### Accession
PXD036445

### Title
Consistency across multi-omics layers in a drug-perturbed gut microbial community

### Description
Here we map the molecular response of a synthetic community of 32 human gut bacteria to three non-antibiotic drugs by using five omics layers, namely 16S rRNA gene profiling, metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, and metabolomics. Using this controlled setting, we find that all omics methods with species resolution in their readouts are highly consistent in estimating relative species abundances across conditions. Furthermore, different omics methods can be complementary in their ability to capture functional changes in response to the drug perturbations. For example, while nearly all omics data types captured that the antipsychotic drug chlorpromazine selectively inhibits Bacteroidota representatives in the community, the metatranscriptome and metaproteome suggested that the drug induces stress responses related to protein quality control and metabolomics revealed a decrease in polysaccharide uptake, likely caused by Bacteroidota depletion. Taken together, our study provides insights into how multi-omics datasets can be utilised to reveal complex molecular responses to external perturbations in microbial communities.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed using a liquid chromatography (LC) system coupled to a mass spectrometer (MS). The LC was an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and was coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were separated on 50 cm HPLC-columns (ID: 75 µm; in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). For each LC-MS/MS analysis about 500 ng peptides were separated on 100 min gradients. Peptides were separated with a two-buffer-system consisting of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with a linear 70 min gradient of 2-24% buffer B, followed stepwise by a 21 min increase to 40% buffer B, a 4 min increase to 98% buffer B and a 5 min wash of 98% buffer B. The flow rate was constant at 350 nl/min. The temperature of the column was kept at 60°C by an in-house-developed oven containing an Peltier element, and parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software (Scheltema & Mann, 2012). First, data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed of each single organism to establish a library for the data independent acquisition (DIA) of the community culture samples. The DDA scans consisted of a Top15 MS/MS scan method. Target values for the full scan MS spectra were 3e6 charges in the 300-1650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an ion target value of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS data for the community culture samples were acquired with the DIA scan mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. The full MS scan was followed by 32 MS/MS windows per cycle in the range of m/z 300–1650 at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200. A higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans was acquired with a stepped normalized collision energy of 25/27.5/30 eV and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 3e6 or for a maximum of 54 ms. The MS data of the single organisms and of the community cultures were used to generate a DDA-library and the direct-DIA-library, respectively, which were computationally merged into a hybrid library using the Spectronaut software (Biognosys AG). All searches were performed against a merged protein FASTA file of our reference genomes annotated using Prokka (see above). Searches used carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used, permitting a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The Q-value cutoffs for both library generation and DIA analyses were set to 0.01. Differential protein and metabolite analysis were performed using repeated measures analysis of variance using the lmer function in the ade4 package. The same formula used in the differential transcript analysis was also used in the analysis. To exclude low abundant features, those that have 0 or NA in at least half of the samples were removed prior to the analysis. P-values were adjusted by the IHW method. Proteins quantification and filtering. Proteins were filtered based on the information from the DDA experiment on which peptides are detected in which single species. Metaproteomics report with protein and peptide quantification obtained from Spectronaut software applied to DIA samples was used as input. For each peptide in the community peptide report file, number of exact protein and species matches was calculated. For each protein, only unique peptides that match to one species were left for quantification. For each protein, the peptides were sorted according to the number of samples in which they were detected. Protein abundance was calculated as the mean of three most commonly measured peptides as suggested before (Christina Ludwig et al, 2018). If the number of peptides was less than three, the protein was discarded. To reduce taxonomic abundance effects in downstream analyses, taxon-specific scaling was performed on metagenomics, metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics as described by (Klingenberg & Meinicke, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multi-omics proteomics metagenomics metatranscriptomics community drug chlorpromazine niclosamide metformin gut microbiome microbiota

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry
Max Planck Institut

### Submitter
Peter Treit

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry


