### Accession
PXD030275

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Revealed the Changes of Pharmacodynamic Network of Bugu Shengsui Decoction Promoting Osteoblasts Proliferation

### Description
Insufficient osteogenesis is greatly essential to osteoporosis. Bugu Shengsui Decoction, a compound formula for osteoporosis, has significant clinical effects in the treatment of osteoporosis. Yet the detailed mechanisms are unclear. In this study, we first evaluated the pharmacological effects of Bugu Shengsui Decoction on bone metabolism, bone mineral density, bone morphology and biomechanics in ovariectomized rats. It also clarified the promoting effect of Bugu Shengsui Decoction on the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts. Based on the above results, we conducted quantitative proteomics research and a series of validation experiments, the results showed that PI3K-AKT signaling pathway and targets, such as Fn1, Col1a1, Col1a2, Col6a1, Col6a2, Col6a3, Rac1, Hsp90ab1, Hsp90b1, Ywhaz and Gnb2, were most relevant to the anti-osteoporosis efficacy of BGSSD. Summarily, our discoveries certify that Bugu Shengsui Decoction is an effective treatment for osteoporosis via PI3K-AKT.

### Sample Protocol
MC3T3-E1 cells were collected after being washed by PBS for 3 times and centrifugated at 4°C, 3000 rpm for 3 min. The cells were lysed in 0.1% Triton X-100 (T8787, Sigma, USA)-100mM TEAB (T7408, Sigma, USA) containing EDTA-free by ultrasonic completely on ice. The supernatant was collected and protein content was detected by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. 10μL samples (3mg/mL) were reacted with 30μL 8M urea and 2μL 200mM DTT at 65°C in darkness for 15min. Then 2μL 400mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added for reaction 30min in darkness at 35°C. 2μL 200mM DTT was added to react with the leftover IAA for 15min at 65°C. 100μL 100mM TEAB, 2μL 0.2μg/μL trypsin (V528A, Promega, USA) and 1.5μL 100mM calcium chloride were added to perform Enzyme cutting at 37°C for no less than14h. Dimethyl labeling was followed: for the control (“light”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% CH2O (F1635, Sigma, USA) and 6μL 0.6M NaBH3CN (42077, Sigma, USA), for the modeling (“middle”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% 13CD2O (596388, Sigma, USA) and 6μL 0.6M NaBH3CN, and for the BGSSD (“heavy”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% 13CD2O and 6μL 0.6M NaBD3CN(190020, Sigma, USA). The labeling reaction was incubated for 1h at 22°C. It was quenched by 24μL 1% ammonia hydroxide and 12uL formic acid. Finally, the “light”, “middle” and “heavy” samples were mixed and the desalting was performed with Pierce™ C18 Tips (87782, Thermo, USA).

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo, USA), coupled with an Ultimate-3000 LC system(22). In short, full-scan mass spectra were captured over the ratio of m/z from 350 to 1800, using the analyzer with a mass resolution of 7000 in positive-ion mode. MS/MS fragmentation was performed in a data-dependent mode, of which the TOP 20 intensity ions were selected for MS/MS analysis with a resolution of 17500, using the collision mode of HCD. Other important parameters respectively were isolation window of 2.0 m/z units, default charge of 2+, normalized collision energy of 28%, maximum IT of 50ms, and dynamic exclusion of 20.0s. Then, data analysis was performed by ProLuCID. The different isotopic modifications (28.0313 and 34.0631 Da respectively for light and heavy labeling) were set as static modifications on the N-terminal of a peptide and lysine. The ratios of reductive dimethylation were quantified by the CIMAGE software. Proteins with an average ratio(light/heavy) of more than 1.5 were selected for further GO analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bugu shengsui decoction, Osteoporosis, Quantitative proteomics, Pi3k-akt, Pharmacodynamic network, Proliferation, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
Wangjing Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China

### Submitter
Baoyu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Jianye Dai
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China


