### Accession
PXD009204

### Title
Paleoproteomics of birds - proteome data analysis 

### Description
The project aims at taxonomy of extinct and extant birds using proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
BONE EXTRACTION PROCEDURES AND MASS SPECTROMETRY SAMPLE PREPARATION  To extract bone proteins, bone fragments were treated with 1.2 M HCl, 6 M Guanidine-HCl and 100 mM Tris/6 M Guanidine-HCl in a 10-day protocol. Protease inhibitors were included in each step. After Acetone precipitation and freeze-drying, proteins were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Bio-Rad) treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated using 25 mM iodoacetamide. During the extraction procedure, as an improvement to the described procedure, we changed the eppendorf tubes daily for fresh ones to prevent dissolving of the plastics used. After alkylation, peptides were digested overnight at 37˚̊C with 1  g/ml trypsin. Digestion was quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were stored at -80˚C. MASS SPECTROMETRY PROCEDURES Bone digests were loaded and desalted on a C18 PepMap precolumn and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography using two identical ChromXP C18CL columns coupled parallel and connected to a split-less NanoLC-Ultra 2D plus system with a linear 45-min gradient from 4 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid and a constant (4 μL/min) flow rate. The LC system was coupled to an amaZon speed ETD ion trap equipped with an Apollo II electrospray ionization (ESI) source. After each MS scan, up to 10 abundant multiply charged species in the range m/z 300-1300 were selected for MS/MS using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and actively excluded for 1 min after having been selected twice. Each individual scan or tandem mass spectrum was saved to the hard drive. The LC system was controlled by HyStar 3.2 and the ion trap by trapControl 7.1. Two technical replicates were acquired.

### Data Protocol
After MS/MS, peptides were identified using the Mascot server available at  www.matrixscience.com. Individual spectra were searched against all bony vertebrates sequences in SwissProt and NCBI Protein using the public version of Mascot (Perkins, 1999). Strict tryptic cleavage was assumed, with two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and proline as variable modifications. A peptide tolerance of 0.6 Da with 2 "C-13" isotope error allowed was used, with an MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da. Peptide charges 2+, 3+ and 4+ were considered, and all fragment ions corresponding to the ESI-TRAP were considered. To compare the peptides retrieved we used the compareMS2 tool. We analyzed possible deamidation and oxidation of collagens retrieved from the bones analyzed using the Mascot server as described in the previous paragraph. However, in our tests for endogeneity, we considered oxidation of both lysine, methionine and proline as a variable modification. We also looked for deamidation patterns on asparagine and glutamine residues using NQ as a variable modification, which might be an indicator for the environmental conditions in which the bones were preserved. In all cases, we compared at least two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dodo, Collagens, Great auk, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Focus Group Endless Forms
University of Applied Sciences Leiden

### Submitter
Ivo Horn

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Gravendeel
Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Focus Group Endless Forms


