### Accession
PXD008548

### Title
Proteomic analysis dissects the impact of nodulation and biological nitrogen fixation on Vicia faba root nodule physiology

### Description
Symbiotic nitroegn fixation in functional (Fix+) and non-functional (Fix-) nodules of Vicia faba infected with Rhizobium leguminosarum was investigated using label-free shotgun tandem MS. Proteins involved in symbiotic nitrogen fixation and maintenance of the symbiosis were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Roots and nodules were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground to fine powder in a cryo mill.Proteins were extracted using a SDS-containing buffer and concentrated at the border between the sample and separation gel. After in-gel tryptic digest and extraction, peptides were separated by reverse phase LC (1h gradient) and submitted to tandem MS analyses using a top 10 duty cycle for a label-free approach (Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation using LFQ-values was performed using the MaxQuant software package including the included Andromeda search engine against an in-house database containing Medicago truncatula proteins combined with Rhizobium legumnosarum proteins as well as  common contaminations. Statistical evalutaion was performed using the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Symbiotic nitrogen fixation in root nodules of legumes is a highly important biological process which is only poorly understood. Root nodule metabolism differs from that of roots. Differences in root and nodule metabolism are expressed by altered protein abundances and amenable to quantitative proteome analyses. Differences in the proteomes may either be tissue specific and related to the presence of temporary endosymbionts (the bacteroids) or related to nitrogen fixation activity. An experimental setup including WT bacterial strains and strains not able to conduct symbiotic nitrogen fixation as well as root controls enables identification of tissue and nitrogen fixation specific proteins. Root nodules are specialized plant organs housing and regulating the mutual symbiosis of legumes with nitrogen fixing rhizobia. As such, these organs fulfill unique functions in plant metabolism. Identifying the proteins required for the metabolic reactions of nitrogen fixation and those merely involved in sustaining the rhizobia:plant symbiosis, is a challenging task and requires an experimental setup which allows to differentiate between these two physiological processes. Here, quantitative proteome analyses of nitrogen fixing and non-nitrogen fixing nodules as well as fertilized and non-fertilized roots were performed using Vicia faba and Rhizobium leguminosarum. Pairwise comparisons revealed altered enzyme abundance between active and inactive nodules. Similarly, general differences between nodules and root tissue were observed. Together, these results allow distinguishing the proteins directly involved in nitrogen fixation from those related to nodulation. Further observations relate to the control of nodulation by hormones and provide supportive evidence for the previously reported correlation of nitrogen and sulfur fixation in these plant organs. Additionally, data on altered protein abundance relating to alanine metabolism imply that this amino acid may be exported from the symbiosomes of V. faba root nodules in addition to ammonia. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008548.

### Keywords
Root, Symbiotic nitrogen fixation, Vicia faba, Rhizobium leguminosarum, Nodule

### Affiliations
Leibniz Universtät Hannover
Leibniz Universität Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics Herrenhäuser Str. 2 30419 Hannover

### Submitter
Holger Eubel

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Eubel
Leibniz Universität Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics Herrenhäuser Str. 2 30419 Hannover


