### Accession
PXD020832

### Title
Compound Deletion of Thrombospondin-1 and -2 Results in a Skeletal Phenotype not Predicted by the Single Gene Knockouts

### Description
The trimeric thrombospondin homologs, TSP1 and TSP2, are both components of bone tissue and contribute in redundant and distinct ways to skeletal physiology. The functional effects of combined TSP1 and TSP2 deficiency remain to be elucidated.  Here, we examined the spectrum of detergent soluble proteins in diaphyseal cortical bone of growing (6-week old) male and female mice deficient in both thrombospondins (double knockout (DKO)). Equal amounts of detergent soluble cortical bone protein were subject to Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) quantitative proteomics. 3,429 proteins met the selection criteria (FDR≤ 1% and 2 peptide spectral matches). 181 proteins were differentially abundant in both male and female DKO bones (≥1.95 fold or ≤0.55 fold compared to wild-type). Physiologically relevant annotation terms identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis included “ECM degradation” and “Quantity of Monocytes.” Manual inspection revealed that a number of proteins with shared expression among osteoclasts and osteocytes were reduced in DKO bones. To associate changes in protein content with phenotype, we examined 12-week old male DKO and WT mice. DKO mice were smaller than WT. DKO femora had reduced cross-sectional area with a flattened, less circular cross-section. DKO bones were less stiff in bending, but this reduction was disproportionate to the decreases in bending moment of inertia on nanoCT leading to a modest increase in predicted modulus (stiffness/bending moment). DKO displayed a lower ultimate load along with increases in both ultimate displacement and yield displacement.  The ratio of ultimate displacement to yield displacement was actually higher in DKO, suggesting that decreased yield displacement does not account entirely for the reduction in ultimate displacement. Together, these mechanical attributes suggest compensation for small bone size through mechanisms that are not explained by nanoCT structural analysis. DKO mice also exhibited reductions in trabecular bone mass, which were surprisingly associated with increased osteoblast numbers and osteoid surface. Marrow-derived colony forming unit-fibroblastic was reduced in DKO mice. Together our data suggest that when both TSP1 and TSP2 are absent, a unique bone phenotype not predicted by the single knockouts, is manifested

### Sample Protocol
In order to obtain adequate amounts of protein for the TMT assay, cortical bone from 3 animals per genotype and sex were combined. Samples (80.5 ug/condition) were proteolysed and labeled with TMT 10-plex essentially by following manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher).  Briefly, upon reduction and alkylation of cysteines, the proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -20 C.  The precipitate was spun down, and the pellet was allowed to air dry.  The pellet was resuspended in 0.1M TEAB and overnight digestion with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein) at 37 C was performed with constant mixing using a thermomixer.  The TMT 10-plex reagents were dissolved in 41 l of anhydrous acetonitrile and labeling was performed by transferring the entire digest to TMT reagent vial and incubating at room temperature for 1 h.  Reaction was quenched by adding 8 l of 5% hydroxyl amine and further 15 min incubation.  Labeled samples were mixed together, and dried using a vacufuge.  An offline fractionation of the combined sample (~200 g) into 8 fractions was performed using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce; Cat #84868). Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 9 l of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile in preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-multinotch MS3): Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex) was used to acquire the data.  Two l of the sample was resolved on a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 m i.d. x 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) at the flow-rate of 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient system (2-22% acetonitrile in 150 min;22-32% acetonitrile in 40 min; 20 min wash at 90% followed by 50 min re-equilibration) and directly spray onto the mass spectrometer using EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Mass spectrometer was set to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 120K resolution; AGC target 2x105; max IT 100 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 seconds) MS2 scans (collision induced dissociation; ion trap;  NCE 35; AGC 5x103; max IT 100 ms).  For multinotch-MS3, top 10 precursors from each MS2 were fragmented by HCD followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60K resolution; AGC 5x104; max IT 120 ms, 100-500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1)

### Publication Abstract
The trimeric thrombospondin homologs, TSP1 and TSP2, are both components of bone tissue and contribute in redundant and distinct ways to skeletal physiology. TSP1-null mice display increased femoral cross-sectional area and thickness due to periosteal expansion, as well as diminished matrix quality and impaired osteoclast function. TSP2-null mice display increased femoral cross-sectional thickness and reduced marrow area due to increased endosteal osteoblast activity, with very little periosteal expansion. Osteoblast lineage cells are reduced in TSP2-null mice, but not in TSP1-null. The functional effects of combined TSP1 and TSP2 deficiency remain to be elucidated. Here, we examined the spectrum of detergent soluble proteins in diaphyseal cortical bone of growing (6-week old) male and female mice deficient in both thrombospondins (double knockout (DKO)). Of 3429 detected proteins, 195 were differentially abundant in both male and female DKO bones. Physiologically relevant annotation terms identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis included "ECM degradation" and "Quantity of Monocytes." Manual inspection revealed that a number of proteins with shared expression among osteoclasts and osteocytes were reduced in DKO bones. To associate changes in protein content with phenotype, we examined 12-week old male and female DKO and WT mice. DKO mice were smaller than WT and in male DKO, femoral cross section area was reduced. Some of the male DKO femora also had a flattened, less circular cross-section. Male DKO bones were less stiff in bending and they displayed reduced ultimate load. Displacements at yield load and at max load were both elevated in male DKO. However, the ratios of post-yield to pre-yield displacements significantly diminished in DKO suggesting proportionally reduced post-yield behavior. Male DKO mice also exhibited reductions in trabecular bone mass, which were surprisingly associated with equivalent osteoblast numbers and accordingly increased osteoblast surface. Marrow-derived colony forming unit-fibroblastic was reduced in male and female DKO mice. Together our data suggest that when both TSP1 and TSP2 are absent, a unique, sex-specific bone phenotype not predicted by the single knockouts, is manifested.

### Keywords
Thrombospondins, Osteoclasts, Bone, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, A. Alfred Taubman Biomedical Sciences Research Building, Room 2009, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109

### Submitter
Andrea Alford

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Alford
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, A. Alfred Taubman Biomedical Sciences Research Building, Room 2009, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109


