### Accession
PXD023072

### Title
Notch-Jagged signaling complex defined by an interaction mosaic

### Description
The Notch signaling system links cellular fate to that of its neighbors, driving proliferation, apoptosis, and cell differentiation in metazoan organisms, whereas dysfunction leads to debilitating developmental disorders and cancers. Here we probe the molecular architecture of mammalian Notch1 full ectodomain in complex with the canonical ligand Jagged1 using cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). Our data reveals that three Jagged1 sites, C2-epidermal growth factor (EGF) 1, EGF10 and cysteine-rich domain (CRD), are in proximity to the Notch1 negative regulatory region (NRR) in the Notch1-Jagged1 full ectodomain complex. We verified direct interactions and identified additional interacting regions by quantitative-binding experiments. In addition, XL-MS and structural analysis reveal Notch1 and Jagged1 ectodomain intramolecular interactions and structural flexibility that support the formation of backfolded architectures. Together the data suggest a direct and intricate role for the different extracellular regions of Notch1 and Jagged1 in the activation and regulation of Notch1 signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Cross-linking with PhoX XL-MS was performed according to a previously optimized protocol (Klykov et al., 2018). The optimal cross-linker concentration was established with SDS-PAGE. Cross-linking reactions were performed in triplicates with 50 µg input of mouse Notch1fe and Jagged1fe. Purified proteins at concentration of 10 µM were incubated together in crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl and 1.5 mM MgCl2) for 10 minutes followed by adding of PhoX (Thermo) to a final concentration of 1 mM. The sample mixtures were filtered through MWCO 10 kDa filters (Vivaspin) into 10 mM Tris pH 7.5 in a 3:1 ratio (v:v) to a final volume of 25 µl. Prior to protein digestion, samples were deglycosylated overnight with Deglycosylation Mix II (NEBB). After deglycosylation, urea was added to a final concentration of 8 M followed by addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM respectively. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 hour and then proteolytic digestion was performed with LysC (Wako) for 4 hours and trypsin (Promega) overnight. Resulting peptide mixtures were desalted with Oasis HLB plates (Waters), dried and stored at -80°C until further use.   Automated Fe(III)-IMAC-Based Enrichment Cross-linked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA 5 μL in an automated fashion using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). Fe(III)-NTA cartridges were primed with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with 250 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). Samples were dissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer and loaded onto the cartridge. The columns were washed with 250 μL of loading buffer, and the cross-linked peptides were eluted with 25 μL of 10% ammonia directly into 25 μL of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried down and stored in 4 °C until subjected to LC-MS. For LC-MS analysis the samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed with Thermo Proteome Discoverer (2.5.0.400) with incorporated XlinkX node in NonCleavable mode at 1% False Discovery rate (FDR) at csm and crosslink level against a manually created database with target proteins and 200 random decoy entries. As modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed and Oxidation (M), and Asn->Asp (N) were set as variable. Only the cross-links which were detected in 2 out of 3 replicates with a minimal score of 30 were used for further analysis. For detecting the monolinks and sequence coverage MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 was used with standard settings and identifications were filter to 1% FDR. As modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed and Oxidation (M), PhoX H2O (K), PhoX Tris (K), and Asn->Asp (N) were set as variable.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Phox, Jagged1, Notch1, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Glycoprotein, Egf repeats, Cell signaling, Xlinkx/pd

### Affiliations
Utrecht University / Pharmaceutical Sciences Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Padualaan 8 , 3584 CH Utrecht
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Scheltema
Utrecht University / Pharmaceutical Sciences Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Padualaan 8 , 3584 CH Utrecht


