### Accession
PXD008531

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals co-ordinated alterations in protein synthesis and degradation pathways in LRRK2 knockout mice

### Description
Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) segregate with familial Parkinson’s disease (PD) and genetic variation in LRRK2 contributes to risk of sporadic disease. Although knockout of LRRK2 or knock-in of pathogenic mutations into the mouse germline does not result in a PD phenotype, several defects have been reported in the kidneys of LRRK2 knockout mice. To understand LRRK2 function in vivo, we used an unbiased approach to determine which protein pathways are affected in LRRK2 knockout kidneys. We performed two iTRAQ screens on cytosol- and microsome-enriched fractions from 12-month old LRRK2-KO and G2019S knockin kidneys compared to wild type controls. We nominated changes in cytoskeletal-associated proteins, lysosomal proteases, proteins involved in vesicular trafficking and in control of protein translation in LRRK2-KO. Changes were not seen in mice expressing the pathogenic G2019S LRRK2 mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen kidneys (from 5 wild type, 5 LRRK2-KO and 5 LRRK2-G2019S 12-month-old mice) were homogenized in fractionation buffer (0.225M mannitol, 0.05M sucrose, 0.005M HEPES pH 7.3). The 2000g supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 12000g for 8min. Ultracentrifugation at 55000g for 30min of the supernatant from the last step was employed to separate the cytosol- and microsome-enriched fractions. The supernatant and the pellet, resuspended in iTRAQ buffer (0.3M HEPES, 2% CHAPS, 1mM EDTA), were used for iTRAQ experiments.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ labeled peptide identification and quantitation was performed using Mascot from Xcalibur RAW files with parameters and thresholds for peak picking. Peptide identification was performed using the Mascot Server to identify homologous peptides in the Sprot Mouse Database with iTRAQ8plex (N-term) and iTRAQ8plex (K) set as fixed modifications and Methylthio (C), Oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y) set as variable modifications. Only unique peptides were used to identify and calculate protein ratios. The iTRAQ label intensity for each sample was divided by the intensity of the pooled reference to obtain peptide ratios, and subsequently normalized so that the median ratio for each peptide was 1 for the wild type animals. Statistical inferences were assessed by Welch’s t-test followed by the Benjamini-Hochberg correction

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) segregate with familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and genetic variation around LRRK2 contributes to risk of sporadic disease. Although knockout (KO) of Lrrk2 or knock-in of pathogenic mutations into the mouse germline does not result in a PD phenotype, several defects have been reported in the kidneys of Lrrk2 KO mice. To understand LRRK2 function in vivo, we used an unbiased approach to determine which protein pathways are affected in LRRK2 KO kidneys. We nominated changes in cytoskeletal-associated proteins, lysosomal proteases, proteins involved in vesicular trafficking and in control of protein translation. Changes were not seen in mice expressing the pathogenic G2019S LRRK2 mutation. Using cultured epithelial kidney cells, we replicated the accumulation of lysosomal proteases and demonstrated changes in subcellular distribution of the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor. These results show that loss of LRRK2 leads to co-ordinated responses in protein translation and trafficking and argue against a dominant negative role for the G2019S mutation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lrrk2, Membrane trafficking, Genetic mouse models, Protein translation, Lysosomal function, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institute of Health, Building 35, Room 1A116 35 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20814, USA
NIH

### Submitter
Jinhui Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Mark R Cookson
Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institute of Health, Building 35, Room 1A116 35 Convent Drive Bethesda, MD 20814, USA


