### Accession
PXD019095

### Title
Small RNA directs symbiosis, virulence, and natural products biosynthesis in entomopathogenic bacteria

### Description
Rapid modulation of gene expression is a key feature for the success of bacteria, particularly for those that rapidly have to adapt to different niches. The lifecycles of Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus involve a mutualistic association with nematodes as well as an entomopathogenic phase1,2, both of which rely on the production of numerous specialized metabolites (SMs) 3,4. Several regulators have been previously implicated in the regulation of SM production in these genera3,4. However, the molecular underpinnings regulating SM production and the role of small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) in this process are unknown. Here we describe the mechanism underlying RNA-mediated control of SM synthesis. We show that the Hfq-dependent sRNA, ArcZ, is an essential requirement for SM production. We discovered that ArcZ directly base-pairs with the mRNA encoding HexA, a key repressor of SM genes. We further demonstrate that the ArcZ regulon is not restricted to SM production, but rather modulates up to ~15% of the transcriptional output in both Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus. Together, our study shows that sRNAs are crucial for SM production in these species, reveals previously unknown targets for biosynthetic pathway manipulations, and offers a new tool for the (over)production, isolation and identification of unknown natural products.

### Sample Protocol
The detail of the proteomics procedure can be assessed in (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00216). In short, to extract proteins from E.coli, frozen cell pellets 300 µL lysis buffer (0.5% Na-desoxycholate in 100 mM NH4HCO3) were added to the cell pellet, and incubated at 95°C for 10. The protein concentration in the supernatant was determined with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, #23252). Reduction  and alkylation was performed at 95 °C using 5mM TCEP and 10mM Chloroacetamide for 15min. 50 µg of protein was transferred to new reaction tubes and protein digestion was carried out overnight at 30 °C with 1 µg trypsin (Promega). After digest, the peptides were desalted using CHROMABOND Spincolumns (Macherey-Nagel) that were conditioned with 500 µL of acetonitrile and equilibrated with 500 µL and 150 µL 0.1% TFA. After loading the peptides were washed with 500 µL 0.1% TFA in 5:95 acetonitrile:water, peptides were eluted with 400 µL 0.1% TFA in 50:50 acetonitrile:water. Peptides were concentrated and dried under vacuum at 50°C and dissolved in 100 µL 0.1% TFA by 25 s of sonication and incubation at 22°C under shaking at 1200 rpm for 5 min. 1 µg peptide was analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The LC-MS/MS analysis including lable-free quantification was carried out as previously described in (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00216) with minor modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with packed in-house C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were first loaded onto a C18 precolumn (preconcentration set-up) and then eluted in backflush mode with a gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % acetonitrile, 0.15 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B over 30 min.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v2.0), MS/MS search was performed in MASCOT (v2.5, Matrix Science) against the Uniprot Photorhabdus laumondii protein database. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic search with two missed cleavage sites, 10ppm MS1 and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance. Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modification. Progenesis outputs were further processed with SafeQuant (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23017020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hfq, Hexa, Photorhabdus, Srna, Arcz

### Affiliations
Molekulare Biotechnologie Fachbereich Biowissenschaften Buchmann Insitutee for Molecular Life Sciences Goethe Universität Frankfurt
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Bode
Molekulare Biotechnologie Fachbereich Biowissenschaften Buchmann Insitutee for Molecular Life Sciences Goethe Universität Frankfurt


