### Accession
PXD001129

### Title
Dissection of IL-2 and IL-15 signaling pathways

### Description
The aim of this study was to compare the signaling cascades initiated by the two closely related cytokines IL-2 and IL-15. Considering the relevance of protein tyrosine phosphorylation in signal transduction, in order to quantify changes in protein phosphorylation in response to IL-2 and IL-15, we combined triple SILAClabeling of leukemic T-cells with phosphotyrosine (pY)-specific antibody-based protein enrichment followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Following the strategy described above, we managed to decipher in detail the complex signaling networks triggered by IL-2 and IL-15. Interestingly, a large number of components of the three main signaling pathways known to be initiated in response to the interleukins (JAK/STAT; RAS/MAPK; PI3K/AKT) were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Kit225 cells were grown in media containing Arg0/Lys0, Arg6/Lys4 or Arg10/Lys8 for two weeks prior treatment. After 48 hour deprivation with IL-2, cells were kept unstimulated (Arg0/Lys0) and stimulated with IL-2 (Arg6/Lys4) or IL-15 (Arg10/Lys8). Immunoprecipitation of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins was performed as previously described [19]. Briefly, the three differentially labeled protein lysates were combined in 1:1:1 ratio according to their protein concentration, pre-cleared with A-sepharose beads and immunoprecipitated using two complementary anti-pY antibodies. Eluted immune complexes were equally split and run in 2 parallel lanes of a precast gradient NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel (Invitrogen) and visualized with Colloidal Blue (Invitrogen). Both gel lanes were separately cut into slices and subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. Peptides derived from one of the lanes were directly concentrated and desalted using C18 stage Tips to further analyse by LC-MS/MS, whereas peptides derived from the other line were subjected to TiO2 enrichment prior mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw mass spectra data from both biological replicates were combined and processed using the MaxQuant software v1.3.0.5. . For protein identification at least two peptides, including 1 unique were required. Both razor and unique peptides, except Phospho-STY modified peptides, were considered for protein group quantification. For the analysis of phosphotyrosine-containing peptides, 1% FDR, a minimum localization probability of 0.75, score difference of 5 and MaxQuant score of 50 were demanded.

### Publication Abstract
Common &#x3b3;-chain family of cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21, where IL stands for interleukin) are key regulators of the immune homeostasis that exhibit pleiotropic biological activities and even sometimes redundant roles as a result of the utilization of the same receptor subunit. However, they also exert distinct functions that make each of them to be indispensable. For instance, all family members can act as T-cell growth factors; however, we found that IL-15 but not IL-7 can replace IL-2 to promote and sustain the proliferation of Kit225T cells. In addition to the &#x3b3;-chain, IL-2 and IL-15 share the &#x3b2;-chain, which creates the paradox of how they can trigger diverse phenotypes despite signaling through the same receptors. To investigate this paradigm, we combined SILAC with enrichment of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and peptides followed by mass spectrometric analysis to quantitatively assess the signaling networks triggered downstream IL-2/IL-2R and IL-15/IL-15R. This study confirmed that the transduction pathways initiated by both cytokines are highly similar and revealed that the main signaling branches, JAK/STAT, RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT, were nearly equivalently activated in response to both ILs. Despite that, our study revealed that receptor internalization rates differ in IL-2- and IL-15-treated cells indicating a discrete modulation of cytokine signaling. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001129 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001129).

### Keywords
Signaling, Phosphotyrosine, Il-15, Silac, Il-2

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center of Experimental BioInformatic, University of Southern Denmark
Postdoc

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Nerea Osinalde
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center of Experimental BioInformatic, University of Southern Denmark


