### Accession
PXD030250

### Title
Multi-omics and 3D-imaging reveal bone heterogeneity and unique calvaria  cells in neuroinflammation

### Description
Diverse immune cells move from the calvaria marrow into the dura mater via recently discovered skull-meninges connections (SMCs). Yet, how the calvaria bone marrow is different from the other bones and whether it plays a special role in human diseases remain unknown. Using multi-omics approaches and whole mouse transparency we reveal that bone marrow cells are highly heterogeneous across the mouse body. The calvaria harbors the most distinct molecular signature with hundreds of differentially expressed genes and proteins. Acute brain injury induces skull-specific outcomes including increased calvaria cell numbers. Moreover, TSPO-PET imaging of stroke, dementia and multiple sclerosis patients demonstrate increased inflammation in the human skull, mirroring the underlying brain inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
SDC lysis buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was used to lyse the cell pellets at 95°C for 10 min at 1,000 rpm. Samples were sonicated in high mode (30 sec OFF, 30 sec ON) for 12 cycles (Bioruptor® Plus; Diagenode). 25 µg of protein was used for further preparation. Reduction and alkylation of the samples were done with final concentrations of 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA, at 45°C for 10 min with 1,000 rpm shake. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C, 1,000 rpm shake by trypsin and LysC (1:40, protease:protein ratio). Peptides were acidified with 2% TFA, isopropanol with 1:1 volume-to-volume ratio. Custom-made StageTips were used for desalting and purification of the acidified samples were done in, which composed of three layers of styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore) membranes (activated by 100% ACN, 1% TFA in 30% Methanol, 0.2% TFA, respectively). Samples are washed by EtOAc including 1% TFA, isopropanol including 1% TFA, and 0.2% TFA, respectively. Peptides were then eluted from the membranes via 60 µL elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH) and dried by vacuum centrifuge (40 min at 45°C). Peptides were reconstituted in 6 µL of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and peptide concentration was estimated via optical measurement at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; Thermo Scientific).  500µg of Peptides were loaded onto 50 cm HPLC column (75 µm inner diameter, in-house packed with 1.9 µm with C18 Reprosil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 60°C) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B).) for MS analysis. 0.5 µg of peptides were loaded on the column at 60°C, and separated with a 120 min gradient (5-30% buffer B over 95min, 30-65% buffer B over 5min, 65-95% over 5 min, and wash with 95% buffer B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent MS/MS cycle time scan method. The time between the master scans were 1 second. Full MS scans were acquired in 300–1650 m/z range with a normalized AGC target %300 at 60,000 resolution and 25 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions for MS/MS scans were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30%. MS/MS scans were acquired 15,000 at m/z resolution with a normalized AGC target 100%, and a maximum injection time of 28 ms. Expected LC peak width was 120 s and desired apex window was set to 30%. Total proteomes were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) combined with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). FAIMS Pro™ with Orbitrap Fusion ™ module was used in analysis of total proteome samples with 2 different compensation voltages (CV) (-50V and -70V).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0. Default settings were used if not stated otherwise. FDR 0.1% was used for filtering at protein, peptide and modification level. As variable modifications, acetylation (protein N-term) and oxidized methionine (M), as fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) were selected. Trypsin/P and LysC proteolytic cleavages were added. Missed cleavages allowed for protein analysis was 3. "Match between runs" and label free quantitation (LFQ) were enabled and all searches were performed on the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (2019). Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was used for bioinformatics analysis. Gene Ontology (GO), UniProtKB and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotations were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Calvaria, Mouse, Lc-msms, Bones, Meninges, Thermo scientific orbitrap exploris

### Affiliations
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany


