### Accession
PXD029538

### Title
Neuralized-like protein 4 (Neurl4) mediates ADP-ribosylation of mitochondrial proteins

### Description
Characterization of NEURL4 as a novel mitochondrial ART enzyme and identification of its potential targets.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells WT were grown in medium containing unlabelled L-arginine and L-lysine and the two independent Hela NEUR4-KO in heavy condition. For pull-down of polyADP-ribosylation proteins, mitochondrial proteins were extracted from SILAC-labelled Hela wild-type and Neurl4-knockout cells. GST-WWE-conjugated agarose were added to immobilize the poly-ADP-ribosylation proteins using equal amount of proteins from the two SILAC states and incubating at 4°C for 1h; bound material was washed extensively in high-stringency buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5; 500 mM NaCl; 5 mM EDTA; 1% NP40; 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT); 0.1% SDS). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized with Coomassie blue stain, and then were digested in-gel by trypsin overnight.  Peptides were analysed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column (3 μm, 75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected in-line to a C18 analytical column (2 μm, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo EasySpray) using the Thermo EasyLC 1200 system with the column oven set to 55 °C. The nanoflow gradient consisted of buffer A (composed of 2% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (consisting of 80% (v/v) ACN with 0.1% formic acid). For protein analysis, nLC was performed for 180 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, with a gradient of 2-8% B for 5 min, followed by a 8-20% B for 96 min, a 20-35% gradient for 56min, and a 35-98% B gradient for 3 min, 98% buffer B for 3 min, 100-0% gradient of B for 3 min, and finishing with 5% B for 14 min. Peptides were directly ionized using a nanospray ion source into a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The QE-HF was run using data dependent MS2 scan mode, with the top 10 most intense ions acquired per profile mode full-scan precursor mass spectrum subject to HCD fragmentation. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC of 3e6 or maximum injection time of 60 ms and a scan range of 350 to 1650 m/z, while the MS2 scans were performed at 45,000 resolution, with an ion-packet setting of 2e4 for AGC, maximum injection time of 90 ms, and using 33% NCE. Source ionization parameters were optimized with the spray voltage at 2.1 kV, transfer temperature at 275 °C. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human complete proteome FASTA database downloaded on 2018_10_26, using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.7.0) that integrates the Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and ADP-ribosylation on a wide range of amino acid residues (C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y) were included as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 6 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the target-decoy database search strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Adp-ribosylation, Mitochondrial art, Mitochondrial proteins, Neurl4

### Affiliations
Boston University

### Submitter
Christian Heckendorf

### Lab Head
Dr Valentina Perissi
Boston University


