### Accession
PXD010592

### Title
Strategies to enhance the extraction of electrophoretically separated proteins from polyacrylamide gels and their application to mass spectrometry analyses (C4PR_LIV)

### Description
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) is a powerful technique for separating proteins extracted from complex biological samples. Unfortunately, the difficulty of recovering intact proteins in high yield from polyacrylamide matrices often limits further analyses. We discovered that staining proteins with Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) immediately after electrophoresis improves extraction efficiency. Post-staining, proteins widely varying in molecular weight were recovered at high efficiency with a 10 minute procedure that did not employ a surfactant. High recoveries were also obtained from dried, archived gels. Native-PAGE separated protein complexes larger than 400 kDa were recovered in an alternative procedure that substituted the mild detergent octyl-β-D glucopyranoside for CBB. Recovered proteins retained their native structure and were amenable to structural analysis by native mass spectrometry. The established workflows facilitate in-depth proteomic and protein structure analyses as well as the purification, storage, and transport of protein samples.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Analysis of SDS-PAGE Gel-Recovered Proteins using iTRAQ 150 compound eye tissues were homogenized in 300 μL NuPAGE LDS sample buffer, 50 mM DTT and spun at 18,000 × g for 5 min. Supernatant was incubated at 70 °C for 10 min, followed by alkylation with 75 μL 1 M IAM for 30 min at RT. Protein conc determined using Qubit protein assay according to the makers guide. After SDS-PAGE (15 μg total protein), the separated proteins were recovered by passive extraction using 0.1% (w/v) SDS/100 mM NH4HCO3. Recovered proteins were purified by MeOH-CHCl3 precipitation, and the precipitated protein pellet dissolved in 20 μL iTRAQ buffer with 0.1% (w/v) of RapiGest. Another 15 μg aliquot of the extract (one that had not been subjected to SDS-PAGE) was dissolved in 20 μL iTRAQ buffer with 0.1% (w/v) of RapiGest following MeOH-CHCl3 precipitation and used as a control for quantitative analysis. After in-solution digestion of the recovered and original sample with 0.2 μg trypsin for 16 hours at 37 °C, the digested peptides were labelled with iTRAQ 113, 114, and 115 for original sample; iTRAQ 116, 117, and 118 for recovered sample for 2 hours at RT. For labelling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 50 μl of isopropanol and added to the protein digests. Then samples mixed with 25 μL 2% (v/v) TFA, incubated for 30 min at 37 °C, and combined. Peptides were fractionated using a Pierce high pH RP peptide fractionation kit and purified using self-made C18 STAGE tips. Peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and subjected to LCMSMS analysis. The DDA analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCTnano coupled to a Fusion MS. 500 ng of protein was loaded onto the trapping column (PepMap100, C18, 75 μm X 20 mm) for 7 min at 9 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The sample was resolved on Easy-Spray C18 75 μm x 500 mm 2 μm bead using a gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) 3.8% B (79.9% (v/v) ACN, 20% (v/v) H2O, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 50% A 50% B over 30 min at 300 nL/min. The MS program used the multi-notch MS3 method: a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (4e5 ions AGC with 50ms max fill time) with MSMS using quadrupole ion selection with a 0.7 m/z window, HCD with a NCE of 35 and LTQ analysis using the turbo scan and a max fill time of 50 msec. The 10 most intense MS2 peaks were simultaneously selected for MS3 analysis using SPS isolation, HCD at NCE 65 and analysis in the orbitrap using 50,000 res and mass range of 100-500 m/z. MSMS cycle time of 3 sec and 60 s dynamic exclusion. Protein Quantification using SILAC SDS-PAGE gels were run in duplicate with identical lanes with 15 μg of yeast lysate in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Lysis used a Minilys bead beater with glass beads for 15 rounds of 30 seconds, 1 minute rest between on ice. All lysed material recovered including cell debris. Samples were combined with 2X sample buffer and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. SDS-PAGE at RT with a constant voltage of 200 V for 30 min. One gel was stained with aqueous CBB (ATTO) for 8 min, and washed for 30 min in deionized H2O. The other was stained using normal CBB for 60 min, and destained for 30 min (10 % (v/v) MeOH, 10 % (v/v) CH3COOH) and washed for 30 min in ddH2O. Individual lanes were excised using a razor blade and split into six sections. The excised gel sections were uniformly ground for 30 seconds using a plastic pestle in a BioMasher disposable homogenizer tube. 500 ul of protein extraction solution (0.1% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM NH4HCO3) was added and grinding resumed until all fragments of gel were homogenized. Each sample was then shaken 400 rpm at RT for 10 min using a Vibrax benchtop orbital shaker. After filtration through a 0.45-μm Spin-X centrifuge tube filter, the recovered solution was concentrated using an Amicon centrifugal 3-kDa ultrafiltration device. The fractions for each lane were recombined. Three pools from each CBB stain were mixed with 15 μg of stable isotope labelled ([13C6] Arg, [13C6] Lys) yeast lysate. Three control samples were created using 15 μg unlabeled (‘light’) and 15 μg stable isotope labelled (‘heavy’) yeast. All samples were precipitated using MeOH-CHCl3 precipitation. Light-only samples were resuspended in 10 μl 1X sample buffer and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min before SDS-PAGE analysis. All heavy/light samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.05 % (w/v) RapiGest and heated 80 °C for 10 min. Samples were then incubated with 3 mM DTT at 60 °C for 10 min, followed by alkylation with 9 mM IAM for 30 min at room temperature. After in-solution digestion with 0.5 μg trypsin for 16 hours at 37 °C, RapiGest was precipitated from the digest with the addition of 1 μl TFA at 37 °C for 45 min. After 13,500 X g spin, 4 °C for 30 min the cleared digest was analysed using LC-MS using a Q Exactive HF coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLCnano system. 1 μg peptide was injected on column and analysed using a two hour shallow gradient.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Analysis of SDS-PAGE Gel-Recovered Proteins using iTRAQ The data was processed using Proteome Discoverer V2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in combination with Mascot V2.6 (Matrix Science) search engine for protein identification. Peptide identification was performed against the reviewed entries from the UniProt Drosophila melanogaster reference proteome (23298 entries) using a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, a product mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification and variable iTRAQ 8 plex modification of lysine and the N-terminus.  Peptide and protein identifies were accepted using 1% FDR for strict filtering and 5% for relaxed filtering. Unique peptides were only accepted for quantification if all reporter channels were present with an average S/N of 10 and below a co-isolation threshold of 50%. As a systematic quantification shift was expected, no sample normalization was performed. Protein Quantification using SILAC SILAC data was processed using Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) with the Proteolabels module (Omic Analytics Ltd., UK) for SILAC data and database searching using Mascot V2.6 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the Saccharomyces Cerevisiae proteome. Raw ratio light/heavy data were exported for both proteins and individual peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Prefractionation of complex mixtures of proteins derived from biological samples is indispensable for proteome analysis via top-down mass spectrometry (MS). Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), which enables high-resolution protein separation based on molecular size, is a widely used technique in biochemical experiments and has the potential to be useful in sample fractionation for top-down MS analysis. However, the lack of a means to efficiently recover the separated proteins in-gel has always been a barrier to its use in sample prefractionation. In this study, we present a novel experimental workflow, called Passively Eluting Proteins from Polyacrylamide gels as Intact species for MS ("PEPPI-MS"), which allows top-down MS of PAGE-separated proteins. The optimization of Coomassie brilliant blue staining followed by the passive extraction step in the PEPPI-MS workflow enabled the efficient recovery of proteins, separated on commercial precast gels, from a wide range of molecular weight regions in under 10 min. Two-dimensional separation combining offline PEPPI-MS with online reversed-phase liquid chromatographic separation resulted in identification of over 1000 proteoforms recovered from the target region of the gel (&#x2264;50 kDa). Given the widespread availability and relatively low cost of traditional sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-PAGE equipment, the PEPPI-MS workflow will be a powerful prefractionation strategy for top-down proteomics.

### Keywords
Protein extraction, Sds page

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J Beynon
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


