### Accession
PXD048849

### Title
Detection of structure-specific interactions of Rab GTPases

### Description
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) mediate multiple essential functions and regulatory events in living organisms. The physical interactome of a given protein can be abnormally altered in response to external and internal cues, thus modulating cell physiology and contributing to human pathologies including neurodegenerative diseases. Despite substantial efforts, current approaches cannot pinpoint structure-specific PPIs or their interaction interfaces on a proteome-wide scale. To address this limitation, we have adapted the structural proteomics method known as limited proteolysis–mass spectrometry to identify PPIs by probing protein structural alterations within cellular extracts upon treatment with a protein of interest. Here, we added Rab GTPases, namely Rab5A and Rab2A in their GTP- and GDP-bound forms to a HEK293T cellular extract and probed their structure-specific interactomes. We identified already know interactors of these proteins bassed on previously published data as well as a number of candidate interactor proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Rab2A and Rab5A in GTP- and GDP-bound forms: Samples of purified protein provided by the laboratory of Prof. Sean Munro (MRC Cambridge) were mixed with PBS buffer pH 7.0, resulting in a concentration of 1 μg/μL. To conduct LiP titration experiments in HEK293T cellular extracts, increasing amounts of Rab2A or Rab5A in either the GTP- or GDP-bound state (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 μg) was added to each sample containing a total of 100 μg of proteins.  Cell pellets of HEK293T were resuspended in 400 µL LiP buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2) and lysed using a pellet pestle in ten cycles of 10 s of homogenization and 1-min pause at 4 °C. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation (1,000 x g at 4 °C) for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and the remaining pellet was further resuspended in 200 µL LiP buffer. The lysis step was repeated as described and supernatants were combined. The total lysate protein concentration was determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat #23225) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Rab GTPases were added at given concentrations to each of 4 replicates for each condition containing 100 µg of HEK293T extract. Upon 10-min incubation at 25 °C, the samples were then subjected to limited proteolysis. Proteinase K (PK) from Tritirachium album was added simultaneously to all four replicates of protein samples per condition (n = 4 for all experiments) with the aid of a multichannel pipette, at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated at 25 °C for 5 min. Proteolytic reactions were stopped by heating samples for 5 min at 99 °C in a heat block. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing an equal volume of 10% sodium deoxycholate.   Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP-HCl for 45 min at 37 °C. Alkylation was carried out in 40 mM IAA followed by incubation at RT in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted in four volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin (both at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Digests were acidified by addition of FA to a final concentration of 2% and sodium deoxycholate precipitate was removed by filtration using a centrifugation filter at 1,000g for 5 min. Peptides were desalted using a 96-well C18 MACROspin plate with 10-100 µg capacity according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying, samples were resuspended in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The iRT kit (Biognosys AG) was added to all samples. Peptide digest of Rab GTPases were analyzed in DDA mode on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to a Waters nanoACQUITY system (Waters Corporation). Peptides were separated on a 40 cm × 0.75 µm i.d. column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120) and separated by a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with increasing buffer B (95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 35%. Full MS1 scans were acquired over a mass range of 350–1400 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 4x105 and an injection time of 100 ms. DDA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1x105 and an injection time of 54 ms. To maximize parallelization, a duty cycle time was 3 s. The first mass was fixed at 110 m/z and the normalized collision energy was set to 28.

### Data Protocol
DDA files were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database (updated 2020-03-20) and the MaxQuant contaminants fasta database (245 entries).For datasets involving Rab GTPases, DDA files were processed using SpectroMine 4 using the default settings. Imputation and normalization were disabled. Peptide reports generated in SpectroMine were processed using an in-house R script in R Statistical Software (version 4.2.2; R Core Team 2021). In brief, proteins with at least two peptide precursors were considered. RSVF and AC8-CaM datasets included only proteotypic peptides. For aSyn and Rab GTPases datasets, both proteotypic and non-proteotypic peptides were covered; therefore, non-proteotypic peptides, which are reported, should be taken with caution. Raw peptide abundances were normalized using variance stabilizing normalization with the vsn package (Huber et al, 2002) (version 3.64.0). We used an outlier detection method based on the interquartile range (IQR) to define boundaries outside of the first (Q1) and third (Q3) quartile for peptide abundances within each condition per peptide precursor. Peptide abundances that are more than 1.5 times the IQR below Q1 or more than 1.5 times above Q3 are considered outliers. This approach ensured that potential outliers are removed prior to dose-response analysis. Subsequently, we considered only peptide precursors that were measured in at least 3 replicates, covering at least 5 conditions. Filtered data, consisting of normalized log2-transformed peptide abundances, were scaled to a range between 0 and 1 and subjected to dose-response analysis using the protti package (Quast et al, 2022) (version 0.5.0) that utilizes the log-logistic model with four parameters (LL.4) from the drc package (Ritz et al, 2015) (version 3.0-1). Pearson’s correlation coefficient r was used to assess the strength of the sigmoidal trend of dose-response profiles. Only peptides that fulfilled the Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected p-values (q-values) < 0.01 obtained from an analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson’s correlation coefficients r > 0.85 were considered significant. Unscaled peptide abundances were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant peptides using an empirical Bayes moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package (Ritchie et al, 2015) (version 3.52.4). The resulting p-values were adjusted by multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg method. The output of the statistical analysis was filtered using the following cutoffs: q-value < 0.01 and |log2 FC| > 0.75. The final list of peptides that fulfilled all the defined criteria represented differentially altered peptides. Every differentially altered peptide has an EC50 value assigned, which represents the inferred quantity of a protein necessary to observe half-maximum of the relative peptide intensity change between treated and untreated samples. Furthermore, the score for each differentially altered peptide was computed by dividing |log2 FC| of peptide intensity by the adjusted p-value. Significantly changing proteins were mapped against the lsit of interactors identified by Gillingham et al, 2019.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Lc-msms, Interactome, Proteomics, Structure-specific interactions, Limited proteolysis, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions, Rab gtpases

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Aleš Holfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


