### Accession
PXD001858

### Title
Faustovirus global proteome -  Faustovirus, an asfarvirus-related new lineage of giant viruses infecting amoebae

### Description
Global proteome study of two protein extracts of purified Faustovirus, using a bi dimensionnal nanoLC fractionnation combined to a Synapt G2 Si HDMSe monitoring enabling ion mobility

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation to perform proteomics, the Faustovirus pellet was suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the presence or absence of 1% of N-Lauroylsarcosine and disrupted by sonication (three times for 60 s at power = 20 without pulsing). Viral debris was removed by centrifugation (12,000 x g, 4°C, 10 min), and soluble proteins were diluted 1:1 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to standard trypsin digestion protocol with reduction/carboxymethylation. Prior to MS analysis, each digested sample (30 µg) containing detergent was processed through a 125 µl detergent removal spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The protein digest was analysed using a nanoAcquity 2D-LC system connected to a Synapt G2Si Q-TOF ion mobility hybrid spectrometer. The first chromatographic dimension consisted of a C18 300µm x 50mm column (Nano Ease 5µm XBridge BEH130, Waters). Peptides were eluted onto second dimension using seven step gradients at 1.5 µL/min with 20 mM ammonium formate pH10 and 12/15/18/20/25/35/65 % acetonitrile steps respectively. A trapping column (nanoAcquity UPLC 10K-2D-V/M Trap 5µm Symmetry C18 180µm x 20mm, Waters) was used to collect first dimension peptides for concentration and desalting, after dilution into 15 µL/min of 99.9 % water 0.1 % formic acid and 0.1 % acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid. The second dimension consisted of a C18 75µm x 250mm column (nanoAcquity UPLC 1.8µm HSS T3, Waters). Peptides eluted from the first dimension steps were separated using a 1 hour gradient (275 nl/min, 5 to 40 % acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid). Data independent MS/MS analysis was performed with the Ion Mobility feature (HDMSe method). The capillary was set to 3 kV, the sampling cone to 40 V and source temperature to 90 degrees. The MS range was set to 50-2000 m/z, the trap cell energy was 4 V, the transfer cell low energy was 5 V and high fragmentation energy was a 19-45 V ramp. Sample loading was adjusted by injecting a known standard (E. coli Digestion Standard, Waters MasPREP) with a pseudo 1D injection method (unique first dimension elution step at 50 % acetonitrile followed by a 1.5 hours analytical gradient). Typical on-column sample load was approximately 100 ng per fraction (700 ng injected).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using PLGS 3.0.1 software (low/high energy threshold = 135/30 counts, intensity threshold = 750 counts). Lockmass correction was applied to all spectra (Leucine Enkephalin 785.8426 m/z). An internal protein sequences database was used to identify proteins in each fraction (490 sequences, January 2014).  The following workflow parameters were set: monoisotopic masses, minimum 1+ charge, 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl C as fixed modification, deamination NQ and oxidation M as variable modification, 4% false discovery rate, 1 minimum peptide per protein, 3 minimum fragment ion matches per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Nano2dlc-ms/ms, Faustovirus

### Affiliations
Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Émergentes (URMITE)  UMR 6236, Faculté de médecine  27 Bd Jean Moulin  13385 MARSEILLE Cedex 05  FRANCE
MS Engineer

### Submitter
ARMSTRONG Nicholas

### Lab Head
Dr Eric CHABRIERE
Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Émergentes (URMITE)  UMR 6236, Faculté de médecine  27 Bd Jean Moulin  13385 MARSEILLE Cedex 05  FRANCE


