### Accession
PXD024046

### Title
Comparative gene and protein expression profile of olfactory ensheathing cells from olfactory bulb and olfactory mucosa

### Description
Olfactory ensheathing cells are one of the few central nervous system regenerative cells discovered so far. It is characterized by its lifelong nerve regeneration function, and it can also release a variety of neurotrophic factors and neural adhesion molecules. It is considered to be the glial cell with the strongest myelination ability. Olfactory ensheathing cells and Schwann cells have phenotypes in common, they can promote axon regeneration(R. Doucette, 1995). Olfactory ensheathing cells have the characteristics of Schwann cells and astrocytes, but the overall performance tends to be the former, which has two unique characteristics. First, it exists not only in the peripheral nerves (Schwann cells), but also in the central nervous system (astroglia); second, the olfactory mucosa has the ability to regenerate life-long, including human olfactory ensheathing cells(J. C. Bartolomei and C. A. Greer, 2000). Regeneration is a process in which olfactory ensheathing cells participate in efficient regulation, although the specific mechanism is not yet clear. Olfactory ensheathing cells are different from astrocytes and Schwann cells, but at the same time have the characteristics of these two cells(S. C. Barnett, 2004), like Schwann cells help axon growth, but more than Schwann cells It can make axons grow long distances, that is, it has stronger migration(A. Ramon-Cueto et al., 1998); there are also astrocytes that have a nutritional effect on the survival of neurons and the growth of axons, but olfactory ensheathing cells can also wrap neurons forms myelin sheath to support the growth of nerve processes(R. Devon and R. Doucette, 1992; J. Gu et al., 2019). There are two characteristics that make olfactory ensheathing cells the best choice for the treatment of neurological diseases(S. C. Chiu et al., 2009; J. Kim et al., 2018; M. Abdel-Rahman et al., 2018). Olfactory ensheathing cells are gradually used to treat spinal cord injuries and have shown amazing effects(J. C. Bartolomei and C. A. Greer, 2000; K. J. Liu et al., 2010; R. Yao et al., 2018). Olfactory ensheathing cells that have been used in research are usually derived from the olfactory bulb(E. H. Franssen et al., 2007), but it is easier to obtain olfactory ensheathing cells from the olfactory mucosa in clinical practice(M. Ryszard et al., 2006), so the difference between the olfactory ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb and the olfactory mucosa There are more and more studies(B. M. U. et al., 2007), and previous studies have shown that they not only have many similar functions, but also have many differences(M. W. Richter et al., 2005; L. Wang et al., 2014; K. E. Smith et al., 2020). Because olfactory ensheathing cells derived from the olfactory bulb are not easy to obtain, olfactory ensheathing cells derived from the olfactory mucosa have become the focus of attention. Although we know that olfactory ensheathing cells from two sources have nerve repair functions, it is not clear why the two different sources of olfactory ensheathing cells have different therapeutic effects. Nicolas G. once studied that the genetic difference between the two cells and found that there are many genes related to wound repair and nerve regeneration(G. Nicolas et al., 2010). We have reason to guess that olfactory ensheathing cells from these two sources will also have a large difference in protein level. Our research group wants to use the current mature transcriptome and proteomic sequencing technologies to explore the difference between olfactory ensheathing cells from the olfactory bulb and olfactory mucosa, and explain why the two sources of olfactory ensheathing cells shows different therapeutic effects, hope to provide a new theoretical basis for future clinical treatment.

### Sample Protocol
RNA quality examination RNA purity was checked using the kaiaoK5500®Spectrophotometer (Kaiao, Beijing, China). RNA integrity and concentration was assessed using the RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit of the Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). Library preparation for RNA sequencing  A total amount of 2μg RNA per sample was used as input material for the RNA sample preparations. Sequencing libraries were generated using NEBNext® Ultra™ RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (#E7530L, NEB, USA) following the manufacturer’s recommendations and index codes were added to attribute sequences to each sample.  Library examination  RNA concentration of library was measured using Qubit® RNA Assay Kit in Qubit® 3.0 to preliminary quantify and then dilute to 1ng/㎕. Insert size was assessed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), and qualified insert size was accurate quantification using StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System (Library valid concentration＞10 nM) Library clustering and sequencing  The clustering of the index-coded samples was performed on a cBot cluster generation system using HiSeq PE Cluster Kit v4-cBot-HS (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After cluster generation, the libraries were sequenced on an Illumina platform and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated. Protein Extraction Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea(Sigma，USA), 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Calbiochem，USA)). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Cat. No. P0012, Biyotime，China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin(Promega，USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in the mobile phase A of liquid chromatography (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Fluka, USA) in water) and then separated using the NanoElute ultra-high performance liquid system. The peptides are separated by the ultra-high performance liquid system and injected into the capillary ion source for ionization and then analyzed by the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications.  GO annotation and enrichment analysis Gene Ontology analysis(M. Ashburner et al., 2000; P. D. Thomas, 2017), or GO analysis, is a bioinformatics analysis method that can organically link the information of genes and gene products (such as proteins) to provide statistical information. GO annotations are divided into 3 categories: biological processes, cell composition, and molecular functions. KEGG pathway annotation and enrichment analysis KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) (H. Ogata et al., 1999; H. Chen et al., 2020)can combine currently known protein interaction network information, such as pathways and related complexes ("Pathway" database), genes and gene products ("Gene" database), biological complexes and Relevant reactions ("compound and reaction" database) and other information are integrated. KEGG’s pathways mainly include: metabolism, genetic information processing, environmental information related processes, cellular physiological processes, drug research, etc(Du J et al., 2014). We use the KEGG pathway database to annotate protein pathways: first, use the KEGG online service tool KAAS to annotate the submitted proteins, and then use the KEGG mapper to match the annotated proteins into the corresponding pathways in the database.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications., Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://geneonfelogy.org/), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) were used to analyze differential proteins (P<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs) from the olfactory bulb (OB) and the olfactory mucosa (OM) have the capacity to repair nerve injury. However, the difference in the therapeutic effect between OB-derived OECs and OM-derived OECs remains unclear. In this study, we extracted OECs from OB and OM and compared the gene and protein expression profiles of the cells using transcriptomics and non-quantitative proteomics techniques. The results revealed that both OB-derived OECs and OM-derived OECs highly expressed genes and proteins that regulate cell growth, proliferation, apoptosis and vascular endothelial cell regeneration. The differentially expressed genes and proteins of OB-derived OECs play a key role in regulation of nerve regeneration and axon regeneration and extension, transmission of nerve impulses and response to axon injury. The differentially expressed genes and proteins of OM-derived OECs mainly participate in the positive regulation of inflammatory response, defense response, cytokine binding, cell migration and wound healing. These findings suggest that differentially expressed genes and proteins may explain why OB-derived OECs and OM-derived OECs exhibit different therapeutic roles. This study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University (approval No. 2017-073) on February 13, 2017.

### Keywords
Olfactory ensheathing cells (oecs); olfactory bulb (ob); olfactory mucosa (om); gene; protein; gene ontology (go); kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg); molecular function; cellular component; biological process

### Affiliations
Ningxia Medical University
School of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, China, 750004. Ningxia Human Stem Cell Institute, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, China, 750004.

### Submitter
Lan Yuanxiang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanxiang Lan
School of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, China, 750004. Ningxia Human Stem Cell Institute, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, China, 750004.


