### Accession
PXD026565

### Title
LC-MSMS analysis of ageing vs labour division in ants

### Description
In social insects, workers perform distinct tasks according to the caste they belong to, and workers from different castes differ in their age (nest workers are usually younger than foragers are). The caste shift thus seems inseparable from age, preventing from deciphering the role of labour division and age in regulating individual physiology and ageing rates. We set up an experimental protocol separating age and caste effects by defining four groups of black garden ant (Lasius niger) workers: young foragers (Y.F), old foragers (O.F), young nest workers (Y.NW) and old nest workers (O.NW). Proteomics highlighted differences between individuals according to their age, whereas metabolomics revealed caste-related differences. Our study highlighted that age and caste influence specifically different aspects of the physiology of ant workers.

### Sample Protocol
Replicates in each group (N=4-5) were made of sixteen worker individuals. Frozen ants were grinded under liquid nitrogen, and proteins were extracted using 220µl of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate, 1% DTT, protease inhibitors; Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France). After sonication on ice and elimination of cuticle remnants, proteins were acetone-precipitated, then acetone fractions were kept for metabolomics analysis and pelleted proteins were dissolved in Laemmli buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 5% -mercaptoethanol, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol). Total protein concentrations were determined using the RC-DC Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). At this stage, a reference sample comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts was made for QC-related measurements. Twenty µg of proteins of each sample were electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE gels (12% polyacrylamide), and five protein bands (2 mm) per lane were excised after colloidal Coomassie Blue staining. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; 120 ng/band) at 37°C overnight. After extraction from the gels using acetonitrile, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 27 μL of a solution composed of 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. Analysis was performed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples (1 µl) were first concentrated/desalted onto a NanoEAse M/Z Symmetry precolumn (C18, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm; Waters) using 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 3 minutes. A solvent gradient from 1 to 6% of B in 0.5 min then from 6 to 35% of B in 60 min was used for peptide elution, which was performed at a flow rate of 450 nL/min using a NanoEAse M/Z BEH column (C18, 130Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm; Waters) maintained at 60 °C. Samples were analysed randomly per block, each block being composed of one biological sample from each group. The reference sample was analysed six times throughout the experiment. In between each sample, washing of the column using 90% acetonitrile during 6 min and running of a solvent blank allowed limiting carry-over effects.  The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (300−1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 at m/z 200. MS parameters were set as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms, AGC target value of 3 × 106 ions, lock-mass option enabled (polysiloxane, 445.12002 m/z), selection of up to 10 most intense precursor ions (doubly charged or more) per full scan for subsequent isolation using a 2 m/z window, fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 27), dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors set to 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 17500 at m/z 200. MS/MS parameters were set as follows: maximum injection time of 100 ms, AGC target value of 1 × 105 ions, peptide match selection option turned on.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.7.0. Peak lists were created using default parameters. Using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant, peaklists were searched against a UniprotKb protein database (Lasius niger, TaxID 67767; 18217 entries) created in November 2019 with MSDA software suite. The database was complemented by Andromeda with the addition of the sequences of common contaminants like keratins and trypsin (247 entries) and of decoy (reverted) sequences for all Lasius niger proteins. Parameters were set as follows: precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 4.5 ppm for the main search after recalibration, fragment ion mass tolerance set to 20 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues considered as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini considered as variable modifications, peptide length of minimum 7 amino acids, maximum number of trypsin missed cleavages set to one, false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for both peptide spectrum matches and proteins. The proteins identified with a single peptide or with a negative score were discarded from identification data, as well as decoy hits and potential contaminants. Protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ (label-free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant. Parameters were set as follows: “minimal ratio count” of one, “match between runs” option enabled using a 0.7-min time window after retention time alignment, consideration of both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionines) peptides for quantitative determination, exclusion of shared peptides. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Finally, criteria for retained proteins were as follows: at least two unique peptides quantified, no more than two missing values per group. Proteins absent in given groups (i.e. not detected at all) but satisfying above-mentioned criteria for the other groups were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Position within the social group has consequences on individual lifespans in diverse taxa. This is especially obvious in eusocial insects, where workers differ in both the tasks they perform and their aging rates. However, in eusocial wasps, bees and ants, the performed task usually depends strongly on age. As such, untangling the effects of social role and age on worker physiology is a key step towards understanding the coevolution of sociality and aging. We performed an experimental protocol that allowed a separate analysis of these two factors using four groups of black garden ant (Lasius niger) workers: young foragers, old foragers, young nest workers, and old nest workers. We highlighted age-related differences in the proteome and metabolome of workers that were primarily related to worker subcaste and only secondarily to age. The relative abundance of proteins and metabolites suggests an improved xenobiotic detoxification, and a fuel metabolism based more on lipid use than carbohydrate use in young ants, regardless of their social role. Regardless of age, proteins related to the digestive function were more abundant in nest workers than in foragers. Old foragers were mostly characterized by weak abundances of molecules with an antibiotic activity or involved in chemical communication. Finally, our results suggest that even in tiny insects, extended lifespan may require to mitigate cancer risks. This is consistent with results found in eusocial rodents and thus opens up the discussion of shared mechanisms among distant taxa and the influence of sociality on life history traits such as longevity.

### Keywords
Sociality, Lc-msms, Ant, Ageing

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


