### Accession
PXD006055

### Title
Quantitative Phospho-proteomic Analysis of TNFα/NFκB Signaling Reveals a Role for RIPK1 Phosphorylation in Suppressing Necrotic Cell Death

### Description
TNFα is a potent inducer of inflammation due to its ability to promote gene expression, inpart via the NFκB pathway. Moreover, in some contexts, TNFα promotes Caspase-dependent apoptosis or RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL-dependent necrosis. Engagement of the TNF Receptor Signaling Complex (TNF-RSC), which contains multiple kinase activities, promotes phosphorylation of several downstream components, including TAK1, IKKα/IKKβ, IκBα and NFκB. However, immediate downstream phosphorylation events occurring in response to TNFα signaling are poorly understood at a proteome-wide level. Here we use Tandem mass tagging-based proteomics to quantitatively characterize acute TNFα-mediated alterations in the proteome and phosphoproteome with or without inhibition of the cIAP-dependent survival arm of the pathway with a SMAC mimetic. We identify and quantify over 8,000 phosphorylated peptides, among which are numerous known sites in the TNF-RSC, NFκB, and MAP kinase signaling systems, as well as numerous previously unrecognized phosphorylation events. Functional analysis of S320 phosphorylation in RIPK1 demonstrates a role for this event in suppressing its kinase activity, association with CASPASE-8 and FADD proteins, and subsequent necrotic cell death during inflammatory TNFα stimulation. This study provides a resource for further elucidation of TNFα-dependent signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for TMT-based mass spectrometry The experimental outline is indicated in Figure 1b. H1299 cells were DMSO control-treated,treated with TNFα (10 ng/ml) for 10 minutes, or treated with Birinipant (500 nM) for 15 minutes prior to TNFα treatment. Cells were harvested by scraping, washed twice with ice-cold PBS, pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000g for 15 minutes at 4 °C, and lysed by sonication in 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 5 mM DTT, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, protease inhibitors (EDTA-free, Roche) and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Lysates werecleared by centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Approximately 6 mg of total protein for each condition (measured using a Micro-BCA assay, Thermo) were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with Dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide and precipitated using methanol−chloroform. Samples were re-suspended in 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and subsequently diluted to 4M Urea in 10 mM CaCl2, 10 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and digested with LysC protease (at a 1:100 protease : protein ratio) at 37 °C for 16 hours, followed by dilution to 1M urea and Trypsin digestion (at a 1:100 protease : protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with an equal volume of 5% formic acid to a pH ~ 2, dried down, re-suspended in 5% formic acid/5% acetonitrile, and subjected to C18 StageTip desalting (31). Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2 as previously described (32–34).  Briefly, 2 mg peptides (measured using a Micro-BCA assay, Thermo) were re-suspended in 2 M lactic acid/50% acetonitrile. TiO2 5 μm beads (GL Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan), equilibrated in 2 M lactic acid/50% acetonitrile, were added to the re-suspended peptides and incubated withgentle rotation for 1 hour at room temperature. Beads were washed twice with 2 M lactic acid/50% acetonitrile, twice with 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, and finally twice with 25% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Enriched phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 50 mM K2HPO4 pH 10, vacuum centrifuged to dryness, and re-suspended in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8) in preparation for the TMT labelling. TMT labelling, off-line basic reverse-phase fractionation and mass spectrometry TMT labeling was performed as previously described (32). From each condition, ~ 50 µg of peptides (for the proteome analysis) and ~ 25 µg of phospho-enriched peptides (for the phosphoproteome analysis) were labeled with the TMT reagents at 2:1 ratio of TMT vs peptides. DMSO control samples were labeled with 126, 127N, 127C, and 128N; TNFα-treated samples were labeled with 128C, 129N, and 129C; and SM+TNFα-treated samples were labeled with 130N, 130C, and 131. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The labelling efficiency for the peptides and the phospho-peptides was >97%, as determined by differential TMT modification. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples and subsequently vacuum- centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 StageTip desalting. An Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array detector (Thermo Scientific) was used for the reverse-phase fractionation. ~ 500 µg peptides (proteome) and ~ 250 µg phospho-enriched peptides (phosphoproteome) were subjected to a 50 minute linear gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, over an Agilent Article 300 Extend-C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm i.d. and 22 cm long). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, which were subsequently consolidated to 12 fractions, which were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was then desalted by C18 StageTip, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile/5% formic acid for LC−MS/MS analysis. 3 µg of peptides of each fraction were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) running a 3 hour gradient from 6% to 36% acetonitrile using a multi-notch MS3-based method (30). MS1 scans were collected over an m/z range of 400-1400 Thomson (Th), AGC 2x105, 120,000 resolution, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The 10 most abundant MS1 ions were selected for the MS2 analysis, consisting of collision-induced dissociation (35% collision energy, AGC 4000, and a maximum injection time of 150 ms). MS3 spectra were collected on an Orbitrap using an SPS of 10 isolation notches, an m/z range of 100-1000, 60,000 resolution, AGC 5 × 104, HCD activation 55%, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic and phospho-proteomic data analysis Spectra files (.RAW) were converted to a mzXML format using a modified ReAdW.exe version and peptides identified by an in-house SEQUEST-based tool (35) with a human UniProt Database (February 4th 2014). The TMT label on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation (+15.99491 Da) was set as a variable modification. For the phosphoproteome analysis a variable modification of +79.9663 Da was set on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. A precursor ion tolerance of 50 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 1 Da were used for the searches. Peptides were filtered to a false discovery rate of 1% using a linear discriminant analysis based on XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy as described previously (36). For the TMT-based quantitation, TMT signal-to-noise ratios >100 were extracted for all TMT channels and each channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming an equal level of loading across all 10 samples. Localization of phosphorylation sites was determined using AScore (37), and sites with an AScore>13 were selected for further analysis. The reproducibility of thedatasets was assessed by the Coefficient of Variation (CV) among replicates. For the proteome datasets the CV values were- DMSO- 8.8%, TNFα- 11.6%, and SM+ TNFα- 7.7%; and for the phosphoproteome datasets the values were DMSO- 13.6%, TNFα- 20.4%, and SM+ TNFα-20.4%. For the analysis of quantified proteins and phosphorylated peptides, values were exported into Microsoft Excel.  A two-tailed Student’s ttest p-value ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. An additional filter based on a DMSO log2 fold-change of ≥ ±1 for the TNFα-stimulated and the SM+ TNFα-stimulated proteome and phosphoproteome (Fig. 2 and supplemental Fig. 3), and a TNFα log1.5 fold-change of ≥ ±1 for the effect of SM on the TNFα-stimulated proteome and phosphoproteome (Fig. 3) was used to select for proteins and phosphorylated peptides with the largest changes in abundance. Sets of genes coding for proteins with significantly altered phosphorylation sites were uploaded and searched with the DAVID online tool (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) for enriched biological processes (GOTERM_BP_FAT). Clusters were annotated according to their general function with overlapping biological process.

### Publication Abstract
TNF&#x3b1; is a potent inducer of inflammation due to its ability to promote gene expression, in part via the NF&#x3ba;B pathway. Moreover, in some contexts, TNF&#x3b1; promotes Caspase-dependent apoptosis or RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL-dependent necrosis. Engagement of the TNF Receptor Signaling Complex (TNF-RSC), which contains multiple kinase activities, promotes phosphorylation of several downstream components, including TAK1, IKK&#x3b1;/IKK&#x3b2;, I&#x3ba;B&#x3b1;, and NF&#x3ba;B. However, immediate downstream phosphorylation events occurring in response to TNF&#x3b1; signaling are poorly understood at a proteome-wide level. Here we use Tandem Mass Tagging-based proteomics to quantitatively characterize acute TNF&#x3b1;-mediated alterations in the proteome and phosphoproteome with or without inhibition of the cIAP-dependent survival arm of the pathway with a SMAC mimetic. We identify and quantify over 8,000 phosphorylated peptides, among which are numerous known sites in the TNF-RSC, NF&#x3ba;B, and MAP kinase signaling systems, as well as numerous previously unrecognized phosphorylation events. Functional analysis of S320 phosphorylation in RIPK1 demonstrates a role for this event in suppressing its kinase activity, association with CASPASE-8 and FADD proteins, and subsequent necrotic cell death during inflammatory TNF&#x3b1; stimulation. This study provides a resource for further elucidation of TNF&#x3b1;-dependent signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Cellular signaling, Cell death, Inflammatory response, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Firaz Mohideen

### Lab Head
Dr Firaz Mohideen
Harvard Medical School


