### Accession
PXD041378

### Title
APEX proximity labeling of murine NDUFS4 interacting proteins in podocytes

### Description
In this project we used an unbiased approach to identify the proteins that interact with NDUFS4 in the mouse podocytes using the APEX2 proximity labeling system. An immortalized murine podocyte was permanently transduced with a doxycycline (DOX) inducible NDUFS4-APEX2 chimeric construct. The cells were treated with DOX for 72 h to induce NDUFS4-APEX2 expression, followed by H2O2 activation of APEX2 mediated biotinylation of neighboring proteins. Biotinylated proteins were pull down by streptavidin beads and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Cells without DOX induction or with DOX but without H2O2 activation were used as controls

### Sample Protocol
80-90% confluent cells were pretreated with 500 M biotin-tyramide for 30 min, followed by 1 mM H2O2 for 1min. After quenching and washing with PBS containing 5 mM Trolox and 10mM sodium ascorbate, cells were harvested into PBS. The cells were centrifuged, and cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer with 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, and 10 mM sodium azide. Cell lysates were incubated with prewashed Pierce streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher) overnight in a cold room. The beads were washed with RIPA buffer (Teknova) twice, with 1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2CO3, and 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) once, and with RIPA buffer twice. Bound biotinylated proteins were eluted in 1 x SDS sample buffer and separated on 4-20% PAGE, followed by immunoblotting with NDUFS4 antibody. The immuno-precipitated samples were resolved on NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Gel (Life Technologies), each lane was excised into 4 equal pieces and combined into two tubes after in-gel digestion using LysC+trypsin enzyme. The peptides were dried in a speed vac and dissolved in 10µl of 5%methanol containing 0.1% formic acid buffer. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using nanoLC1000 system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptides were loaded on a two-column setup with precolumn (2cm X 100µmI.D.) and analytical column (20cm x 75µmI.D.) filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (1.9 µm, Dr.　Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptide elution was done using a 110min discontinuous gradient of 90% acetonitrile buffer (B) in 0.1%formic acid at 200nl/min (2-30%B: 86min, 30-60%B: 6min, 60-90%B: 8min, 90-50%B: 10min). The MS instrument was operated in data dependent mode with MS1 acquisition in Orbitrap (120000 resolution, AGC 5e5, 50ms injection time) followed by MS2 in Ion Trap (Rapid Scan, HCD 30%, AGC 5e4). The cycle time was set to 3 sec and dynamic exclusion to 5sec.

### Data Protocol
The MassSpec raw data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with Mascot algorithm against mouse NCBI refseq database updated 2020_0324. The precursor ion tolerance and product ion tolerance were set to 20ppm and 0.5Da respectively. Maximum cleavage of 2 with Trypsin enzyme, dynamic modification of oxidation (M), protein N-term acetylation, deamidation (N/Q) and destreak (C) was allowed. The peptides identified from mascot result file were validated with 5% false discover rate (FDR). The gene product inference and quantification were done with label-free iBAQ approach using ‘gpGrouper’ algorithm (PMID: 30093420). For statistical assessment, missing value imputation was employed through sampling a normal distribution N (μ-1.8 σ, 0.8σ), where μ, σ are the mean and standard deviation of the quantified values. For differential analysis, we used the moderated t-test and log2 fold changes as implemented in the R package limma and multiple-hypothesis testing correction was performed with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apex proximity labeling of murine ndufs4 interacting proteins in podocytes

### Affiliations
Division of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Farhad R. Danesh
Division of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX


