### Accession
PXD038665

### Title
Beneficial effect of ACI-24 vaccination on microglial phenotypes in an amyloidosis mouse model

### Description
Amyloid-beta (Aβ) deposition is an initiating factor in Alzheimer´s disease (AD). Microglia are the brain immune cells that surround and phagocytose Aβ, but their phagocytic capacity declines in AD. This is in agreement with studies that associate AD risk loci with genes regulating phagocytic function. Immunotherapies are currently pursued as therapeutic strategies against AD and there are increased efforts to understand the role of the immune system in ameliorating AD pathology. Here, we evaluated the effect of the Aβ targeting ACI-24 vaccine in preventing the AD pathology in an amyloidosis mouse model. ACI-24 vaccination elicited a robust and sustained antibody response in APPPS1 mice with an accompanying reduction of Aβ plaque load, amyloid plaque-associated ApoE and dystrophic neurites as compared to non-vaccinated controls. Furthermore, plaque-associated microglia had the tendency to be more activated post vaccination. The lower Aβ plaque load triggered by vaccination with ACI-24 was in concordance with the bulk transcriptomic analysis that revealed a reduction in the expression of several disease-associated microglial signatures. Accordingly, plaque-distant microglia displayed a more ramified morphology, supporting beneficial effects of the vaccination on bulk microglial phenotypes. Our study demonstrates that administration of the Aβ targeting vaccine, ACI-24, triggers protective microglial responses that translate into a reduction of AD pathology suggesting its use as a safe and cost effective AD therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of primary microglia Olfactory bulb, brain stem and cerebellum were removed, meninges cleaned and primary microglia acutely isolated (without culturing) from remaining cerebrum using the MACS technology (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described with some modification (Colombo et al., 2021). Samples were dissociated first by enzymatic digestion using papain (200U, P3125, Sigma) and afterwards with mechanical dissociation using three fire-polished glass Pasteur pipettes of decreasing diameter. CD11b positive microglia were magnetically labelled using CD11b MicroBeads, loaded onto a MACS LS Column (Miltenyi Biotec) and subjected to magnetic separation, resulting in CD11b-enriched (microglia-enriched) and CD11b-depleted (microglia-depleted) fractions. Obtained microglia-enriched pellets were washed twice with HBSS (Gibco) supplemented with 7 mM HEPES, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Sample Preparation for Proteomics Microglia-enriched pellets from 5 APPPS1 mice treated with PBS and 6 APPPS1 mice treated with ACI-24 were subjected to proteomic analysis. The cell pellets were lysed in 200 µL of STET lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton, pH 7.5) at 4°C with intermediate vortexing. The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 16000 x g at 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatant was transferred to a protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and the protein concentration estimated using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A protein amount of 15 µg per sample was subjected to tryptic digestion. First, 100 mM MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and DNA was digested with 25 units Benzonase (Sigma Aldrich, US) for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were reduced at 37°C for 30 min with 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by cysteine alkylation with 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 20 °C. Excess of IAA was removed by adding DTT. Detergent removal and subsequent digestion with 0.2 µg LysC and 0.2 µg trypsin (Promega, Germany) were performed using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation as previously described (Hughes et al., 2019 ). After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (Biosolve) and indexed retention time peptides were added (iRT Kit, Biognosys).  LC-MS/MS Analysis The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoElute system (Bruker Daltonics) which was online coupled with a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). An amount of 400 ng of peptides per sample were separated on a self-packed 15 cm C18 column (75 µm ID) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ resin (1.9µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). For peptide separation, a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) with a length of 120 min was applied at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 50 °C (0 min: 2% B; 2 min: 5% B; 94 min: 24% B; 112 min: 35% B; 120 min: 60% B). A Data independent acquisition Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) method was used. One MS1 full scan was followed by 32 sequential DIA windows with 26 m/z width for peptide fragment ion spectra with an overlap of 1 m/z covering a scan range of 400 to 1201 m/z. The ramp time was fixed to 100 ms and 2 windows were scanned per ramp. This resulted in a total cycle time of 1.8 s.

### Data Protocol
The software DIA-NN version 1.8 was used to analyze the data (Demichev et al., 2020). The raw data was searched against a one protein per gene database from Mus musculus (UniProt, 21966 entries, download: 2021-04-09) using a library free search. Trypsin was defined as protease and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment ion m/z ranges were limited from 400 to 1201 and 200 to 1700, respectively. A FDR threshold of 1% was applied for peptide and protein identifications. The mass accuracy and ion mobility windows were automatically adjusted by the software. The match between runs option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) deposition is an initiating factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Microglia are the brain immune cells that surround and phagocytose A&#x3b2; plaques, but their phagocytic capacity declines in AD. This is in agreement with studies that associate AD risk loci with genes regulating the phagocytic function of immune cells. Immunotherapies are currently pursued as strategies against AD and there are increased efforts to understand the role of the immune system in ameliorating AD pathology. Here, we evaluated the effect of the A&#x3b2; targeting ACI-24 vaccine in reducing AD pathology in an amyloidosis mouse model. ACI-24 vaccination elicited a robust and sustained antibody response in APPPS1 mice with an accompanying reduction of A&#x3b2; plaque load, A&#x3b2; plaque-associated ApoE and dystrophic neurites as compared to non-vaccinated controls. Furthermore, an increased number of NLRP3-positive plaque-associated microglia was observed following ACI-24 vaccination. In contrast to this local microglial activation at A&#x3b2; plaques, we observed a more ramified morphology of A&#x3b2; plaque-distant microglia compared to non-vaccinated controls. Accordingly, bulk transcriptomic analysis revealed a trend towards the reduced expression of several disease-associated microglia (DAM) signatures that is in line with the reduced A&#x3b2; plaque load triggered by ACI-24 vaccination. Our study demonstrates that administration of the A&#x3b2; targeting vaccine ACI-24 reduces AD pathology, suggesting its use as a safe and cost-effective AD therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Vaccination, Alzheimer, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


