### Accession
PXD009318

### Title
IgG-independent co-aggregation of FceRI and FcgRIIB results in LYN- and SHIP1-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of FcgRIIB

### Description
We used tyrosine phosphorylation profiling by anti-pTyr-antibody mediated enrichment and subsequent analysis by mass spectrometry in order to determine the changes in early signalling after mast cell activation. Mast cells were stimulated with varying concentrations of antigen for one minute and the differences between optimal (20 ng/ml) and supra-optimal (2000 ng/ml) antigen mast cell activation were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse bone marrow derived mast cells (BMMCs) were stimulated with either optimal (20 ng/ml) or supra-optimal (2000 ng/ml) antigen concentrations (or mock treatment). Cells were lysed in 8M Urea buffer, reduced, alkylated and digested o/n with LysC and Trypsin, according to standard protocols. The digested peptides of the three conditions were then modified using the dimethyl labelling method (light (L), intermediate (M) and heavy (H)) and subsequently subjected to anti-pTyr-antibody mediated phosphotyrosine-peptide enrichment. The eluted peptides were desalted using homemade STAGE-tips and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite instrument. The first and second experiment were labelled L: mock/ M: 20/ H: 2000. The third experiment was performed using a label swap. L: 20/ M: 2000/ H: mock

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analysed using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the mouse SwissProt database version 06/18 (only reviewed and canonical entries). The search settings for MaxQuant were: multiplicity of 3; labels: DimethLys0 and DimethNter0 for “light”, DimethLys4 and DimethNter4 for “intermediate”, and DimethLys8 and DimethNter8 for “heavy”. carbamidomethylation (Cys) as a fixed modification; oxidation (Met); phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) as variable modifications. FDR 0.01% on protein, peptide and PTM level.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (Fc&#x3b5;RI) follows a bell-shaped dose-response curve. Upon supra-optimal stimulation, mast cell effector responses are down-regulated by inhibitory molecules like the SH2-containing inositol-5'-phosphatase SHIP1 and the SRC-family-kinase LYN. To identify further molecules involved in a negative regulatory signalosome, we screened for proteins showing the same pattern of tyrosine phosphorylation as SHIP1, which is tyrosine-phosphorylated strongest upon supra-optimal antigen (Ag) stimulation. The low-affinity IgG receptor, Fc&#x3b3;RIIB, was found to be most strongly phosphorylated under supra-optimal conditions. This phosphorylation is the consequence of passive, Ag/IgE-dependent and progressive co-localization of Fc&#x3b5;RI and Fc&#x3b3;RIIB, which is not dependent on IgG. Upon supra-optimal Fc&#x3b5;RI cross-linking, Fc&#x3b3;RIIB phosphorylation is executed by LYN and protected from dephosphorylation by SHIP1. Analysis of Fc&#x3b3;RIIB-deficient bone marrow-derived mast cells revealed an ambiguous phenotype upon Fc&#x3b5;RI cross-linking. Absence of Fc&#x3b3;RIIB significantly diminished the level of SHIP1 phosphorylation and resulted in augmented Ca<sup>2+</sup> mobilization. Though, degranulation and IL-6 production were only weakly altered. Altogether our data establish the LYN/Fc&#x3b3;RIIB/SHIP1 signalosome in the context of Fc&#x3b5;RI activation, particularly at supra-optimal Ag concentrations. The fact that SHIP1 tyrosine phosphorylation/activation not only depends on Fc&#x3b3;RIIB, highlights the necessity for its tight backup control.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mast cell activation, Tyrosine phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Immunology RWTH Aachen University Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Huber
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Immunology RWTH Aachen University Germany


