### Accession
PXD001070

### Title
Growth cone localization of the mRNA encoding a chromatin regulator modulates neurite outgrowth

### Description
Neurons exploit local mRNA translation and retrograde transport of transcription factors to regulate gene expression in response to signaling events at distal neuronal ends. Whether epigenetic factors could also be involved in such regulation is not known. We report that the mRNA encoding the HMGN5 chromatin binding protein localizes to growth cones of both neuronal-like cells and of hippocampal neurons, where it has the potential to be translated, and that HMGN5 can be retrogradely transported into the nucleus along neurites. Loss of HMGN5 function induces transcriptional changes and impairs neurite outgrowth while HMGN5 overexpression induces neurite outgrowth and chromatin decompaction. Interestingly, control of both neurite outgrowth and chromatin structure is dependent on growth cone localization of Hmgn5 mRNA. Our results provide the first evidence that mRNA localization and local translation might serve as a mechanism to couple the dynamic neuronal outgrowth process with chromatin regulation in the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed and we immunoprecipitated the protein with anti-GFP agarose for 1 hour. After washing the precipitated beads twice with 300 μl ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), beads with bound proteins were eluted in two steps: first by using 60 μl of eluting buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea, and 50 μg/ml Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako) and incubating while shaking at 27°C for 30 min and second by adding 25 μl of elution buffer II (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 2 M urea, and 1 mM DTT) twice. Both supernatants were combined and incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were alkylated (20 μl iodoacetamide, 5 mg/ml, 30 min in the dark). Then, the reaction was stopped with 1 μl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 100 μl of the sample was immediately loaded into equilibrated handmade C18 StageTips containing octadecyl C18 disks (Supelco, Sigma, United Kingdom). C18 StageTips, spin adaptors, and solvents were prepared as described previously (23). Samples were desalted by washing the StageTips twice with 50 μl of 0.1% TFA and eluted with two lots of 25 μl of 50% acetonitrile (AcN) and 0.1% TFA solution. Final eluates were combined and concentrated until the volume was reduced to 5 μl using a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco, USA). Samples were diluted to obtain a final volume of 12 μl by adding 0.1% TFA and analyzed by MS. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system incorporating an autosampler. Five microliters of the resuspended tryptic peptides was loaded onto a homemade column (100-mm length, 75-mm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.9 μm RepreosilAQ C18 (Dr Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 40-min reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220°C, with a potential of 2,000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Mass spectra were analyzed by using the MaxQuant software program. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data was analysed by the MaxQuant 1.3 software package. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse uniprot database with a mass accuracy of 6ppm and 20ppm (for MS and MS/MS). Carbamylation (C)  was selected as fixed modification. Variable modifications were phosphorylation (STY) and  oxidation (M). The LFQ intensities count was set to 1, elution time matching to 0.5min

### Publication Abstract
Neurons exploit local mRNA translation and retrograde transport of transcription factors to regulate gene expression in response to signaling events at distal neuronal ends. Whether epigenetic factors could also be involved in such regulation is not known. We report that the mRNA encoding the high-mobility group N5 (HMGN5) chromatin binding protein localizes to growth cones of both neuron-like cells and of hippocampal neurons, where it has the potential to be translated, and that HMGN5 can be retrogradely transported into the nucleus along neurites. Loss of HMGN5 function induces transcriptional changes and impairs neurite outgrowth, while HMGN5 overexpression induces neurite outgrowth and chromatin decompaction; these effects are dependent on growth cone localization of Hmgn5 mRNA. We suggest that the localization and local translation of transcripts coding for epigenetic factors couple the dynamic neuronal outgrowth process with chromatin regulation in the nucleus.

### Keywords
Hmgn5, Chromatin  regulation, Neuronal development

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Systems Biology Ireland, UCD

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
Systems Biology Ireland, UCD


