### Accession
PXD013502

### Title
In vivo murine brain protein synthesis uncover the molecular physiological process in brain

### Description
Identification of proteins that are synthesised de novo in response to specific microenvironmental cues is critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms, which underpin vital physiological processes and pathologies. Here, we report that a brief period of pulsed SILAM (Stable Isotope Labeling of Mammals) diet enables determination of biological functions corresponding to actively translating proteins in the mouse brain. Our results demonstrate that the synapse, dendrite and myelin sheath are highly active cellular compart of protein synthesis, rapidly expressing key mediators of nutrient sensing, lipid metabolism, amyloid precursor proteins processing and stability. Together, these findings confirm that protein metabolic activity varies significantly between brain cellular compartments in vivo and indicate that pulsed-SILAM based approaches can identify specific anatomical sites and biological pathways likely to be suitable for drug targeting in neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue processing Mice were euthanised with CO2 and immediately followed by cardiac puncture blood collection before brain tissues were excised, dissected, and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. For total protein extraction, brain tissues were disaggregated using a liquid nitrogen-cooled pulveriser (BioSpec), and 100mg of the resultant sample was re-suspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB, Sigma) lysing buffer containing 2% SDS together with protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck). The tissue suspension was then further homogenised using 1mm magnetic beads (Next Advance) in a bullet blender homogeniser (BioFrontier Technology) under high intensity at 4oC for 5min. The tissue homogenates subsequently centrifuged at 10,000 x g, 4°C for 10min and the supernatants collected. Further rounds of homogenization were performed as required until no visible pellet remained. The collected supernatants were then combined, quantified and processed for in-gel digestion or precipitated with acetone (Fisher Chemical) before in-solution digestion. Total proteins were precipitated with acetone for 4h at -20°C, followed by centrifugation at 5000xg, 4°C for 5min. The pellets were then air-dried and redissolved in 100mM ABB buffer containing 8M urea and protease inhibitor cocktail for in-solution tryptic digestion. For in-gel tryptic digestion, protein gel-loading buffer for SDS-PAGE were used to dissolve the protein pellet. In-gel tryptic digestion A total of 200 g brain protein per mouse was separated with 10 % SDS-PAGE gels, and the lanes were then cut into eight separate bands and subjected to in-gel digestion. Each gel band was further cut into approximately 1-2 mm2 pieces and washed several times with 25 mM ABB followed by 25 mM ABB containing 50 % acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemical) until gel pieces were completely destained. Dehydrated the destained gel pieces with ACN and SpeedVaced for 5-10 min.  Further reduced the gels pieces with freshly prepared 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) in 25 mM ABB  for 1 hour at 60 °C and then alkylated the gel pieces with 55 mM Iodocetamide (IAA, Sigma) in  25 mM ABB and left in the dark at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour. Gel pieces were dehydrated using ACN and subjected to overnight digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin(Promega) at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted with 50 % ACN, 5 % acetic acid (Merck), and dried using SpeedVac (Eppendorf), and then stored at -20 °C until use. In-solution tryptic digestion and HPLC fractionation A total of 600 g brain protein was subjected to reduction with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) at 30 °C for 2 hours and then alkylation with 20 mM IAA in 100 mM ABB in the dark at RT for 30 min.  Sequencing grade modified trypsin was added immediately and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The tryptic peptides were then desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried in a SpeedVac. Peptides were then dissolved with Buffer A (0.02 % NH4OH) and subjected to high pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography fractionation with Buffer B (0.02 % NH4OH, 80 % ACN) on a C18 column (4.6x200 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å, Waters, USA) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min using a HPLC. The established 60 min gradient was set as 3-10 % buffer B for 5 min, 10-35 % buffer B for 40 min, 35-70 % buffer B for 5 min and 100% buffer B for 10 min. A total of 60 individual fractions were collected and then combined into 15 separate pools according to concatenation order. All fractions were SpeedVac dried and stored at -20 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Total four independent replicates; brain samples 1-3 were prepared by in-solution digestion and HPLC separation into 15 fractions, while brain sample 4 was separated into eight individual fractions by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion. Tryptic peptides were re-suspended in 0.1 % formic acid (FA, Fisher Chemical), and each fraction was injected three times (TR1, TR2, and TR3 for in-solution digested samples) or twice (in-gel digestion sample) as technical replicates in LC-MS/MS. The peptides were separated and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Approximately 2 μg peptide from each fraction was injected into an Acclaim peptide trap column (Thermo Fisher) via the Dionex RSLCnano autosampler. Peptides separated in a Dionex EASY-Spray 75 μm x 10 cm column packed with PepMap C18 3 μm, 100 Å (PepMap® C18) at 35 °C. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1 % FA) and mobile phase B (0.1 % FA in 100 % acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60 min gradient. The peptides were then analysed with the Q-Exactive MS with EASY nanospray source (Thermo Fisher) at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. A full MS scan (350–1600 m/z range) acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion set as 30 s. The resolution of the HCD spectra set to 35,000 at m/z 200. The AGC settings of the full MS scan and the MS2 scan were 3E6 and 2E5, respectively. The 10 most intense ions above the 2,000 count threshold were selected for fragmentation in HCD with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. An isolation width of 2 was used for MS2. Single and unassigned charged ions excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, the normalised collision energy set to 28 %. Underfill ratio defined as 0.2 %.  Mass spectrometric data analysing Raw data files from 11 replicates (three injections per biological replicates 1-3, plus two injections of sample 4) analyzed as four independent experiments using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v2.1 (ThermoScientific) with the Uniprot mouse protein database (downloaded on 16 March 2017, 91,089 sequences, 38,788,886 residues) using designed workflow. Briefly, this workflow includes eight processing nodes numbered from 0 to 7. Node 0 named “Spectrum Files” allows selecting raw files, Node 1 labelled as “Spectrum Selector” extracts the spectra within a retention time window and precursor ion mass window.  Node 2 named as IMP MS2 Spectrum Processor deisotope and deconvolute isotopic cluster. Node 3 selected search engine SequestHT and Node 4 used Mascot with database search parameters. The parameters set were enzyme: trypsin, maximum miss cleavage:2, minimum peptide length:6, maximum peptide length: 144, maximum number of peptides reported : 100, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, dynamic modification: Label:13C(6)(K), deamidation of N and Q, Methionine oxidation. Static modification: Carbamidomethyl(C),   Node 5 called as “Percolator” where target FDR(strict) set as 0.01, target FDR(relaxed) set as 0.05.  Node 6 labelled as “Event Detector”, Mass precursor set as 4ppm, S/N Threshold set as 1, Node 7 labelled as “Precursor ions Quantifier”, where RT Tolerance of Isotope pattern multiplets(min):0.2 and Single peak/Missing channels allowed:1. Designed consensus workflow was used to further analysed the obtained peptide/protein list with PD2.1. In short, total nine nodes, Node 0 named as MSF Files which the “spectra to store” set as both identified or quantified,  “merging of identified” is set as globally by search engine type , and the “reported FASTA Title lines: Best match, Node 1 is “PSM Grouper” which “peptide group modification the site probability Threshold set as 75 and ‘modification sites” show only best position, Node 2 is “Peptide Validator”, “Validation mode set as “automatic and the target FDR for both PSMs and Peptides set as Strict”:0.01 and “Relaxed”: 0.05, Node 3 is “Peptide and protein filter” peptide confidence: high, minimum peptide length: 6, minimum peptide sequence: 1, Node 4 was “Protein scorer” which including Node 5 that named as “Protein grouping” : the strict parsimony principle was applied, Node 6 labelled as “ Protein FDR Validation”: 0.01 as strict and 0.05 as relaxed, Node 7 named as “Peptide in protein annotation” and Node 8 was “Peptide and Protein quantifier”: use Unique+Razor peptide, consider protein groups for peptides unique, Normalized mode: None, Scaling mode: On channels average(per file), Report Quantification: Reporter Abundance Based on:  intensity, Co-isolation Threshold: 50, Average reporter S/N Threshold: 100

### Publication Abstract
Identification of proteins that are synthesized de novo in response to specific microenvironmental cues is critical for understanding molecular mechanisms that underpin vital physiological processes and pathologies. Here, we report that a brief period of SILAM (Stable Isotope Labeling of Mammals) diet enables the determination of biological functions corresponding to actively translating proteins in the mouse brain. Our results demonstrate that the synapse, dendrite, and myelin sheath are highly active neuronal structures that display rapid protein synthesis, producing key mediators of chemical signaling as well as nutrient sensing, lipid metabolism, and amyloid precursor protein processing/stability. Together, these findings confirm that protein metabolic activity varies significantly between brain functional units in vivo. Our data indicate that pulsed SILAM approaches can unravel complex protein expression dynamics in the murine brain and identify active synthetic pathways and associated functions that are likely impaired in neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Pulsed silam, Psivom, Actively translating protein, Brain physiology

### Affiliations
Newman Siu Kwan SZE's Lab,  
School of Biological Science, Nanyang Technological University
1School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore, 637551, Singapore

### Submitter
Ser Sue Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
1School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore, 637551, Singapore


