### Accession
PXD003053

### Title
HYPE mediated AMPylation site profiling with YnATP in human lysates

### Description
We describe here the first example of global chemoproteomic screening for HYPE mediated AMPylation sites of  human proteins. Catalytically active mutant HYPE E234G was applied in combination with an alkynylated ATP and an alkynyl-biotinylated side ID reagent for capture of chemoenzymatically tagged proteins. AMPylation sites were detected by shotgun proteomics performed on a Q-Exactive instrument.

### Sample Protocol
To HEK293 lysates in AMPylation buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 % Triton X-100, 1 x EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor) supplemented with DTT (1 mM), bioorthogonal substrate probe Yn-6-ATP (100 µM) and recombinant AMPylator  HYPE E234G (1/10 w/w enzyme to total protein). After 3 h at 30 °C the lysates were mixed in 1:1 ratio and proteins were immediately precipitated to quench the reaction. Samples were prepared in biochemical triplicates. Proteins (2 mg/mL, 0.4 %SDS in PBS) were subjected to CuAAC to a biotinylated site ID reagent (Az-RTB) followed by enrichment of target proteins on NeutrAvidin agarose resin. Protein digestion on-bead was initiated upon addition of trypsin (ca. 1/1000 w/w protease to protein) and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C and stage-tip purified prior to shotgun analysis on a QExactive mass spectrometer. Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
AMPylation site ID data were processed with PEAKS7 suite. Samples were searched against UniProt Homo sapiens database. Trypsin (specific, up to three missed cleavages allowed) was selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches (up to 5 candidates per spectrum reported). The maximal mass error was set to 10 ppm (de novo search) or 5 ppm (database search) for precursor ions and 0.01 Da for product ions. Methionine oxidation as well as AMP-derived adducts (+624.1918 Da and +329.0525 Da) to Ser, Thr and Tyr were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as five. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and minimum of one unique peptide per protein was required.

### Publication Abstract
AMPylation of mammalian small GTPases by bacterial virulence factors can be a key step in bacterial infection of host cells, and constitutes a potential drug target. This posttranslational modification also exists in eukaryotes, and AMP transferase activity was recently assigned to HYPE Filamentation induced by cyclic AMP domain containing protein (FICD) protein, which is conserved from Caenorhabditis elegans to humans. In contrast to bacterial AMP transferases, only a small number of HYPE substrates have been identified by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry approaches, and the full range of targets is yet to be determined in mammalian cells. We describe here the first example of global chemoproteomic screening and substrate validation for HYPE-mediated AMPylation in mammalian cell lysate. Through quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics coupled with novel chemoproteomic tools providing MS/MS evidence of AMP modification, we identified a total of 25 AMPylated proteins, including the previously validated substrate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone BiP (HSPA5), and also novel substrates involved in pathways of gene expression, ATP biosynthesis, and maintenance of the cytoskeleton. This dataset represents the largest library of AMPylated human proteins reported to date and a foundation for substrate-specific investigations that can ultimately decipher the complex biological networks involved in eukaryotic AMPylation.

### Keywords
Human, Chemoproteomics, Protein ampylation

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London


