### Accession
PXD023749

### Title
Extracellular vesicles shed by follicular lymphoma B cells promote the polarization of bone marrow stromal cell niche

### Description
Characterisation of the extracellular vesicles shed by follicular lymphoma B cells that induce the polarization of bone marrow stroma cell toward a pro-tumoral niche.

### Sample Protocol
B lymphocytes from cells lines or purified from heathy donor tonsils were cultured in RPMI+7% of EVs deprived SVF for 48H. Then EVs were enriched and washed in PBS by 2 ultracentrifugations to 100.000 g from culture supernatant during 90 minutes. Enriched EVs were resuspend in PBS and stored at -80°C before use. 15µg of each EVs sample was dried and solubilized in 50 µL 8M urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 with vortexing at 37°C for 1 h. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. After diluting to 1 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were digested with 0.2µg trypsine/LysC (Promega) during 2 h and then with 0.4µg overnight by vortexing at 37°C. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 10 µl injection buffer (0.3% TFA) and 1 µL were injected into the LC-MS/MS system consisting of an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) interfaced on-line to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database using SequestHT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.2 (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.21 (Valot et al., 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) and missed cleavages were allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=7 for FL and N=5 for HD). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor niche, Bone marrow stromal cells, Folicular lymphoma-derived extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the mass spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the mass spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)


