### Accession
PXD004769

### Title
Response Profiling Using Shotgun Proteomics Enables Establishing Global Metallodrug Mechanisms of Action - cytoplasmic proteins of arsenic trioxide-treated HCT 116 epithelial cells

### Description
Response profiling using shotgun proteomics for establishing global metallodrug mechanisms of action in two colon carcinoma cell lines, HCT116 and SW480, was applied and evaluated with the clinically approved arsenic trioxide.  Surprisingly, the complete established mechanism of action of arsenic trioxide was observed by protein regulations in SW480, but not in HCT116 cells. Comparing the basal protein expression in the two cell lines revealed an 80% convergence of protein identifications, but with significant expression differences, which in turn seem affect the extent of protein regulation. For example, while a clear-cut redox response was observed in SW480 cells upon arsenic treatment, such an effect was lacking in HCT116 cells and the latter express drastically higher levels of the involved redox proteins. Response profiling was then used to investigate four anticancer metallodrugs (KP46, KP772, KP1339 and KP1537) by means of functional groups of proteins and mapped their effects according to DNA repair, endocytosis, protection from oxidative stress, protection from endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress, cell adhesion and mitochondrial function. We were able to characterize the global effects of these metallodrugs on the proteome and generate hypotheses on hitherto unrecognized mechanisms. Significant differences in the two colon cell lines strongly suggest that knowledge of mechanistic hallmarks of anticancer metallodrug action are imperative for the design of clinical studies and that outcome may be enhanced by means of patient stratification strategies according to these hallmarks.

### Sample Protocol
HCT 116, kindly provided by Michael Jakupec (Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Austria), were cultured in McCoy’s (Life Technologies, UK) containing 10% FCS (ATCC, USA) and 100U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (ATCC, USA) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were treated with 5µM asenic trioxide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Experiments were conducted for 24 hours in T25 flasks in triplicates with on average 107 cells per flasks.  With the combination of an isotonic lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and shear stress cytoplasmic proteins were released and after centrifugation (2300xg, 5min, 4°C) precipitated with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C over night. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5M urea, 1.5M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) and a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany) was employed to determine protein concentrations. In solution digestions were performed with 25µg of protein. The samples were pre-concentrated on 10kDa filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH), reduced with DTT (56°C, 30 min) and carbamidomethylated with iodacetamide (45 min in the dark). To receive peptides, samples were digested with a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega, Germany) for 18h at 37°C. Eluates were dried and stored at -20°C until analysis. For analysis a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Austria) was coupled to a high resolution QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Austria). Dried samples were resolved in 5µL 30% formic acid (FA) containing four synthetic peptides (10fmol each) and diluted with 40µL mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Each sample was recorded twice, 5µL were injected per analysis. The LC-method lasted 135 minutes with a 90min long gradient from 8-40% solvent B (80%ACN, 20%H¬2O, 0.1% FA) running over a 75µm x 50cm C-18 separation column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap RSCL). The MS-method lasted 115min with the resolution set to 70000 and 17500, maximum injection time to 50ms and 75ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. M/z was scanned from 400-1400 and a top 8 method was chosen for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version August 2014 with 20 194 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Response profiling using shotgun proteomics for establishing global metallodrug mechanisms of action in two colon carcinoma cell lines, HCT116 and SW480, has been applied and evaluated with the clinically approved arsenic trioxide. Surprisingly, the complete established mechanism of action of arsenic trioxide was observed by protein regulations in SW480, but not HCT116 cells. Comparing the basal protein expression in the two cell lines revealed an 80&#x2009;% convergence of protein identification, but with significant expression differences, which in turn seem to affect the extent of protein regulation. A clear-cut redox response was observed in SW480 cells upon treatment with arsenic, but hardly in HCT116 cells. Response profiling was then used to investigate four anti-cancer metallodrugs (KP46, KP772, KP1339 and KP1537). Proteome alterations were mapped to selected functional groups, including DNA repair, endocytosis, protection from oxidative stress, protection from endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress, cell adhesion and mitochondrial function. The present data suggest that knowledge of the mechanism of action of anti-cancer metallodrugs and improved patient stratification strategies are imperative for the design of clinical studies.

### Keywords
Response profiling, Metallodrug, Proteome profiling, Mechanism of action, Functional protein groups

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


