### Accession
PXD031116

### Title
Proximity biotinylation of the Toxoplasma gondii basal complex

### Description
During T. gondii cell division (endodyogeny) the basal complex acts as the cytokinetic ring by preserving daughter bud integrity and executing the tapering and basal constriction of nascent parasites. Its molecular composition, order of assembly and mode of action are incompletely understood but differ substantially from final cytokinesis events described in other organisms. In order to identify new proteins of the basal complex we used proximity biotinylation (BioID) and fused the small biotin ligase BioID2 (Kim et al., 2016) to basal complex components (BCCs). We endogenously tagged MORN1, Centrin2 (Cen2), IMC8, MyoJ, BCC1 (TGGT1_232780) and BCC2 (TGGT1_231070) with BioID2 and used an YFP-BioID2 fusion protein as a cytosolic control. Our reciprocal BioID approach identifies several novel BCCs that resolve into four basal complex sub clusters (BCSC1-4). Together with the functional characterization of critical BCCs our data uncover a novel dimension to the hierarchy and structure of daughter budding.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin labeling was done in two biological replicates (+ biotin) and one biological replicate (-biotin). Each biological replicate was run as two technical replicates on the mass spectrometer (+ biotin: Rep1: A/B, Rep2: C/D; -biotin: A/B). Parasites expressing BioID2-fusion proteins were grown overnight ± 150 μM biotin and harvested by mechanical lysis in 1%SDS in resuspension buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4). For the streptavidin pull-down, 1.5 mg of total protein lysate was cleared by centrifugation and mixed with Streptavidin-agarose beads (Fisher) in 1% SDS in DPBS (Corning). Beads and lysates were incubated overnight at 4˚C and proteins bound on beads were washed the next day with 0.1% SDS in DPBS, DPBS and H2O. Beads were resuspended in 6 M Urea in DPBS, reduced, alkylated and digested with 2 μg of Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37˚C. Digested peptides were separated from beads by centrifugation and subsequent mass-spectrometric analysis was performed. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Samples were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). Peptides were eluted onto a biphasic column (100 µm fused silica column with a 5 µm tip packed with 10 cm Aqua C18 resin and 4 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman)) using a gradient of 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then eluted from the SCX resin onto the Aqua C18 resin and into the mass spectrometer using four salt steps (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 500 mM ammonium acetate) ((Weerapana et al., 2007)). The flow rate through the column was set to ~0.25 µL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.75 kV.  With dynamic exclusion enabled, one full MS scan (FTMS) (400-1,800 MW) was followed by 7 data dependent scans (ITMS) of the nth most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
The tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm ((Eng et al., 1994)) using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the Toxoplasma gondii GT1 ToxoDB-V29 database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0 ((Tabb et al., 2002)). Reported peptides were required to be unique to the assigned protein (minimum of two unique peptides per protein) and discriminant analyses were performed to achieve a peptide false-positive rate below 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The basal complex (BC) is essential for T. gondii cell division but mechanistic details are lacking. Here we report a reciprocal proximity based biotinylation approach to map the BC's proteome. We interrogate the resulting map for spatiotemporal dynamics and function by disrupting the expression of components. This highlights four architecturally distinct BC subcomplexes, the compositions of which change dynamically in correlation with changes in BC function. We identify BCC0 as a protein undergirding BC formation in five foci that precede the same symmetry seen in the apical annuli and IMC sutures. Notably, daughter budding from BCC0 progresses bidirectionally: the apical cap in apical and the rest of the IMC in basal direction. Furthermore, the essential role of the BC in cell division is contained in BCC4 and MORN1 that form a 'rubber band' to sequester the basal end of the assembling daughter cytoskeleton. Finally, we assign BCC1 to the non-essential, final BC constriction step.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Bioid, Basal complex

### Affiliations
Boston College, Department of Biology, MA, USA
Boston College, Department of Biology

### Submitter
Klemens Engelberg

### Lab Head
Dr Marc-Jan Gubbels
Boston College, Department of Biology, MA, USA


