### Accession
PXD031976

### Title
Quantitative chemoproteomic identification of lysine carboxylation in proteins

### Description
Carbon dioxide is an abundant biological gas that drives adaptive physiological responses within organisms from all domains. The basic biochemical mechanisms by which proteins serve as sensors of CO2 are, therefore, of great interest. CO2 is a potent electrophilic, and thus one way it can modulate protein biochemistry is by carboxylation of the primary amines group of lysines. However, the resulting cabamates spontaneously decompose, giving off CO2, which makes studying this modification notoriously challenging. Here we describe a chemoproteomic method to stably mimic CO2-carboxylated lysine residues in proteins by reacting them with OCNH. We leverage this method to develop a competition based strategy to quantitatively identify CO2-carboxylatedlysines of proteins and use it to explore the lysine ‘carboxylome’.

### Sample Protocol
CO2/OCNH competition assays were performed as described above in 50ul reaction volumes. Following competition, samples were immediately desalted using ZebraTM spin desalting columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, 89882). Samples were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 degC, 45 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 25 degC, 30 min, dark), followed by acetone precipitation. Precipitated pellets were resuspended in digestion solution (50 HEPES pH 8, 4 mg trypsin) and incubated for 18 hours at 37 degC. Following incubation, peptides were dialyzed for 2 hours into 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) using 1 kDa cutoff Pur-A-Lyzer Midi dialysis kits (Sigma, PURD10005). Peptides were then dried down by SpeedVac. Peptides were then resuspended in 100 ml of 50 mM HEPES pH 8. A total of 160 mg of the appropriate TMTduplex isobaric tags were then added to the 100 ul tryptic digest (50 ug) from the above competition samples. Reactions were incubated at 25 °C for an hour with shaking at 600 rpm followed by addition of 8 ul of 5% hydroxylamine and samples were incubated for 15 min at room temperature to quench the reaction. Quenched NaCl and NaHCO3 reactions were then mixed together and desalted by overnight dialysis in 0.1% TFA using the above-mentioned 1 kDa cutoff dialysis units. Peptides were then quantified by nanodrop and dried down.  MS experiments were performed at UVic Genome BC Proteomics Centre, Victoria, Canada. Each dried peptide sample was rehydrated to 1 µg·µl-1 with (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A 1 µl aliquot of the peptide solution was separated by on-line reversed phase liquid chromatography using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nanoLC II system with an in-house prepared Microsorb 300-3 C8 reversed-phase pre-column (100 µm inner diameter (I.D.), 1.5 cm length, 3 µm, 300 Å), and a reversed phase nano-analytical column Microsorb 300-3 C8 (75 µm I.D., 20 cm length, 3 µm, 300 Å, Varian, Palo Alto, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl·min-1.  The chromatography system was coupled on-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Solvents were A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  After a 248 bar (~ 4 µL) pre-column equilibration and 248 bar (~ 3 µL) nanocolumn equilibration, samples were separated using a 140-minute gradient (0 min: 5% B; 5 min: 8% B; 120 min: 55% B; 5 min: 100% B hold 10 min: 100% B).  The Orbitrap Fusion instrument parameters (Fusion Tune v3.3 software) for the orbitrap-orbitrap high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) induced fragmentation scan for peptide identification (OT-OT HCD MS/MS) and generation of TMT reporter ions were as follows:  nano-electrospray ion source with spray voltage 2.55 kV, capillary temperature 275 ℃. The survey MS1 scan m/z range was set to 350-200 in profile mode, resolution 120, 000 FWHM at 200 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target standard, one microscan with auto maximum inject time for maximum sensitivity and scan-rate.  The Lock mass for siloxane (391.28428 Da) was used for internal calibration.  Data-dependent acquisition Orbitrap survey spectra were scheduled at least every 3 seconds, with the software determining “maximum” number of MS/MS acquisitions during this period. The most intense ions with 2-7 charge state exceeding 50, 000 counts were selected for HCD MS/MS fragmentation with detection in centroid mode. Dynamic exclusion settings are, repeat count: 2; if occurring within 5 seconds; exclusion duration: 5 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window.  The ddMS/MS OT HCD scan used a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z; Orbitrap detector, resolution: 50,000, auto m/z scan range mode, first m/z: 100, centroid detection, 1 microscan, AGC target value 1e5, 105 ms maximum injection time and fixed HCD collision energy 38%.  An additional lower HCD collision energy (32%) mass triggered Orbitrap HCD MS/MS scan occurred if the carbamyl-lysine [Immonium-NH3] ion at 127.0863 m/z (+ 10 ppm) was observed at 5% relative intensity to the 127.131079 TMT reporter ion to give additional confirmation for the desired homocitrulline modification.

### Data Protocol
The Synechocystis sp. and DCynS E. coli proteome datasets were processed with raw files being created by XCalibur 3.0.63 software and analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.228, Thermo Scientific). Data were searched against the corresponding Uniprot reference proteomes (E. coli K12: UP000000558, Synechocystis sp. 6803: UP000001425), with K. pneumoniae OXA-48 sequence added (Uniprot accession: Q6XEC0) in FASTA format. Default search settings were used unless stated otherwise. Search parameters used a MS/MS tolerance of 15 mmu with fixed modifications: methylthio (C), TMTduplex (N-term), and variable modifications: TMTduplex (K), carbamylation (K, + 43.00582 Da). Of note, we do not include N-terminal carbamylation events in our proteomic analysis. The processing step workflow was set up with spectrum files being run through a reporter ion quantifier (integration tolerance: 20 ppm, most confident centroid mode) and a separate spectrum selector followed by two branching scan event filters with corresponding SEQUEST-HT database searches. The scan event filters had the following common parameters: FTMS mass analyzer, MS/MS order, HCD activation. However, the event filters differed with respect to collision energy range (30 – 34%, or 36 – 39%). The parallel SEQUEST-HT searches have the following parameters in common, max missed tryptic sites: 3, peptide length range: 6 - 150 aa, precursor ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. However, the two searches had different fragment mass tolerances: 0.05 Da, or 0.3 Da.  Peptide spectrum match (PSM) identified proteins were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. After search, SEQUEST-HT cross correlation scores (Xcorr) were calculated and PSMs filtered using a fixed value PSM validator with default settings. Consensus workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed using default settings. Peptides corresponding to contaminant proteins were manually removed from the dataset. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing. Please note, for the Cyanobacteria samples A, and C, and E. coli samples (A, B, and D), RCO2 values (I-CO2/I+CO2) were determined using TMT reporter ion ratios (126/127). However, for Synechocystis sp. sample B, and E. coli sample C, RCO2 values were determined using reporter ion ratio (127/126). Data were normalized as outlined in the manuscript. Please see manuscript (Supplementary information) for a more detailed information on data processing and analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Carbon dioxide is an omnipresent gas that drives adaptive responses within organisms from all domains of life. The molecular mechanisms by which proteins serve as sensors of CO<sub>2</sub> are, accordingly, of great interest. Because CO<sub>2</sub> is electrophilic, one way it can modulate protein biochemistry is by carboxylation of the amine group of lysine residues. However, the resulting CO<sub>2</sub>-carboxylated lysines spontaneously decompose, giving off CO<sub>2</sub>, which makes studying this modification difficult. Here we describe a method to stably mimic CO<sub>2</sub>-carboxylated lysine residues in proteins. We leverage this method to develop a quantitative approach to identify CO<sub>2</sub>-carboxylated lysines of proteins and explore the lysine 'carboxylome' of the CO<sub>2</sub>-responsive cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. We uncover one CO<sub>2</sub>-carboxylated lysine within the effector binding pocket of the metabolic signaling protein PII. CO<sub>2</sub>-carboxylatation of this lysine markedly lowers the affinity of PII for its regulatory effector ligand ATP, illuminating a negative molecular control mechanism mediated by CO<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Lysine carboxylation, Co2, Homocitrulline

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada  Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada
Simon Fraser University

### Submitter
Dustin King

### Lab Head
Dr David Vocadlo
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada  Department of Chemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6, Canada


