### Accession
PXD016837

### Title
The melanoma cell line MDA-MB-435 adhesome in long-term culture and its comparison to the adhesome upon integrin αV knockdown

### Description
Using mass spectrometry–based proteomics, we analysed the components of integrin adhesion complexes of MDA-MB-435S cells and two MDA-MB-435S-derived integrin αV-specific shRNA-expressing cell clones. Among integrins, we detected αV and β5 integrin subunits in the MDA-MB-435S adhesome, thus showing that in long term culture these cells use preferentially integrin αVβ5 for adhesion. Our data represents the first published adhesome of αVβ5 integrin heterodimer.

### Sample Protocol
IACs were isolated as previously described (Jones et al., 2015). In short, cells (2-2.5x106, depending on cell clone, to obtain similar cell number 48 h later) were plated on 10 cm diameter cell culture dishes (at least 6 dishes per cell line) and grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS. After 48 h, the medium was removed, cells were washed with DMEM-HEPES (hydroxyethyl piperazineethanesulfonic acid) and incubated with Wang and Richard's reagent for 5 min (6 mM dimethyl 3,3'-dithiobispropionimidate, DTBP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). At the same time, cells in an additional plate were counted to ensure equal cell number per sample. DTBP was quenched by 0.03 M Tris-HCl (pH 8) and cells were lysed using modified RIPA buffer. Cell bodies were removed by high-pressure washing and remaining adhesions were collected by scraping. Samples containing isolated IACs were acetone precipitated, dissolved in Laemmli buffer and further processed either for mass spectrometry (MS) or WB analysis. Samples were prepared as previously described (Humphries et al., 2009), using a slightly modified procedure. Briefly, samples were loaded onto gradient gels (NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and electrophoresis was performed for 3 min (200V). Protein bands were stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon, UK), followed by excision and destaining using series of alternate washing steps with ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka, USA) and acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Washing and drying steps were made in 96-wells perforated plates (GlySci, USA). Gel pieces were dried with acetonitrile and additional drying was performed using vacuum centrifuge. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 h at 56°C) and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide (37°C, 45 min, dark) (both Sigma-Aldrich, USA). After series of washing and drying steps, gel pieces were incubated with trypsin (1.25 ng/µL, Promega, USA) and incubated for 45 min at 4°C, followed by an overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were collected and extracted using acetonitrile supplemented with formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), then dried and resuspended in a solution of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile plus 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were desalted using OLIGO R3 beads (Life technologies, USA) using 96-well plates with PVDF membranes (Corning, USA). Desalting was performed with a 0.1% formic acid wash steps before being eluted twice with 50 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were subsequently dried and resuspended in a solution of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile plus 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed using a modified version of the LC-MS/MS method previously described (Horton et al., 2015). Briefly, an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass detector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with electrospray ionization. Peptide mixtures were eluted for 44 minutes using a gradient containing 92% of solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 8% up to 33% of solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Solvent flow was set to 300 nL per minute. To identify proteins, data were searched against the human Swissprot database (version 2018_01) using Mascot (Matrix science, version 2.5.1). Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.50 Da, while parent ion tolerance was 5 PPM. Protein identifications were further refined using Scaffold (Proteome software). Protein (99.9%) and peptide (95%) probabilities were assigned using the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) as incorporated by Scaffold including a minimum of 4 unique peptides per each protein.

### Data Protocol
Human protein-protein interactions were loaded from STRING database, using stringApp (confidence score cut-off = 0.40, maximum additional interactors = 0) (Doncheva et al., 2019) for Cytoscape software (version 3.7.1) (Shannon et al., 2003). Functional annotation was performed using the Database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID), version 6.8 (Huang da et al., 2009a) and Panther GO database (Thomas et al., 2003), while the literature search was performed in case of cortical stabilization microtubule complex (Lansbergen et al., 2006; Astro et al., 2014; Bouchet et al., 2016; Noordstra and Akhmanova, 2017). Functional enrichment was performed using DAVID_CC subontology list (Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value<0.05, EASE score<0.1 at least 4 identified proteins). To summarize the gene ontology terms and place them in similarity-based space, REViGO tool, with the following setup (comparison of corrected p-values related to GO terms were used, allowed similarity: small (0.5), semantic similarity measure to use: Resnik-normalized) was used (Supek et al., 2011). QSpec Spectral counter tool was used to provide the statistical measure of differentially expressed proteins in MDA-MB-435S versus 2αV datasets and MDA-MB-435S versus 3αV datasets (Choi et al., 2008). For visualization of differentially expressed proteins, volcano plot (GraphPad Prism) with the following setup was created: fold change>1.5 (MDA MB 435S / 2αV and MDA MB 435S / 3αV, respectively), -log(FDR)>1.  Fold change was calculated according to Qspec output values.

### Publication Abstract
Integrins are heterodimeric glycoproteins that bind cells to extracellular matrix. Upon integrin clustering, multimolecular integrin adhesion complexes (IACs) are formed, creating links to the cell cytoskeleton. We have previously observed decreased cell migration and increased sensitivity to microtubule (MT) poisons, paclitaxel and vincristine, in the melanoma cell line MDA-MB-435S upon transfection with integrin &#x3b1;V-specific siRNA, suggesting a link between adhesion and drug sensitivity. To elucidate the underlying mechanism, we determined &#x3b1;V-dependent changes in IAC composition. Using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, we analyzed the components of isolated IACs of MDA-MB-435S cells and two MDA-MB-435S-derived integrin &#x3b1;V-specific shRNA-expressing cell clones with decreased expression of integrin &#x3b1;V. MS analysis showed that cells preferentially use integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 for the formation of IACs. The differential analysis between MDA-MB-435S cells and clones with decreased expression of integrin &#x3b1;V identified key components of integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 adhesion complexes as talins 1 and 2, &#x3b1;-actinins 1 and 4, filamins A and B, plectin and vinculin. The data also revealed decreased levels of several components of the cortical microtubule stabilization complex, which recruits MTs to adhesion sites (notably liprins &#x3b1; and &#x3b2;, ELKS, LL5&#x3b2;, MACF1, KANK1, and KANK2), following &#x3b1;V knockdown. KANK2 knockdown in MDA-MB-435S cells mimicked the effect of integrin &#x3b1;V knockdown and resulted in increased sensitivity to MT poisons and decreased migration. Taken together, we conclude that KANK2 is a key molecule linking integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 IACs to MTs, and enabling the actin-MT crosstalk that is important for both sensitivity to MT poisons and cell migration.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Mda-mb-435s', 'Integrin αvβ5', 'Melanoma', 'Cortical microtubule stabilisation complex', 'Integrin adhesion complex', 'Adhesome', 'Cancer']

### Affiliations
['Ruder Boskovic Institute', 'Laboratory for Cell Biology and Signalling, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia']

### Submitter
['Mladen Paradzik']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Laboratory for Cell Biology and Signalling, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruder Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia', 'email': 'Andreja.Ambriovic.Ristov@irb.hr', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Andreja Ambriović-Ristov', 'id': '173350100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['Melanocyte']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['melanocyte']
Characteristics[disease]: ['ductal carcinoma']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[fractionation method]: [1]
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite;AC=MS:1001910']
comment[modification parameters]: ['not available']

