### Accession
PXD032664

### Title
Proteomics of Enriched Insulin Secretory Granules Fractionated by Size Exclusion Chromotography

### Description
Hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) form in pancreatic beta-cells through the formation of peptide bonds between proinsulin fragments and other peptides. HIPs, which have been confidently identified in pancreatic islets by mass spectrometry, are targeted by CD4 T cells in subjects with Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), as well as by disease-triggering CD4 T cell clones in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice. The mechanism(s) of HIP formation are currently poorly understood; however, it is well established that proteases can drive the formation of new peptide bonds in a side reaction during peptide bond hydrolysis. Here, we used a proteomic strategy on enriched insulin granules and identified cathepsin D (CatD) as the primary protease driving the specific formation of HIPs that are targeted by disease-relevant CD4 T cells in T1D. We also established that NOD islets deficient of cathepsin L (CatL), another protease that was implied in the formation of disease-relevant HIPs, contain elevated levels of HIPs, signifying a primary role for CatL in the proteolytic degradation of HIPs. In summary, our data suggest that CatD may be a therapeutic target in efforts to prevent or slow down the autoimmune destruction of beta-cells mediated by HIP-reactive CD4 T cells in T1D.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched secretory granules were subjected to lysis with 2% octyl beta glucoside in pH 7 buffer (80mM NaCl, 10mM Na2HPO4, 10mM acetic acid). Undissolved contents were spun down at 17,000 x g for 10 min  and supernatant was collected and separated using a size exclusion column (BIORAD BioLogic FPLC system) with the same pH 7 buffer at a flow rate of 0.8mL/min. Eight fractions (2 ml each) were collected starting at 7.8min (6.2ml).SEC fractions were digested with Trypsin, AspN, and GluC then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Agilent 1200 series UHPLC system with a nanoflow adapter and an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a nano-ESI source. Online separation was accomplished by reversed-phase liquid chromatography using a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; 3 μm particles; 100 Å pores) and Thermo Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm inner diameter; 2 μm particles; 100 Å pores) in a trap forward-elute configuration using a water/acetonitrile gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile in water).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the Spectrum Mill software. During extraction, MS/MS scans within a 2 min window were merged based on precursor selection purity, spectral similarity, retention time, and m/z. Merged spectra were searched against the SwissProt mouse database with Agilent ESI Q-TOF defined as the instrument. The precursor mass tolerance was set at ±10 ppm and the product ion mass tolerance was set at ±20 ppm. No enzymatic digest was defined to allow for identification of naturally truncated peptides, which we and others have shown to be present in beta cells. Matches were then validated with the following set of thresholds: score >10, percentage scored peak intensity (SPI) > 70%, and rank 1 minus rank 2 (R1-R2) score >2.5. The precursor mass shift range was set at 0 to 100 Da to allow for oxidation of multiple methionine residues in a single precursor. For the SwissProt database searches, spectra were concurrently searched against a reverse sequence database to enable determination of false discovery rates (FDRs). Spectrum Mill calculates FDRs by multiplying the number of validated hits in the reverse sequence database (“false” or “decoy” hits) by two and then dividing the result by the total number of hits across both databases (“true” and “false” hits) and multiplying by 100 to generate a percentage. Doubling of the reverse database hits is based on the assumption that the number of false validated hits in the forward database search is equal to the number of validated hits in the reverse database search. If Spectrum Mill matches multiple spectra to the same peptide sequence, the multiple matches can be grouped and only the spectrum match with the highest score will be reported as the representative distinct peptide match.

### Publication Abstract
Hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) form in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells through the formation of peptide bonds between proinsulin fragments and other peptides. HIPs have been identified in pancreatic islets by mass spectrometry and are targeted by CD4 T cells in patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D) as well as by pathogenic CD4 T-cell clones in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice. The mechanism of HIP formation is currently poorly understood; however, it is well established that proteases can drive the formation of new peptide bonds in a side reaction during peptide bond hydrolysis. Here, we used a proteomic strategy on enriched insulin granules and identified cathepsin D (CatD) as the primary protease driving the specific formation of HIPs targeted by disease-relevant CD4 T cells in T1D. We also established that NOD islets deficient in cathepsin L (CatL), another protease implicated in the formation of disease-relevant HIPs, contain elevated levels of HIPs, indicating a role for CatL in the proteolytic degradation of HIPs. In summary, our data suggest that CatD may be a therapeutic target in efforts to prevent or slow the autoimmune destruction of &#x3b2;-cells mediated by HIP-reactive CD4 T cells in T1D.

### Keywords
Proteins, Proteases, Beta cell, Insulin secretory granule

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Colorado, USA
University of Colorado Anschutz

### Submitter
Samantha Crawford

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Delong
University of Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Colorado, USA


