### Accession
PXD034908

### Title
The muscle proteome reflects changes in mitochondrial function, cellular stress and proteolysis after 14 days of unilateral lower limb immobilization in active young men

### Description
Skeletal muscle unloading due to joint immobilization induces skeletal muscle atrophy. However, the skeletal muscle proteome response to limb immobilization has not been investigated using SWATH methods. This study quantitatively characterized the muscle proteome at baseline, and after 3 and 14 d of unilateral lower limb (knee-brace) immobilization in 18 healthy young men (25.4 ±5.5 y, 81.2 ±11.6 kg). All muscle biopsies were obtained from the vastus lateralis muscle. Unilateral lower limb immobilization was preceded by four-weeks of exercise training to standardise acute training history, and 7 days of dietary provision to standardise energy/macronutrient intake. Dietary intake was also standardised/provided throughout the 14 d immobilization period.

### Sample Protocol
Human skeletal muscle was homogenised, lysed and digested. Samples were then desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra ion library was generated from a pool of sample digests. Both IDAs and SWATH analyses were performed on a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
IDA and SWATH data were analysed by ProteinPilot and PeakView (Sciex). FDR of 1% was used for both protein identification and quantitation. Statistical analysis was performed in R/Bioconductor using SwathXtend to report on differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Muscle atrophy, Immobilisation, Swath, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
AUSTRALIAN PROTEOME ANALYSIS FACILITY, MQ UNIVERSITY
Exercise and Sports Science Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine Bond University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4229 Australia

### Submitter
THIRI ZAW

### Lab Head
Dr Vernon Coffey
Exercise and Sports Science Faculty of Health Sciences and Medicine Bond University, Gold Coast, Queensland, 4229 Australia


