### Accession
PXD017121

### Title
Global Profiling of the Lysine Crotonylome in Different Pluripotent States

### Description
Understanding the mechanisms of pluripotency maintenance and exit are important for developmental biology and regenerative medicine. However, studies of pluripotency and post-translational modifications of proteins are scarce. To systematically profile protein crotonylation in mouse pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) in different culture conditions, we used affinity purification of crotonylated peptides, TMT labeling, and LC-MS/MS. Our study included PSCs in ground, metastable, and primed state, as well as metastable PSCs undergoing early pluripotency exit. We have successfully identified 8,102 crotonylation sites in 2,578 proteins, among which 3,628 sites in 1,426 proteins were with high-confidence. These high-confidence crotonylated proteins are enriched for factors involved in functions related to pluripotency such as RNA biogenesis, central carbon metabolism, and proteasome function. Our atlas of protein crotonylation will be valuable for further studies of pluripotency regulation and may also provide insights into the role of crotonylation in other cell fate transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion for LC-MS/MS Cells were lysed on ice in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM nicotinamide, 3 μM TSA (MedChemExpress), and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were centrifuged (20,000 g) at 4 °C for 10 minutes. Supernatants were precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid at -20 °C for 2 hours, following 20,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 minutes. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in a pH 8.0 buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. The protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hour followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 minutes protected from light. The alkylated protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Trypsin was added at 1:50 (w/w) trypsin to protein ratio overnight, and then at 1:100 ratio for 4 hours.   TMT labelling The digested proteins were desalted by running on a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and then vacuum-dried. Desalted peptides were labelled with TMT 6plex isobaric tags (ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, TMT was added at 1:1 (U/mg) TMT reagent to protein ratio for 2 hours at room temperature and then the samples were desalted.  Peptide fractionation TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length). Briefly, labelled peptides were separated with a gradient of 2%-60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate into 80 fractions for 80 minutes. Fractionated peptides were combined into 18 fractions for total proteome analysis or 8 fractions for crotonylome analysis.  Kcr enrichment Kcr-containing peptides were dissolved in pH 8.0 NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and 0.5% NP-40). Dissolved peptides were incubated with antiKcr antibody-coated agarose beads (PTM Biolabs) overnight at 4 °C. Beads were then washed with NETN buffer and bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Enriched peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a home-made reverse-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter). Peptide samples were eluted with a gradient elution system: an increasing gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 7% to 20% over 24 minutes, 20% to 35% in 8 minutes and climbing to 80% in 5 minutes then holding at 80% for the last 3 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/minute on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The eluted peptide samples were analyzed by a Q Exactive PlusTM hybrid quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was fixed from 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30 and the fragments were detected at a resolution of 17,500. Data-dependent acquisition was used for MS data collection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis The resulting TMT data were processed using MaxQuant (v.1.4.1.2) with integrated Andromeda search engine [47]. Tandem mass spectra data were searched against non-redundant mouse protein amino acid sequence from Uniprot databases (https://www.uniprot.org/) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was selected as cleavage enzyme permitting up to two missing cleavages per peptide for total proteome analysis or four missing cleavages per peptide for crotonylome analysis. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine, crotonylation on lysine, and acetylation on the N-terminal of the protein were specified as variable modifications. FDR threshold for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were set at less than 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For peptide quantification, TMT6plex was selected. All other parameters in MaxQuant were used default setting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Post-translational modifications, Metabolism, Pluripotency, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Yuan Lv

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel A Esteban
Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China


