### Accession
PXD012499

### Title
Candidate proteins involved in the calyx abscission process of ‘Kuerlexiangli’ (Pyrus sinkiangensis Yu) identified by iTRAQ analysis

### Description
‘Kuerlexiangli’ (Pyrus sinkiangensis Yu) is an important market pear in China. The shape and quality of the fruit is negatively affected by the presence of a persistent calyx. Here, to explore the molecular mechanism of calyx abscission, we designed an experiment to compare protein expression at two critical stages of the calyx abscission process under three treatments: a calyx abscising treatment (6000 × Flusilazole + 300 × PBO), a calyx persisting treatment (50 mg L−1 GA3), and a water control. We investigated the collected protein fragments using isobaric tags for relative and absolute protein quantitation (iTRAQ) to identify candidate proteins and perform relative quantification. We identified 378,078 spectra and 3,873 proteins, of which there were 2,371 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) having Gene Ontology terms and associating with 124 defined pathways from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. The DAPs that were correlated with calyx abscission were mainly those known to be involved in photosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction, cell-wall modification, and carbohydrate metabolism. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to confirm the results of the digital transcript abundance measurements. Among the isolated candidate proteins, polygalacturonase and chitinase appear to play key roles during the process of calyx abscission. We identified candidate proteins that exhibit highly dynamic expression changes during the calyx abscission progress. These proteins are potential targets for future functional identification and should be valuable to explore the mechanism of the calyx abscission, and finally for the development of a method for inducing calyx abscission in fruit production based on the use of small molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials used were obtained from the Pomology Institute, Shanxi Academy of Agricultural, Taigu, Shanxi province during the 2015 growing season. We selected three uniform 50-year-old ‘Kuerlexiangli’ trees and divided them into three “blocks” of six branches each. Two branches from each block were subjected to each of the following treatments: (i) a calyx abscising treatment composed of 6000 × Flusilazole + 300 × PBO; (ii) a calyx persisting treatment composed of GA3 50 mg L−1; or (iii) a water control. We sprayed all the sample trees on the same day, during full bloom. Symptoms of calyx tube abscission (yellow loop in abscission zone) were observed within 10 d in the abscission treatment, whereas only a few abscission symptoms were observed in the calyx persisting treatment; therefore, we sampled for proteins related to abscission 8-10 d after treatment, also an additional sample on 20 d after treatment; this stage was chosen for no further calyx abscission had occurred after that. About 200 fruits of each treatment were collected and mixed for iTRAQ analysis. Cells for proteomics analysis were collected by centrifugation at 8,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Proteomics analysis - i) Protein preparation and digestion: for each sample, 10 mg of cells were frozen by liquid nitrogen immediately after centrifugation and washed with phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The cells were broken with sonication cracking at low temperature, and then centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g to collect the supernatant. In addition, cell debris was then re-suspended in a lysis buffer (8 M urea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 40 mM Tris-HCl), with 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (final concentration). After 5 min of vigorously vortex, dithiothreitol (DTT) was also added to a final concentration of 10 mM. After mix, the sample were centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 x g, and the supernatant was mixed well with ice-cold acetone (1:4, v/v) with 30 mM DTT. After repeating this step twice, all supernatants were combined and precipitated at -20°C overnight, and stored at -80°C prior to sample cleanup if not for immediate use. For digestion, protein pellet from previous step was resuspended in digestion buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate TEAB, 0.05% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL (total protein measured by bicinchonic acid assay (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)). Equal aliquots (500 µg) from each lysate were then digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C (Sigma; 1:40 w/w added at 0 and 2 h) and lyophilized; ii) iTRAQ Labeling: the iTRAQ labeling of peptide samples derived from each of the wild type control and the gene knockout mutant samples were performed using iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer' s protocol. Four samples (two biological replicates for the wild type control and two biological replicates for the mutant, respectively) were iTRAQ individually labeled. The peptides labeled with respective isobaric tags, incubated for 2 h and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Each of the labeled control and the mutant replicate samples were 1:1 pooled, and generating four combinations of samples, which were reconstituted in Buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.85). The mixed iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated using PolySULFOETHYL ATM Strong Cation Exchange Choematography (SCX) column (200 x 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle size, 200 Aº pore size) by HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan) at flow rate 1.0 ml min-1. The 50 min HPLC gradient consisted of 100% buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.85) for 5 min; 0-20% buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% ACN, 500 mM KCL, pH 3.0) for 15 min; 20-40% buffer B for 10 min; 40-100% buffer B for 5 min followed by 100% buffer A for 10 min. The chromatograms were recorded at 218 nm. A total of twenty fractions of labeled peptides were collected and then individually desalted with Sep-Pak® Vac C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts), concentrated to dryness using vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis: the mass spectroscopy analysis was performed using an AB SCIEX TripleTOF™ 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA), coupled with online micro flow HPLC system (Shimadzu, JAPAN). The peptides were separated using nanobored C18 column with a picofrit nanospray tip (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 5 μm particles) (New Objectives, Wubrun, MA). The separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 20 μl min-1, with a splitter to get an effective flow rate of 0.2 μl min-1. The mass spectrometer data acquired in the positive ion mode, with a selected mass range of 300-2000 m/z. Peptides with +2 to +4 charge states were selected for MS/MS. The three most abundantly charged peptides above a count threshold were selected for MS/MS and dynamically excluded for 30 s with ±30 mDa mass tolerance. Smart information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was activated with automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. The fragment intensity multiplier was set to 20 and maximum accumulation time was 2 s. The peak areas of the iTRAQ reporter ions reflect the relative abundance of the proteins in the samples. For peptide identification, Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer used in this study has high mass accuracy (less than 2 ppm). Other identification parameters used included: Fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.1 Da; Mass values: monoisotopic; Variable modifications: Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y); Peptide mass tolerance: 0.05 Da; Max missed cleavages: 1; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); Other parameters: default. Proteomic data analysis: the MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.2.0.208) (Thermo Scientific) to generating peak list. The default parameters of Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.2.0.208) were used. The data acquisition was performed with Analyst QS 2.0 software (Applied Biosystems/MDS SCIEX). Protein identification and quantification were performed using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). For iTRAQ quantification, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected by the algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area, error factor (EF) and p-value (default parameters in Mascot Software package). The resulting data set was auto bias-corrected to get rid of any variations imparted due to the unequal mixing during combining different labeled samples. Genome sequence and annotation information of pear (Pyrus)were downloaded from NCBI. The ratio between samples was obtained directly based on the protein abundance for any given protein. Proteins with 1.5 fold or more change between treatment and control samples and p-value of statistical evaluation less than 0.05 were determined as differentially expressed proteins. The quantitation was performed at the peptide level by following the procedures described in http://www.matrixscience.com/help/quant_statistics_help.html. The student’s T-test was performed using the Mascot 2.3.02 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pear, Differentially abundant proteins, Calyx abscission, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, China
College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xin Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Shutian Tao
College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, China


