### Accession
PXD009965

### Title
Title: Identification of LEFKOTHEA/PORR protein partners

### Description
LEFKOTHEA (At5g62990) is a nuclear gene encoding an RNA-binding protein that carries a transit peptide (TP) and monopartite or bipartite nuclear localization signals (NLS). These motifs result to dual-targeting of LEFKOTHEA to the nucleus and chloroplasts. To identify the chloroplast and nuclear protein interactors of LEFKOTHEA, co-immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (co-IP/MS) analysis was performed. The construct of LEFKOTHEA gene, expressed under the control of the endogenous promoter, with a FLAG tag at the C-terminus was introduced in Arabidopsis lefko2 mutant plants using the Agrobacterium system. The proteins were extracted under native conditions and incubated with anti-FLAG M2-agarose affinity gel. High salt concentrations and 3X FLAG peptide were applied to the beads for protein elution. The eluted protein fractions were subjected to Ultra High Pressure nanoLC-MS/MS. The LEFKOTHEA protein partners were identified using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) against the complete Uniprot proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana (version of 19/1/2016) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity as label free quantitation (LFQ intensity). The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.3.2).

### Sample Protocol
The eluted proteins from at least three independent co-IP experiments were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C and processed according to the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using spin filter devices with 10kDa cutoff (Sartorius, VN01H02). Specifically, the protein solutions were diluted with 1ml 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and applied serially on top of the filter unit through centrifugation at 14000g. The proteins on the filters were extensively washed (three times) with 200μl urea solution and centrifugations. Alkylation of protein cysteines was performed using a 10 mg/ml iodoacetamide solution in urea for 30 min in the dark, again on top of the filter. The proteins on the filters were then washed three times with a solution of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, the proteins were digested by adding 1 μg trypsin/LysC mix (mass spec grade, Promega) in 80μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution and incubated overnight at 37°C. The next day the peptides were eluted by adding 100 μl water and centrifugation at 14000g. The peptides were dried down by speed-vac-assisted solvent removal and reconstituted in a solution of 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide solution was incubated for 3 min in a sonication water bath. Peptide concentration was determined by nanodrop absorbance measurement at 280 nm. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μl/min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm long C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of Solution A (2% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solution B (80% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% B up to 40% B in 210 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35°C. The eluted peptides were ionized by a nanospray source and detected by an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operating in a data dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for continuous internal calibration. Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
The raw files of protein mass spectrometry were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) searched against the complete Uniprot proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana (version of 19/1/2016) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine. Search parameters were strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionines, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity as label free quantitation (LFQ intensity) enabling the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana. affinity purification, Porr, Endogeneous, Lefkothea, Interactors

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, Iera Odos 75, Athens 118 55, Greece
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Polydefkis Hatzopoulos
Department of Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, Iera Odos 75, Athens 118 55, Greece


