### Accession
PXD020843

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase HectD3 is a novel regulator of cardiac hypertrophy and inflammation

### Description
The HECT domain E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 3 (HectD3) is highly expressed in the heart, but its cardiac function is still unknown. Here, we identified SUMO2 and Stat1 as novel cardiac substrates for HectD3. SUMO2 is a potent inducer of Calcineurin-NFAT mediated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, whereas, Stat1 is an interferon responsive transcription factor that plays crucial role in cellular immune responses. HectD3 overexpression on one hand attenuated SUMO2-Calcineurin-NFAT signaling driven cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, on the other hand, it abrogated the pro-inflammatory actions of LPS or interferon-γ in cardiomyocytes in vitro. Consistently, AAV9-mediated overexpression of HectD3 in mice in vivo not only reduced cardiac SUMO2/Stat1 levels and pathological hypertrophy but also alleviated macrophage infiltration and fibrosis induced by pressure overload. In conclusion, we describe a novel cardioprotective mechanism involving the ubiquitin ligase HectD3, which exerts anti-hypertrophic and anti-inflammatory effects via dual regulation of SUMO2 and Stat1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) NRVCMs were transduced with adenoviruses expressing either HectD3 or LacZ and incubated for 72 h. Cell pellets were then lysed in 100μl buffer containing 6M guanidinium hydrochloride, 100mM HEPES pH 7.5, and protease inhibitors. Reduction and alkylation of cysteines were carried out by the addition of 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide, followed by tryptic digestion at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were subsequently extracted using C18 SepPak columns, lyophilized and resuspended in 100 μl of 50mM TEAB and subjected to TMT-labelling. After a second solid phase extraction the samples were fractionated into 10 fractions using high pH reversed-phase chromatography to increase proteome coverage 58.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex U3000 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using following parameters: 6 μl sample was injected and loaded on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18, 10 mm × 300 μm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) and washed for 3 min with 2% ACN/0.05% TFA at a flow-rate of 30 μL/min. Separation was performed using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) with a flow-rate of 300 nL/min and following eluents: A (0.05% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.04% FA); linear gradient 5-40% B in 180 min, 50-90% B in 5 min, 90% B for 10 min, 90-5% B in 1 min and equilibrating at 5% B for 11 min. Ionization was performed with 1.5 kV spray voltage applied on a non-coated PicoTip emitter (10 μm tip size, New Objective, Woburn, MA) with the source temperature set to 250°C. MS data were acquired from 5 to 200 min with MS full scans between 300 and 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The 15 most intense precursors with charge states ≥2+ were subjected to fragmentation with HCD with NCE of 27%; isolation width of 3 m/z; resolution, 17,500 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion for 30 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Lock mass correction was performed based on the polysiloxane contaminant signal of 445.120025 m/z. Additional wash runs were performed between samples from gel bands to reduce carry over while cytochrome C was used to monitor mass accuracy and LC quality control.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS-spectra were searched with the SequestHT algorithm against the entire reviewed protein database of Rattus norvegicus (in total 29,969 sequences, Proteome ID:UP000002494). Static modifications applied for searches were carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, TMT modification of peptide N-terminus and lysines while oxidation on methionine residues was set as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched with semi-enzyme specificity. A MS mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da was used. Peptide grouping was applied to group Peptides Spectrum Matches (PSMs, a MS/MS-spectrum assigned to a peptide sequence from the protein database) with the same modification under the same peptide. The protein group identifications were further filtered based on the following criteria: Proteins must be identified with at least two peptides with a FDR confidence ≤ 0.05 (medium).  TMT reporter ions were used for relative quantification between control and biological treatment in the three biological replicates. Only protein IDs with reporter signals were considered during the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial inflammation has recently been recognized as a distinct feature of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. HectD3, a HECT domain containing E3 ubiquitin ligase has previously been investigated in the host defense against infections as well as neuroinflammation; its cardiac function however is still unknown. Here we show that HectD3 simultaneously attenuates Calcineurin-NFAT driven cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and the pro-inflammatory actions of LPS/interferon-&#x3b3; via its cardiac substrates SUMO2 and Stat1, respectively. AAV9-mediated overexpression of HectD3 in mice in vivo not only reduced cardiac SUMO2/Stat1 levels and pathological hypertrophy but also largely abolished macrophage infiltration and fibrosis induced by pressure overload. Taken together, we describe a novel cardioprotective mechanism involving the ubiquitin ligase HectD3, which links anti-hypertrophic and anti-inflammatory effects via dual regulation of SUMO2 and Stat1. In a broader perspective, these findings support the notion that cardiomyocyte growth and inflammation are more intertwined than previously anticipated.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin ligase, Proteomics, Cardiac models

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
AG Proteomics & Bioanalytics Institut für Experimentelle Medizin Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel 24105 Kiel, Germany


