### Accession
PXD008517

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Aspergillus fumigatus isolated from air and surfaces of the International Space Station

### Description
The on-going Microbial Observatory Experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) revealed the presence of various microorganisms that may be affected by the distinct environment of the ISS. The low-nutrient environment combined with enhanced irradiation and microgravity may trigger changes in the molecular suit of microorganisms leading to increased virulence and resistance of microbes. Proteomic characterization of two Aspergillus fumigatus strains, ISSFT-021 and IF1SW-F4, isolated from HEPA filter debris and cupola surface of the ISS, respectively, is presented, along with a comparison to experimentally established clinical isolates Af293 and CEA10. In-depth analysis highlights variations in the proteome of both ISS-isolated strains when compared to the clinical strains. Proteins up-regulated in ISS isolates were involved in oxidative stress response, and carbohydrate and secondary metabolism. This report provides insight into possible molecular adaptation of filamentous fungi to the unique ISS environment. Lastly, an attempt was made to elucidate plausible causes of the enhanced virulence of both ISS-isolated A. fumigatus strains.

### Sample Protocol
Af293, CEA10, ISSFT-021 and IF1SW-F4 were cultivated in triplicates for 5 days at 30°C on glucose minimal medium (GMM) agar plates covered with cellophane membrane. Each Petri plate (D=10 cm) was inoculated with 10*106 spores/plate. Mycelia from GMM agar plates were collected and lysed in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. 200 µg proteins from each sample were TCA precipitated, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin/LysC. The digested peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTsixplex), fractionated, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph, a75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trapping column, and a 75 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, and an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) with the Sequest-HT searching engines against an A. fumigatus Af293 protein database from NCBI containing 9845 non-redundant sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The on-going Microbial Observatory Experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) revealed the presence of various microorganisms that may be affected by the distinct environment of the ISS. The low-nutrient environment combined with enhanced irradiation and microgravity may trigger changes in the molecular suite of microorganisms leading to increased virulence and resistance of microbes. Proteomic characterization of two Aspergillus fumigatus strains, ISSFT-021 and IF1SW-F4, isolated from HEPA filter debris and cupola surface of the ISS, respectively, is presented, along with a comparison to well-studied clinical isolates Af293 and CEA10. In-depth analysis highlights variations in the proteome of both ISS-isolated strains when compared to the clinical strains. Proteins that showed increased abundance in ISS isolates were overall involved in stress responses, and carbohydrate and secondary metabolism. Among the most abundant proteins were Pst2 and ArtA involved in oxidative stress response, PdcA and AcuE responsible for ethanol fermentation and glyoxylate cycle, respectively, TpcA, TpcF, and TpcK that are part of trypacidin biosynthetic pathway, and a toxin Asp-hemolysin. This report provides insight into possible molecular adaptation of filamentous fungi to the unique ISS environment.

### Keywords
International space station, Proteomic, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
City of Hope

### Submitter
Abby Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope


