### Accession
PXD005659

### Title
Quantitative liver proteomics identifies FGF19 targets that couple metabolism and proliferation

### Description
Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) is a gut-derived peptide hormone that is produced following activation of Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR). FGF19 is secreted and signals to the liver, where it contributes to the homeostasis of bile acid (BA), lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. FGF19 is a promising therapeutic target in metabolic syndrome and cholestatic diseases, but enthusiasm for its use has been tempered by FGF19-mediated induction of proliferation and hepatocellular carcinoma. To inform future rational design of FGF19-variants, we have conducted temporal quantitative proteomic and gene expression analyses to identify FGF19-targets related to metabolism and proliferation. Mice were fasted for 16 hours, and injected with human FGF19 (1 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle. Liver protein extracts (containing 'light' lysine) were mixed 1:1 with a spike-in protein extract from 13C6-lysine metabolically labelled mouse liver (containing 'heavy' lysine) and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Our analyses provide a resource of FGF19 target proteins in the liver. 189 proteins were upregulated (≥ 1.5 folds) and 73 proteins were downregulated (≤ -1.5 folds) by FGF19. FGF19 treatment decreased the expression of proteins involved in fatty acid (FA) synthesis, i.e. Fabp5, Scd1, and Acsl3 and increased the expression of Acox1, involved in FA oxidation. As expected, FGF19 increased the expression of proteins known to drive proliferation (i.e. Tgfbi, Vcam1, Anxa2 and Hdlbp). Importantly, many of the FGF19 targets (i.e. Pdk4, Apoa4, Fas and Stat3) have a dual function in both metabolism and cell proliferation. Therefore, our findings challenge the development of FGF19-variants that uncouple full metabolic benefit from mitogenic potential.

### Sample Protocol
Liver protein extracts were generated by homogenizing 50 mg liver tissue in PBS and subsequent lysis in lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, Roche Proteinase inhibitors). Next, 100 μg protein extract from Wt or FXR-/- mice (‘light’) were mixed 1:1 with a spike-in protein extract generated from 13C6-lysine metabolically labelled mouse liver (‘heavy’) (Silantes, Munich, Germany). Proteins were denatured in urea, alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma, S Louis, MO, U.S.)and digested with 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, U.S.) using a Filtered Aided SamplePurification Protocol (FASP [18]). After trypsinization, peptides were fractionated based on their pH using Strong Anionic Exchange Chromatography and finally desalted and acidified on a C-18 cartridge(3M, St. Paul, MN, U.S.). C18-stagetips were activated with methanol, washed with buffer containing 0.5% formic acid in 80% ACN (buffer B) and then with 0.5% formic acid (buffer A). After loading of the digested sample, stage-tips were washed with buffer A and peptides were eluted with buffer B, dried in a SpeedVac, and dissolved in buffer A. Mass spectrometry and data analysis  Peptides were separated in a 30 cm column (75 μm ID fused silica capillary with emitter tip (New Objective)) packed with 3 μm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a 140 minute gradient (7% to 80% ACN, 0.1% FA), and delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo, Waltham, MA, U.S). Peptides were electro-sprayed directly into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and analysed in Top Speed data-dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 240000 and an intensity threshold of 5000 ions. Most intense ions were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the iontrap was set to 35 milliseconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with the Maxquant software version 1.5.1.0. [19] For identification, the mouse Uniprot 2012 was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool(option set at two minutes), the IBAQ and the LFQ algorithm [20].

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) is a gut-derived peptide hormone that is produced following activation of Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR). FGF19 is secreted and signals to the liver, where it contributes to the homeostasis of bile acid (BA), lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. FGF19 is a promising therapeutic target for the metabolic syndrome and cholestatic diseases, but enthusiasm for its use has been tempered by FGF19-mediated induction of proliferation and hepatocellular carcinoma. To inform future rational design of FGF19-variants, we have conducted temporal quantitative proteomic and gene expression analyses to identify FGF19-targets related to metabolism and proliferation. Mice were fasted for 16 hours, and injected with human FGF19 (1 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle. Liver protein extracts (containing "light" lysine) were mixed 1:1 with a spike-in protein extract from 13C6-lysine metabolically labelled mouse liver (containing "heavy" lysine) and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Our analyses provide a resource of FGF19 target proteins in the liver. 189 proteins were upregulated (&#x2265; 1.5 folds) and 73 proteins were downregulated (&#x2264; -1.5 folds) by FGF19. FGF19 treatment decreased the expression of proteins involved in fatty acid (FA) synthesis, i.e., Fabp5, Scd1, and Acsl3 and increased the expression of Acox1, involved in FA oxidation. As expected, FGF19 increased the expression of proteins known to drive proliferation (i.e., Tgfbi, Vcam1, Anxa2 and Hdlbp). Importantly, many of the FGF19 targets (i.e., Pdk4, Apoa4, Fas and Stat3) have a dual function in both metabolism and cell proliferation. Therefore, our findings challenge the development of FGF19-variants that fully uncouple metabolic benefit from mitogenic potential.

### Keywords
Fgf19; growth factor; fxr; liver; proteomics; metabolism; proliferation; tgf

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Saskia W.C. van Mil
Center for Molecular Medicine, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands


