### Accession
PXD010154

### Title
A deep proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas of 29 healthy human tissues

### Description
We generated a systematic, quantitative and deep proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas from 29 paired healthy human to serve as a molecular baseline to study human biology.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen human tissue samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 8 M urea, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphin hydrochloride, 40 mM chloroacetamide, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) by bead milling (Precellys 24, Bertin Instruments, France; 5,500 rpm, 2 × 20 s, 10 s pause). Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method (Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific) and 300 µg of the protein extract were used for in-solution digestion with trypsin. For this, the sample was diluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M, and trypsin was added at a 50:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio. After 4 hours of digestion at 37°C, another aliquot of trypsin was added to reach a final 25:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio and the sample was incubated overnight at 37°C. For ultra-deep sequencing of a single tonsil tissue, LysC, GluC, ArgC, AspN, LysN and chymotrypsin were also used in tonsil lysate digestion. 6 portions of tonsil lysate with 300 μg protein were taken for digestion and diluted with 8 x responding buffer for each protease to decrease urea concentration to less than 1 M (for eliminate urea inhibition on protease activities). For LysC digestion, lysate were diluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5. 1: 50 (w/w) LysC(Wako) were added for 4 h pre-digestion at 37 °C and 700 rpm, following with overnight digestion with another 1: 50 (w/w) LysC  at 37 °C. For GluC and Asp-N, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 was added to dilute the lysate. 4 h pre-digestion and overnight digestion were performed by adding twice 1: 50 (w/w) GluC (Promega) or 1:100 (w/w) AspN at 37 °C. For ArgC, lysate dilution buffer contained 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.8), 5 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA (pH 8), and 5 mM CaCl2. 1:60 (w/w) ArgC (Promega) were added twice for 4 h pre-digestion and overnight digestion at 37 °C. For LysN, 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.0) were used to dilute the lysate and 1:100 (w/w) LysN (Promega) were added for 4 h pre-digestion and overnight digestion at 37°C. For chymotrypsin, the lysate was diluted with 100 mM Tris/HCl, 10mM CaCl2 (pH 8.0) and 1:50 (w/w) chymotrypsin (Promega) were added for 4 h pre-digestion and overnight digestion at 25 °C. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 columns and fractionated into 36 fractions via hSAX off-line chromatography. The Stage-Tips desalted fractions were dried down by a vacuum centrifuge for further LC-MS/MS analysis.  To validate the variant peptides and novel peptides, all the peptides from Mascot search passed filter criteria were synthesized at JPT Berlin using Fmoc-based solid-phase synthesis. The details of peptide synthesis, sample preparation and MS measurement were as described (Zolg et. al 2017).

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification and label free quantification, the MaxQuant suite of tools version 1.5.3.30 was used. The spectra were searched against the Ensembl human proteome database (release-83, GRCh38) with carbamidomethyl (C) specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-Term) were considered as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The match between runs function was enabled, with match time window set to 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The FDR was set to 1% at both PSM and protein level. LysC, ArgC and LysN were specified with 2 maximum missed cleavages. Searches for GluC and Asp-N peptides allowed 3 missed cleavages. Chymotrypsin (C terminal of F, Y, L, W, or M) was allowed with at most 4 missed cleavages. Label free quantification was performed using the iBAQ approach. For non-tryptic peptides and single tissue analysis, matching data between fractions was disabled. To investigate the identification of protein isoforms, sample-specific protein sequence databases were constructed based on RNA-Seq data by translating all transcripts with FPKM>1. Each tissue was searched against its matched RNA-Seq database using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 as described above without match between runs. To explore the exomic variants identification on protein level, the exome of tonsil tissue were sequenced and corresponding protein sequences database were constructed based on the exomic variants (I/L variants were removed). The Mascot searching of the tonsil proteomic data generated by different proteases digestion and fragment methods were performed against this database together with protein databases from UniProt (downloaded 03. February, 2017) and Ensembl using the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance set at 10 p.p.m., MS/MS tolerance set at 0.05 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine defined as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation defined as variable modification. Trypsin, LysC, ArgC and LysN digested peptides allowed up to 2 missed cleavages. AspN and GluC (V8-DE in Mascot search engine) digested peptides with up to 3 cleavages were considered. Chymotrypsin digested peptides were allowed to have a maximum of 4 missed cleavages. Resulting PSMs were analysed using Percolator and an overall FDR cut-off of 1% was applied. To further consolidate the variants peptides and to reduce false positives, peptide identification by MaxQuant was performed in parallel. Using the customized exomic variant database with the same parameters used in Ensembl database searches described above. To identify novel peptides and improving gene annotation in the human genome, lncRNA protein sequence database was constructed by three-frame-translating the GENCODE (v25) lncRNA database and alternative translation initiation protein sequence database (aTIS) was  constructed by searching the 5’ UTR of GENCODE transcripts (v25) for putative alternative start codons and in-silico translating these “novel coding sequences”. The tissue proteomics data sets were searched against concatenated sequence collections comprising the aTIS and lncRNA databases, GENCODE (v25), UniProt and sample specific RNA-Seq based databases using Mascot with the same parameters as variant peptide identification by Mascot. ). To consolidate the list of candidate aTIS and lncRNA peptides and to reduce false positives, the raw MS data was also searched by MaxQuant (using the same parameters as described for searches using Ensembl). For the synthetic peptides, raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 searching individual LC-MS runs against pool-specific databases. For tryptic peptides, trypsin was specified, and for non-tryptic peptides digestion mode was set as ‘Unspecific’. For N-terminal acetylated peptides, oxidation (M) and Acetyl (N-Term) were considered as variable modifications. The other parameters were same as tissue proteomic data search with Ensembl database.

### Publication Abstract
Genome-, transcriptome- and proteome-wide measurements provide insights into how biological systems are regulated. However, fundamental aspects relating to which human proteins exist, where they are expressed and in which quantities are not fully understood. Therefore, we generated a quantitative proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas of 29 paired healthy human tissues from the Human Protein Atlas project representing human genes by 18,072 transcripts and 13,640 proteins including 37 without prior protein-level evidence. The analysis revealed that hundreds of proteins, particularly in testis, could not be detected even for highly expressed mRNAs, that few proteins show tissue-specific expression, that strong differences between mRNA and protein quantities within and across tissues exist and that protein expression is often more stable across tissues than that of transcripts. Only 238 of 9,848 amino acid variants found by exome sequencing could be confidently detected at the protein level showing that proteogenomics remains challenging, needs better computational methods and requires rigorous validation. Many uses of this resource can be envisaged including the study of gene/protein expression regulation and biomarker specificity evaluation.

### Keywords
['Human proteome']

### Affiliations
['Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich', 'Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany']

### Submitter
['Dongxue Wang']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany', 'email': 'kuster@tum.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Bernhard Küster', 'id': '151040100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['brain' 'adrenal gland' 'prostate' 'lung' 'testis' 'duodenum'
 'small intestine' 'appendix/vermiform appendix' 'urinary bladder'
 'gallbladder' 'esophagus' 'heart' 'lymph node' 'thyroid'
 'endometrium/uterine endometrium' 'placenta' 'pancreas' 'ovary'
 'salivary gland' 'smooth muscle' 'colon' 'fallopian tube/oviduct'
 'tonsil' 'liver' 'stomach' 'fat/adipose tissue' 'rectum' 'kidney'
 'bone marrow' 'pituitary/hypophysis' 'spleen']
characteristics[disease]: ['not available']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not available']
comment[Label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1002526;NT=Q Exactive Plus'
 'AC=MS:1002732;NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos' 'AC=MS:1002523;NT=Q Exactive HF']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable']
Factor Value[organism part]: ['brain' 'adrenal gland' 'prostate' 'lung' 'testis' 'duodenum'
 'small intestine' 'appendix/vermiform appendix' 'urinary bladder'
 'gallbladder' 'esophagus' 'heart' 'lymph node' 'thyroid'
 'endometrium/uterine endometrium' 'placenta' 'pancreas' 'ovary'
 'salivary gland' 'smooth muscle' 'colon' 'fallopian tube/oviduct'
 'tonsil' 'liver' 'stomach' 'fat/adipose tissue' 'rectum' 'kidney'
 'bone marrow' 'pituitary/hypophysis' 'spleen']

