### Accession
PXD033064

### Title
Mitochondria regulate intracellular coenzyme Q transport and ferroptotic resistance via STARD7

### Description
Coenzyme Q (or ubiquinone) is a redox-active lipid, which serves as universal electron carrier in the mitochondrial respiratory chain and antioxidant in the plasma membrane limiting lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Mechanisms allowing cellular coenzyme Q distribution after synthesis within mitochondria are not understood. Here, we identify the cytosolic lipid transfer protein STARD7 as a critical and limiting factor of intracellular coenzyme Q transport. Dual localization of STARD7 to the intermembrane space of mitochondria and the cytosol upon cleavage by the rhomboid protease PARL ensures the synthesis of coenzyme Q in mitochondria and its transport to the plasma membrane. While cytosolic STARD7 overexpression protects against ferroptosis, it limits CoQ abundance in mitochondria and respiratory cell growth, illustrating the need to coordinate CoQ synthesis and cellular distribution by PARL-mediated STARD7 processing. Our findings highlight the antioxidant function of mitochondrial CoQ against ferroptosis and identify PARL and STARD7 as promising targets to interfere with ferroptosis.  The repository contains raw files and methods for project 0112 (brain – whole proteomics) and 0176 (spatial proteomics). The labeling of the raw files and the experiment – raw file matches are available in the individual search zip files. The individual sections are accompanied with the project identifier.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of mitochondrial and plasma membrane fractions (0176 – spatial proteomics) Mitochondrial and plasma membrane fractions were isolated from cells using differential centrifugation. Briefly, cells were homogenized in 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH7.4, 220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA buffer using a potter at 1.000 rpm. Whole cell (WC) sample was collected after homogenization. Homogenized cells were centrifuged at 8.000xg for 10 min at 4°C to isolate mitochondria. The supernatant was centrifuged again at 8.000xg for 10 min at 4°C to collect further mitochondrial fraction. 8.000xg pellets were pooled together to collect mitochondrial fraction (fraction 1). To remove remaining mitochondrial contaminations, the supernatant was centrifuged at 12.000xg for 15 min at 4°C. To isolate the plasma membrane fraction, the supernatant was centrifuged at 40.000xg for 45 min at 4°C and then again at 100.000xg for 1 h at 4° C. WC sample, 8.000xg (fraction 1), 12.000xg (fraction 2), 40.000xg (fraction 3) and 100.000xg (fraction 4) were used for proteomics analysis and 8.000xg and 40.000xg pellets. Supernatants were subjected to acetone precipitation yielding a protein pellet.  Protein Digestion for Proteomics Experiments (0112 – 0176)   40 µL of 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES ph = 8.5 was pre-heated to 70°C and added to the cell pellet for further 10 min incubation at 70°C on a ThermoMixer (shaking: 550 rpm) (0176). For brain tissue lysis in 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES pH=8.5 the Precellys® Evolution instrument was used following the manufactory’s instructions.  The protein concentration was determined using the 660 nm Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, #22660). 50 µg of protein was subjected for tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to SP3 based digestion 1. Washed SP3 beads (SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic, GE44152105050250),  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophylic, GE24152105050250) from Sigma Aldrich) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of bead slurry were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70 % ethanol (V=200 µL) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µL), 5 µL digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 containing 0.5µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.5µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in 10 µL 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to a final concentration of 2.5% and 2%, respectively. Samples were stored at -20°C until subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior measurement, samples were resuspended in 10 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 2 % formic acid containing internal standard iRT peptides.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry (0112 – 0176)  Instrumentation consisted out of an nLC1200 LC system coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to a quadrupole-based mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). For peptide separation an in-house packed column (inner diameter: 75 µm, length: 40 cm) was used. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1 % formic acid and B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied as follows: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 69 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65 % within 5 min and then to 95 % within 6 min. 95 % buffer B was kept for further 10 min to wash the column. Prior each sample, the column was washed using 5 µL buffer A and the sample was loaded using 8 µL buffer A.  For MS spectra acquisition, the RF Lens amplitude was set to 55%, the capillary temperature was 275°C and the polarity was set to positive. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 120,000 (spatial proteomics) or 60,000 (brain whole proteome) (at 200 m/z) at a mass range 320-1150 m/z and an AGC target of 1x10^6. For MS/MS independent spectra acquisition, 48 windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15-17 Th and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The fixed first mass was set to 200. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 350–1065 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 23 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, 30. The default charge state was set to 3. The AGC target was set to 900%. MS2 spectra were acquired as centroid spectra.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Data Analysis – 0112 : brain whole proteome   The software DIA-NN (v1.8) (Demichev et al., 2020) was used to analyze data independent raw files. The spectral library was created using the uniport reference protein (SPECIES) with the ‘Deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ turned on. Protease was set to Trypsin and a maximum of 1 miss cleavage was allowed. N-term M excision was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The peptide length was set to 7 – 30 amino acids and the precursor m/z range was defined from 340 – 1200 m/z. The option ‘Quantitative matrices’ was enabled.  The FDR was set to 1 % and the mass accuracy (MS2 and MS1) as well as the scan window was set to 0 (automatic inference via DIA-NN). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled. The Neuronal network classifier worked in ‘double pass mode’ and protein interference was set to ‘Isoform IDs’. The quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ and cross-run normalization was defined as ‘RT-dependent’. The ‘pg’ (protein group) output (MaxLFQ intensities(Cox et al., 2014)) was further processed using Instant Clue. (Nolte et al., 2018) Statistical significance was assessed using a two-sided t-test on log2 transformed LFQ intensities. A permutation-based approach was used to control the FDR to 0.05.    Mass Spectrometric Data Analysis – 0176: spatial proteomics  Data were analyzed using Spectronaut(Bruderer et al., 2015) (v15.6.211220.50606) and the human Uniprot reference proteome (downloaded 06.2019) using the implemented directDIA  mode. Minimal peptide length was set to 7, and the maximum number of miss cleavages was 2. Dynamic mode to estimate mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 was used. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to 5. Acetylation at the protein N-term and methionine residues oxidization were set as a variable modification. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. The iRT – rt regression type was set to Local (non-linear) regression. Peptide grouping from precursors was done using the stripped peptide sequences. Imputing was set off and cross run normalization was enabled.  Protein interference was performed using the implemented ‘IDPicker’ algorithm. The peptide, peptide-spectrum match and protein group FDR were set to 0.05. The iBAQ intensity was calculated and is reported. -P indicates pellet fraction and -SN the supernatant fraction after centrifugation. For visualization iBAQ intensities were scaled between 0-1 and visualized using hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, complete method) using the InstantClue software (Nolte et al., 2018). The MitoCarta 3.0 was used to define mitochondrial proteins. The set of plasma membrane proteins was extracted by using the Uniprot Gene Ontology cellular compartment information. Proteins that are annotated with ‘plasma membrane [GO:0005886]’ but none of the following nucleus [GO:0005634], cytosol [GO:0005829], cytoplasm [GO:0005737], endoplasmic reticulum [GO:0005783], Golgi apparatus [GO:0005794] and are also not part of the MitoCarta 3.0 repository were considered as the plasma membrane proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Coq, Stard7

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany


