### Accession
PXD030619

### Title
Mass Spectrometry Uncovers Protein Interactions and Stoichiometry of Intermediates and Sub-complexes for SNARE Complex Assembly

### Description
The neuronal SNARE complex assembles from vesicular Synaptobrevin-2 as well as Syntaxin-1 and SNAP25 anchored to the presynaptic membrane. It mediates fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic plasma membrane resulting in exocytosis of neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. While the general sequence of SNARE complex formation is well-established, our knowledge on possible intermediates is still incomplete. We, therefore, follow the step-wise assembly of the SNARE complex and target individual SNAREs, binary sub-complexes, the ternary SNARE complex as well as interactions with Complexin-1. Using native mass spectrometry, we identify the stoichiometry of preferred sub-complexes and monitor oligomerisation of various assemblies. Importantly, we find that interactions with Complexin-1 reduce self-association of the ternary SNARE complex. Chemical cross-linking provides detailed insights into these interactions suggesting a role during membrane fusion. Taken together, we unravel possible intermediates and preferred sub-complexes and compile a road map of SNARE complex assembly including regulation by Complexin-1.

### Sample Protocol
For chemical cross-linking of individual proteins, 10 µM of SNAP25, 10 µM of Syntaxin-1A and 50 µM of Complexin-1 were cross-linked with 1.5 mM or 0.5 mM BS3 for 1h at 25°C and 350 rpm. For chemical cross-linking of the SNARE:Complexin-1 complex, SNAP25, Synaptobrevin-2, Syntaxin-1A and Complexin-1 were mixed equimolar and incubated overnight at 4°C. The pre-assembled complex was cross-linked with 1 mM BS3 for 1h at 25°C and 350 rpm. For hydrolysis of proteins in solution, (cross-linked) proteins were precipitated with ethanol. For this, protein samples were diluted with water to a final volume of 200 µl and precipitated by addition of 20 µl 3 M sodium acetate, pH 5.3 as well as 600 µl ice-cold 100 % (v/v) ethanol. Following incubation overnight, the proteins were pelleted, washed with 80 % (v/v) ethanol and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Resulting protein pellets of individual proteins were suspended in 10 µl 1% (v/v) RapiGest (Waters) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5. The protein pellet of the SNARE:Complexin-1 complex was suspended in 10 µl 8M urea. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 10 µl 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 for 1 h at 37°C. Subsequently, free cysteine residues were alkylated with 10 µl 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 for 1 h at 37°C in the dark. Proteins were hydrolysed in a total volume of 100 µl with trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:20, followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. Following proteolysis, RapiGest was hydrolysed by addition of 20 µl 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid followed by 2 h incubation. Tryptic peptides were then collected after centrifugation and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For enrichment of cross-linked peptide pairs, pellets were dissolved in 60 µl 30% (v/v) acetonitrile , 0.1% (v/v) TFA and isocratically separated on a Superdex peptide column 3.2/300 GL (GE healthcare) using an Äkta pure system. Fractions containing cross-linked peptide pairs were collected, peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides and cross-linked peptide pairs were dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data were searched against a data base including the E. coli proteome as well as the corresponding target proteins using MaxQuant software. The following search parameters were applied: enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavage-sites, 2; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (cysteine), oxidation (methionine) and acetylation (N-terminus); mass accuracy, 20 ppm for precursor ions and 4.5 ppm fragment ions; false discovery rate, 0.01%. For identification of cross-linked peptide pairs, raw-data were searched against a minimized database using pLink (v.2.3.9) (29). The following search parameters were applied: enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavage sites, 3; peptide mass, 600-6000; peptide length, 6-60; precursor and fragment tolerance +/- 20 ppm; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (cysteine); variable modification, oxidation (methionine); fragmentation, HCD; false discovery rate, 0.05%; cross-linker, BS3 (cross-links N-termini and lysine, serine, threonine and tyrosine residues). Mass spectra of potential cross-links were manually validated.  Results tables were processed using CroCo software (30) and identified cross-links were visualized using xVis software (31).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Snare complex, Native mass spectrometry, Complexin-1, Signal transmission in neurons

### Affiliations
Interdisciplinary Research Centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Centre, Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany
HALOmem, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Marie Alfes

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Schmidt
Interdisciplinary Research Centre HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Centre, Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany


