### Accession
PXD032973

### Title
PRODIGE, Digestomic data of proteolysis after tanin supplementation in the rumen

### Description
The main objective of this study was to investigate the effect of tannins on the fate of dietary protein throughout the ruminant digestive tract using a dynamic in vitro digester under controlled conditions

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of the peptides resulting from digestion Sayd, T.; Chambon, C.; Santé-Lhoutellier, V. Quantification of peptides released during in vitro digestion of cooked meat. Food Chem. 2016, 197, 1311−1323. Identification by LC-MS/MS high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Quantification by label free (progenesisQI) and identification by MASCOT and PEAKS

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to characterize the effects of tannins on plant protein during sheep digestion using a digestomic approach combining <i>in vivo</i> (rumen) conditions and an <i>in vitro</i> digestive system (abomasum and small intestine). Ruminal fluid from wethers infused with a tannin solution or water (control) was introduced into the digester, and protein degradation was followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Tannin infusion in the rumen led to a clear decrease in protein degradation-related fermentation end-products, whereas ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCo) protein was more abundant than in control wethers. In the simulated abomasum, peptidomic analysis showed more degradation products of RuBisCo in the presence of tannins. The effect of RuBisCo protection by tannins continued to impact Rubisco digestion into early-stage intestinal digestion but was no longer detectable in late-stage intestinal digestion. The peptidomics approach proved a potent tool for identifying and quantifying the type of protein hydrolyzed throughout the gastrointestinal tract.

### Keywords
Proteomic data, Peptidomic data, Digi, Mass spectrometry, Digestomic rumen, Label free quantitation

### Affiliations
INRAE
INRAE-THEIX PFEM composante proteomique UR QuaPA

### Submitter
christophe  Chambon

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Chambon
INRAE-THEIX PFEM composante proteomique UR QuaPA


