### Accession
PXD025680

### Title
Proteomics informed by transcriptomics for a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the sialoproteome of Ornithodoros moubata adult ticks. SWATH Label Free quantitation

### Description
The specific aim of the present work is to expand the data on the salivary proteome of O. moubata adult ticks, particularly of female ticks, by solving the aforementioned drawbacks, as part of the in depth characterization and analysis of the O. moubata sialome. Knowing this sialome will allow identifying and selecting novel salivary antigens as targets for tick vaccines, and their subsequent testing in animal immunization trials. We pay special attention to female ticks because they are a key developmental stage in the tick life cycle and vaccines may exert on them double deleterious effects, for instance an increase of mortality and a reduction/inhibition of the reproductive performance. With that aim, in the current work we have analysed samples of female and male saliva separately using two different mass spectrometry approaches: data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS  and Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment ion spectra Mass Spectrometry (SWATH MS). This last technique is a specific variant of data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods and is emerging as a technology that combines deep proteome coverage capabilities with quantitative consistency and accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
The O. moubata specimens used in the present work come from the IRNASA colony, which was established from specimens donated by Dr. Philip Wilkinson (Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright, United Kingdom) captured in Malawi. This colony is kept at 28 ° C, 85% relative humidity and 12/12 hours of light / dark, and is regularly fed on rabbits.  Saliva was collected separately from each sex from newly molted 4 month-old female and male ticks after stimulation of secretion with pilocarpine following the protocol described by Baranda et al. (1997). Three replicated biological saliva samples from each sex were prepared, each containing the secretion of 20 female ticks/sample (F1, F2, F3) or of 40 male ticks/sample (M1, M2, M3). Saliva samples were centrifuged 10 min at 12.000 g and 4 ºC and the supernatants were recovered and stored at -20 °C. Protein concentration was assessed by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm in the NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher), and sample reproducibility was checked by SDS-PAGE. Salivary proteins in each female (F1, F2, F3) and male (M1, M2, M3) saliva samples were analysed using an in-solution digestion method. For this, 20 ug of protein per sample were digested with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) as follows. First, protein samples were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) to a final volume of 100 ul and the mixture incubated for 20 min at 60 ºC. Then, proteins were alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) (Sigma) to a final volume of 110 ul and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Finally, each sample was digested with 800 ng of trypsin in a final volume of 118 ul and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The digestion was stopped with 12 µL of 10 % Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Fisher Scientific) in water. The mixtures were dried in a rotatory evaporator and dissolved in a final volume of 40 ul. All the reagents were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma). SWATH MS data for both female and male saliva samples were acquired in a microESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (6600plus TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The samples were acquired in a random orderto avoid bias in the analysis. Five µl of each digested sample were loaded by a 425 nanoLC (Eksigent) onto a trap column (LC Column, 12 nm, 3 µ Triart-C18, 0.5 x 5.0 mm; YMC) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 10 µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, Luna Omega 3 µm Polar C18, 150 x 0.3 mm, Capillary Phenomenex) equilibrated in 3% ACN 0.1% FA. Peptide elution was performed with a linear gradient of 3-35% B in A for 45 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Sample was ionized in a Source Type: Optiflow 1-50uL Micro applying 4.5 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-independent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 400–1250 m/z for 250 ms. 100 variable windows from 400 to 1250 m/z were acquired throughout the experiment. The total cycle time was 2.79 secs. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode.

### Data Protocol
The  spectral library was used as a database for SWATH analysis and peaks from SWATH runs were extracted by Peak View 2.2 software (Sciex) with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% and False Discovery Rate (FDR) lower than 1%. It was not set up to a minimum number of peptides for the quantitation. Quantitated proteins areas were normalized by total areas sum for differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ornithodoros moubata proteome, Label free quantitaion, Swath, Lc msms, Dia

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Oleaga Pérez
Parasitology Laboratory, Institute of Natural Resources and Agrobiology (IRNASA, CSIC). Cordel de Merinas, 40-52, 37008 Salamanca, Spain.


