### Accession
PXD006822

### Title
Redox proteomic analysis reveals an important role for protein oxidative modifications in hypoxia adaptation of Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
In the site of infection, the human fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus faces dynamic changes in oxygen concentrations. The ability to survive in severely hypoxic environments during host invasion is one of important virulence traits of A. fumigatus. Therefore, investigation of hypoxia adaptation mechanisms of this pathogen may suggest potential targets for the development of antifungal therapies. Currently, an increasing number of reports has demonstrated that elevated production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) under low oxygen conditions plays a regulatory role in modulating cellular responses for adaptation to hypoxia. Our results confirmed raised amounts of intracellular ROS in A. fumigatus exposed to decreased oxygen levels. Moreover, nuclear accumulation of the oxidative stress response transcriptional factor AfYap1 was observed after two hours of low oxygen cultivation. For further analysis, we applied iodo-TMT labeling of redox-sensitive cysteine residues to identify proteins, which get reversibly oxidized and therefore regulated by hypoxic ROS after shifting oxygen content in the culture from 21% to 0.2%. For instance, proteins with important roles in maintaining redox balance and protein folding were modified after one hour of hypoxic cultivation. Redox proteomic investigation also revealed that a mitochondrial protein, designated as Coa6, was regulated by hypoxic ROS. A homologous protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was shown to be important for a respiratory chain complex IV assembly. Deletion of the gene encoding this protein in A. fumigatus resulted in complete absence of hypoxic growth, suggesting the significance of complex IV during adaptation of A. fumigatus to oxygen limiting conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed by adding the lysis buffer containing 1% SDS (w/v), 150mM NaCl, 100 mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich), 4 mM EDTA and 1 tablet of cOmplete Ultra Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) to the ground and frozen mycelia. The blocking reagent iodoacetamide was added to the lysis buffer to the concentration of 100 mM immediately before usage. The cell lysate was sonicated in the water bath at 37°C for 30 min. After 15 min centrifugation at 14000 g, the supernatant was collected and transferred to the new tubes. Protein determination was carried out by Merck Millipore Direct Detect System according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 100 µg of each sample was transferred to the new tubes and filled up with the 100 mM TEAB to gain a final volume of 100 µl. The excess of IAM was removed by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Obtained pellets were solubilized in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB with a subsequent sonicating in the water bath for 15 min and vortexing. 2 µl of the reduction buffer containing 0.5 M TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (Calbiochem) in 100 mM TEAB were added and the samples were incubated at 55°C for 1h. Labeling with iodoTMT 6-plex was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For amino-reactive TMT labeling protein extracts were reduced (2µl 500 mM TCEP, 1h at 55°C) alkylated (2µl 625mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at RT), precipitated by methanol/chloroform (Wessel and Flügge, 1984), resolubilized in 100µl 100mM TEAB and digested (4µg Trypsin+LysC per 100µg protein, 18h, 37°C). Labeling with TMT 6-plex was also performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol following the identical scheme used for the iodoTMT labeling. Labeled peptides were lyophilized and suspended in 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). By using an Acclaim PepMap column set (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were trapped (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5µl/min (0.05% TFA, 2% ACN) and separated (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm) at 300 nl/min and 40°C using a binary gradient elution of eluents A (0.1% HCOOH) and B (0.1% HCOOH, 90% ACN): 0-4 min at 4%B, 90 min at 9%B, 130 min at 12.5%B, 180 min at 17%B, 200 min at 20%B, 220 min at 24%B, 250 min at 35%B, 260 min at 44%B, 265 min at 50%B, 270 min at 55%B, 275 min at 70%B, 280-290 min at 96%B, 291-360 min at 4%B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV spray voltage using a stainless steel emitter and a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The mass spectrometry instrument was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (Top10) mode. Full scan precursor ion monitoring was performed at m/z 300-1600 amu, R=70k (FWHM), max. injection time of 120 ms, and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. Data-dependent acquisition of up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with a charge state (z) of 2-6 were selected (isolation width of m/z 2.0 and 0.7) for HCD fragmentation at 36% NCE using nitrogen collision gas. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 40 s. Fragment ions were monitored at R=17.5k (FWHM), max. injection time of 120 ms, and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 2e5. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 100. The LC-MS/MS instrument was operated by Thermo/Dionex Chromeleon Xpress 6.8 and Xcalibur 3.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process mass spectrometry raw files. Tandem mass spectra were searched against A. fumigatus Af293 (27.09.2015, Aspergillus Genome Database, AspGD) using the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. For the iodoTMT analysis, dynamic modifications were oxidation of Met, and carbamidomethylation or iodoTMT-6plex reaction of Cys residues. For the TMT analysis, static modification by TMT at Lys residues and peptide N-terminus as well as carbamidomethylation was set. Dynamic modifications were TMT derivatization of Tyr residues (not considered for quantification) and oxidation of Met. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database were used to validate peptide spectral matches (PSMs). At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate < 1% were required for positive protein hits. Only unique peptides with an integration tolerance of 10 ppm using the most confident centroid were considered for iodoTMT quantification. Quan channel correction in accordance with the isotopic distribution was applied and the reporter ion ratios were normalized based on the protein median. The proteins considered significantly modified when a fold change was greater than 1.5 in at least two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Aspergillus fumigatus faces abrupt changes in oxygen concentrations at the site of infection. An increasing number of studies has demonstrated that elevated production of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) under low oxygen conditions plays a regulatory role in modulating cellular responses for adaptation to hypoxia. To learn more about this process in A. fumigatus, intracellular ROS production during hypoxia has been determined. The results confirm increased amounts of intracellular ROS in A. fumigatus exposed to decreased oxygen levels. Moreover, nuclear accumulation of the major oxidative stress regulator AfYap1 is observed after low oxygen cultivation. For further analysis, iodoTMT labeling of redox-sensitive cysteine residues is applied to identify proteins that are reversibly oxidized. This analysis reveals that proteins with important roles in maintaining redox balance and protein folding, such as the thioredoxin Asp f 29 and the disulfide-isomerase PdiA, undergo substantial thiol modification under hypoxia. The data also show that the mitochondrial respiratory complex IV assembly protein Coa6 is significantly oxidized by hypoxic ROS. Deletion of the corresponding gene results in a complete absence of hypoxic growth, indicating the importance of complex IV during adaptation of A. fumigatus to oxygen-limiting conditions.

### Keywords
Ros, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia, Aspergillus fumigatus, Redoxproteomics

### Affiliations
Stress and Immunoproteomics group, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute of Natural Product research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Kniemeyer
Stress and Immunoproteomics group, Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute of Natural Product research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


