### Accession
PXD027781

### Title
Voltage-Dependent Anion-Selective Channels and Other Mitochondrial Membrane Proteins Form Diverse Complexes in Beetroots Subjected to Flood-Induced Programmed Cell Death

### Description
In plants, programmed cell death (PCD) is involved in both the development and in the response to biotic and abiotic aggressions. In early stages of PCD, mitochondrial membranes are made permeable by the formation of permeability transition pores, whose protein composition is debated. Since flooding stress can produce PCD in several plant species, the first goal of this work was to know if flooding stress could be used to induce PCD in Beta vulgaris roots. To do this, two months old beet plants were flood-stressed from one to five days, and the alterations indicating PCD in stressed beetroot cells were observed with a confocal fluorescence microscope. In addition, cytochrome c was released from mitochondria. After assessing that flood stress induced PCD in beetroots, the composition of mitochondrial protein complexes was observed in control and flood-stressed beetroots. Protein complexes from isolated mitochondria were separated by native gel electrophoresis, and their proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. The spectra count of three isoforms of voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDAC) increased after one day of flooding. In addition, the size of the complexes formed by VDAC was higher in beetroots flood-stressed for one day (~200 kDa) compared with non-stressed ones (~100 kDa). Other proteins, like chaperonin CPN60-2, also formed complexes with different masses in control and flood-stressed beetroots. Finally, possible interactions of VDAC with other proteins were found performing a cluster analysis. These results indicate that mitochondrial protein complexes formed by VDAC could be involved in the process of programmed cell death in flood-stressed beetroots

### Sample Protocol
The separation of membrane protein complexes was performed by Blue-native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE), in 4-13% polyacrylamide gradient gels, as described by Wittig et al., (2006. doi:554 10.1038/nprot.2006.62). Proteins in gels were fixed with 50%(v/v) methanol and 10%(v/v) acetic acid in water and stained with Coomassie Blue (Schägger and von Jagow 1987. doi: 10.1016/0003-2697(87)90587-2). Selected gel fragments were washed with water and then, successively, with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in water, with acetonitrile mixed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1:1), and with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins in gel fragments were then reduced, carbamidomethylated, digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides extracted from the gel as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996. doi: 10.1021/ac950914h).  MS/MS data were acquired essentially as described in Lino et al. (2006. doi: 10.1007/s00425-006-0343-8). Tryptic peptides were applied to a nanoflow LC system nanoAcquity (Waters Corp. Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a linear ion trap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an NanoESI MS/MS ion source. For LC–MS/MS experiments, 3 μl of trypsin-digested proteins were trapped using a pre-column (Symmetry® C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, waters), which was then switched in-line onto a 10-cm capillary UPLC column (100 μm ID BEH-C18 1.7 μm particle size). The column was enclosed in a column heater operating at 35 °C. After loading time, the peptides were separated with a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The gradient was as follows: 3–50 % Solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) in Solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) for 30 min, 50–85 % B (1 min), 85 % B (7 min) and 3 %B (22 min). Eluted peptides were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer through a standard coated silica tip (NewObjective, Woburn, MA, USA). The LTQ spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically alternating a full scan (m/z 400–2000), a collision-induced dissociation (CID) scan and a pulsed-CID (PQD) MS/MS scan in the linear ion trap. CID was performed with helium as collision gas at normalized collision energy of 40 % and 10 ms of activation time. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed basically as described in Lino et al. (2016. doi: 10.1007/s00425-016-2488-4): Fragmentation spectra data files (in raw format) were converted to mzXML files. Spectra in them were compared with theoretical ones obtained from a fasta format file (obtained from NCBI) with the protein sequences resulting from the Beta vulgaris genome sequencing project (Dohm et al., 2014. doi: 10.1038/nature12817) using the X!Tandem search engine in the Trans Proteome Pipeline (TPP) suite (Deutsch et al. 2010. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900375). All mzXML files were searched with the following parameters: 4 Da parent MS ion window, 2 Da MS/MS ion window. Up to two missed cleavages and semi-tryptic peptides were allowed. The iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine (carboxyamidomethylcysteine) was specified as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Peptide assignments were validated using PeptideProphet, and the probability of a correct protein assessment was calculated with ProteinProphet software in TPP. A protein was positively identified when at least five unique peptides were assigned to it and its ProteinProphet probability was >0.9999.  To group the proteins according to their distribution among complexes of different masses, the software NOVA (Giese et al., 2015. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu623) was used; choosing the normalization and Pearson correlation parameters.

### Publication Abstract
In plants, programmed cell death (PCD) is involved in both the development and the response to biotic and abiotic aggressions. In early stages of PCD, mitochondrial membranes are made permeable by the formation of permeability transition pores, whose protein composition is debated. Cytochrome c (cyt c) is then released from mitochondria, inducing the degradation of chromatin characteristic of PCD. Since flooding stress can produce PCD in several plant species, the first goal of this study was to know if flooding stress could be used to induce PCD in <i>Beta vulgaris</i> roots. To do this, 2-month-old beet plants were flood-stressed from 1 to 5 days, and the alterations indicating PCD in stressed beetroot cells were observed with a confocal fluorescence microscope. As expected, nuclei were deformed, and chromatin was condensed and fragmented in flooded beetroots. In addition, cyt c was released from mitochondria. After assessing that flood stress induced PCD in beetroots, the composition of mitochondrial protein complexes was observed in control and flood-stressed beetroots. Protein complexes from isolated mitochondria were separated by native gel electrophoresis, and their proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. The spectra count of three isoforms of voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (VDACs) increased after 1 day of flooding. In addition, the size of the complexes formed by VDAC was higher in flood-stressed beetroots for 1 day (&#x223c;200 kDa) compared with non-stressed ones (&#x223c;100 kDa). Other proteins, such as chaperonin CPN60-2, also formed complexes with different masses in control and flood-stressed beetroots. Finally, possible interactions of VDAC with other proteins were found performing a cluster analysis. These results indicate that mitochondrial protein complexes formed by VDAC could be involved in the process of PCD in flood-stressed beetroots. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027781.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial membrane protein complexes, Voltage-dependent anion-selective channels (vdac), Flooding stress, Beta vulgaris, Programmed cell death (pcd)

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology and Biochemistry, Bioenergetics and biomembranes laboratory, Centro de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del IPN - Unidad Irapuato, México
Cinvestav

### Submitter
KARLA JOANNA ROJAS MENDEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Luis E. Gonzalez de la Vara
Department of Biotechnology and Biochemistry, Bioenergetics and biomembranes laboratory, Centro de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del IPN - Unidad Irapuato, México


