### Accession
PXD001298

### Title
B. subtilis phosphoproteome -  Systematic profiling of the bacterial phosphoproteome reveals bacterium-specific features of phosphorylation

### Description
Highly efficient phosphopeptide enrichment developed for bacterial phosphoproteomics. The most comprehensive phosphoproteme maps in both gram-positive/negative bacteria. Discovery of phosphorylation motifs across distinct bacterial species

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected at mid-log phase and cell wall was disupted by beads-based lysis. Cell debris was removed by centrifuge at 20,000 rpm for 30 minutes. Protein extract was digested with trypsin for overnight incubation. Phosphopeptides were enriched by HAMMOC-based purification and analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
The peak list of each raw MS spectrum was generated according to previously described (Nakagami et al., 2010). Peptide identification was performed by Mascot ver (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a composite target−decoy protein sequence database containing 4,188 for B. subtilis. The search criteria used in this study were as follows: trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C); and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST), (Y), (D), and (H). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was set at 0.1 Da. Data from each nanoLC−MS/MS run was searched individually. Peptides were considered identified if the Mascot score yielded a confidence limit above 95% based on the significance threshold (p < 0.05) and if at least three successive y- or b-ions with an additional two and more y-, b-, and/or precursor-origin neutral loss ions were observed, based on the error-tolerant peptide sequence tag concept (Mann and Wilm, 1994). These criteria gave a false positive rate of < 1% for phosphopeptide identification, as evaluated using the target−decoy strategy. For those phosphopeptides identified in more than one run, only the one with the highest score has been reported. The reliability of the phosphorylation sites, pSer, pThr, and pTyr, assignments was assessed by the probability for each of the possible phosphorylation sites was determined by using the PhosCalc version 1.2 (http://www.ayeaye.tsl.ac.uk/PhosCalc/) (MacLean et al., 2008). The probability of phosphorylation at all candidate sites within each phosphopeptide was extracted on the basis of the PTM (post-translational modification) score and grouped into class I (phosphosite probability p > 0.75), class II (0.5 < p ≤ 0.75), and class III (p ≤ 0.5) (Olsen et al., 2006). The phosphosite has a PTM localization probability of >0.75 (class I) was considered as a confident site assignment and accepted automatically as unambiguous (ref). For the Class II and III, the accuracy of phosphosites was manually validated. As for the phosphopeptides having a PTM score less than 0.75 or reporting as phosphoaspartate and phosphohistidine peptides were manually inspected to assign the precise phosphorylation sites based on clearly observed site-determined ions.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is a crucial posttranslational modification for regulating cellular processes in bacteria; however, it has not been extensively studied because of technical difficulties in the enrichment of phosphopeptides. We devised an enrichment protocol that enabled the identification of &gt;1000 phosphopeptides from a single bacterial sample. We discovered three high-confidence serine and threonine phosphorylation motifs, as well as 29 other motifs at various levels of confidence, from three distinct bacterial phosphoproteomes. We found that the proline-directed and basophilic phosphorylation motifs that are commonly enriched in eukaryotes were not observed in bacteria. Unlike eukaryotes, bacteria had a low occurrence of both phosphorylation and acetylation in N-terminal phosphopeptides. Because infection of host cells by bacterial pathogens is often accompanied by kinase-mediated phosphorylation events, the differences in phosphorylation preferences between bacteria and eukaryotes revealed by this study could be useful in identifying bacterial-specific targets for future therapies.

### Keywords
B. subtilis, Phosphorylation, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Bioanalysis, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan
Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan Unversity

### Submitter
Miao-Hsia Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Miao-Hsia Lin
Department of Molecular and Cellular Bioanalysis, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan


