### Accession
PXD024052

### Title
Exploration of GFP-IRF7 neddylation sites

### Description
To explore the possible neddylation sites, GFP-IRF7 and His-NEDD8 were co-overexpressed in HEK293 cell line and GFP was immunoprecipitated, followed by SDS-PAGE and silver staining. The band detected was subjected to LC–MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 whole cell lysates were mixed with GFP agarose beads (MBL) and incubated overnight at 4 °C with rotation. Then, the beads were washed three times with high salt buffer and twice with low salt buffer at 4 °C. Following SDS-PAGE, gels were subjected to silver staining. Then, possible neddylation band was excised for trypsin digestion. The gradient solvent system consisted of Nano-HPLC Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water) and Nano-HPLC Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). Full MS scans were performed in mass analyzer over m/z range of 350-2000. LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were ionized under the condition of 2.0 kV spray voltage and a capillary temperature of 320 °C. The data were searched by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against uniprot-Mus musculus 20201106. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with two missed cleavage sites allowed. The mass accuracy was set as ± 10 ppm, and ± 0.05 Da was used for the fragment ion mass tolerance. Chemical modifications such as protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M), and phosphorylation were selected as variable modifications, whereas carboxymethylation (C) was selected as fixed modifications. For identifying neddylated peptides, modification of Lys by GG was selected as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293, Lc-ms/ms, Gfp-irf7

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences
Institute of Basic Medical Science

### Submitter
Yaolin Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiyan Zhang
Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences


