### Accession
PXD018778

### Title
Proteome-wide analyses reveal the diverse functions of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Oryza sativa

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib), a newly identified post-translational modification, is known to regulate transcriptional activity in animals. However, extensive studies of the lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome in plants and animals have yet to be performed. In this study, using LC-MS/MS qualitative proteomic strategies, we identified 4,163 Khib sites on 1,596 modified proteins in rice (Oryza sativa) seedlings. Motif analysis revealed 10 conserved motifs flanking the Khib sites, and subcellular localization analysis revealed that 44% of the Khib proteins are localized in the chloroplast. Gene ontology function, KEGG pathway, and protein domain enrichment analyses revealed that Khib occurs on proteins involved in diverse biological processes and is especially enriched in carbon metabolism and photosynthesis. Among the modified proteins, 20 Khib sites were identified in histone H2A and H2B, while only one site was identified in histone H4. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis further demonstrated that Khib participates in diverse biological processes including ribosomal activity, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and metabolic pathways. In addition, a comparison of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, acetylation, and crotonylation in the rice proteome showed that 45 proteins with only 26 common lysine sites are commonly modified by three PTMs. The crosstalks of modified sites and PPI among these PTMs may form a complex network with both similar and different regulatory mechanisms. In summary, our study comprehensively profiles the lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome in rice and provides a better understanding of its biological functions in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion for Proteomic Analysis of Total Proteins: The sample (1 g leaf material) was ground by liquid nitrogen into powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. Then, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 3 μM TSA and 2 mM EDTA) was added to the tissue powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g and 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (P0011, Beyotime Bio) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to provide a urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and then at a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. To enrich the Khib modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed 2-hydroxyisobutyryl lysine antibody beads (PTM-804, PTM Biolabs) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were then washed four times with IP buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
2.2 LC-MS/MS analysis The peptide was dissolved with liquid mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid aqueous solution) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Mobile phase A comprised an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Mobile phase B comprised an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set as follows: 0~26 min, 7-23% B; 26~34 min, 23-35% B; 34~37 min, 35-80% B; 37~40 min, 80% B; the flow rate was maintained at 400 nL/min. The separated peptides were injected into a nanospray ion (NSI) source for ionization and then analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus MS. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the peptide parent ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap. The first-order mass spectral scanning range was set to 350-1800 m/z, the scanning resolution was set to 70,000, the secondary mass spectral scanning range was 100 m/z, and the Orbitrap scan resolution was set to 17,500. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program; i.e., after the first scan, the highest signal strength of the first 20 peptide parent ions was placed into the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) pool using 28 and 31% of the fragmentation energies, which was the same order as that used for secondary MS. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrum, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 10000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 200 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS was set to 30 seconds to avoid repeated scan parent ions. 2.3 Proteomic data processing The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database (16,964 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 10 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. For visualization, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryza sativa; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation;photosynthesis;histone acylation

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/ Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education/ Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genomics and Molecular Breeding, Agricultural College of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Agricultural College of Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Zhiyun Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyun Gong
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/ Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education/ Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genomics and Molecular Breeding, Agricultural College of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


