### Accession
PXD019935

### Title
Inhibition of the mTOR pathway and reprogramming of protein synthesis by MDM4 reduce ovarian cancer metastatic properties.

### Description
Background: The expression of MDM4, a well-known p53-inhibitor, is positively associated with chemotherapy response and overall survival in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). The basis of this association remains elusive. Since the occurrence of metastasis is one of the factors responsible for the high death rate of this cancer, we analyzed MDM4 involvement in EOC metastatic process.  Methods: In vivo and in vitro models, based on 2D and 3D assays, were employed to assess the activity of MDM4 in ovarian cancer progression. A 3D-bioprinting co-culture system was ad hoc developed for this study. Proteomic analysis was conducted on 3D multicellular tumour spheroids to assess pathways triggered by MDM4 overexpression. Results: In mouse models, increased MDM4 reduced intraperitoneal dissemination of human and murine EOC cells, independently of p53 and in a cell-autonomous way. Consistently, high MDM4 correlates with increased overall survival probability in large public data sets. 2D and 3D assays indicated that MDM4 impairs the early steps of the metastatic process. The 3D-bioprinting co-culture system showed reduced dissemination and intravasation into vessel-like structures of MDM4-expressing cells. Proteomic analysis of EOC spheroids revealed that MDM4 reduces protein synthesis and decreases mTOR signaling. Accordingly, MDM4 did not further inhibit EOC cell migration when its activity towards mTOR is blocked genetically or pharmacologically. Conversely, increased MDM4 reduced the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors in constraining EOC cell migration.  Conclusions: Overall, these data clarify the antagonism of MDM4 towards EOC progression and suggest the usefulness of MDM4 assessment for tailored application of mTOR targeted therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Human and murine whole cell pellets have been lysed in RIPA buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM DTT, 40 U ml-1 RNAse OUT (Invitrogen), 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0,5 mM Na3VO4, 10 μl ml-1 Protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC, Sigma) and the protein content extracts have been quantified by Bradford Assay (Bio-Rad). Three biological replicates of human SK-OV-3  spheroids preparation and pools of 3 biological murine ID8 spheroids (Empty Vector and MDM4) have been processed. 30 µg of proteins from each sample have been transferred on a Microcon-10 Centrifugal filter with 10kDa cutoff (Merck Millipore Ltd.) and followed by FASP digestion protocol . Briefly, proteins have been denatured upon filter aided Urea Buffer (UB) exchange composed by 8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH= 8.5. Denatured proteins were reduced by 8mM DTT (15 min, 56°C) in UB and subsequently alkylated by 0.05M IAA in UB (20min, RT, dark). All the samples undergo a proteolytic digestion by Trypsin enzyme in 0.05M ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) solution, using a protease:protein ratio,  1:50 (w/w), at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides have been recovered from the filter in 0.05M AMBIC and the trypsin was blocked by adding FA to 0.2% (v/v) final concentration. Peptides have been concentrated by speedvac, resuspended in 0,1%  formic acid  solution (FA) and 0.250 ug of each sample was spiked by 500fmol of Hi3 Rabbit Phosphorylase B Digestion Standard (Hi3 Phos B, Waters Corp.) and run in three technical replicates.  The LC-MS analysis was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System directly coupled with a Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer (Waters Corp.)  In details, the separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corp.) by loading 5 µL of each digested samples onto a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm precolumn (Waters Corp.) subsequently separated by a 120 min reversed phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 2–40% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C. Gradient was obtained by using as mobile phases  the following solution: A = 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water B = 0.1% formic acid (FA) in acetonitrile (ACN). Separated peptides have been analysed by High Definition Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system. MS signals have been detected in High Definition MSE (HDMSE) a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol where ion mobility separation (IMS) has been integrated into LC-MSE workflow (Distler et al., 2016). The following mass spectrometer parameters have been used: positive survey polarity of electrospray source (ES+), acquisition mode mass range 50-2000m/z, capillary source voltage 3.2 kV, source T 80°C , cone voltage 40eV, TOF resolution power 20000, precursor ion charge state 0.2-4, trap collision energy 4eV,  transfer collision energy 2eV precursor MS scan time 0.5 sec and fragment MS/MS scan time 1.0 sec. All spectra have been acquired in Ion Mobility Separation mode (IMS) cycles with wave height at 40 V, wave velocity of 650 m/s,  transfer  wave height  4V and transfer wave velocity of 175 m/s(Distler et al., 2014;Greco et al., 2018). Data were post-acquisition lock mass corrected using the doubly charged monoisotopic ion of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Waters), sampled every 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate runs for each sample have been processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software ProteinLynx Global Server v. 3.0.3 (PLGS, Waters Corp.) The qualitative identification of proteins has been obtained by searching in the UniProt KB database release of May23_2018, restricted respectively to Homo Sapiens or to Mus Musculus   Taxonomy,  for SKOW and ID8 cells  respectively,  to which the sequence of Hi3 Phosphorylase B from Rabbit (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot AC: P00489) was appended. Search parameters were set as: trypsin enzyme, automatic tolerance for precursor ions and for product ions, minimum 1 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum 3 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum 1 peptide matched per protein, 2 missed cleavage, carbamydomethylation of cysteines as fixed  modification and oxidation of methionines as  variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) of the identification algorithm  was thresholded as ≤ 1% at protein level, based on a target decoy database.  Label free quantitative analysis was obtained with the protein expression analysis mode integrated in PLGS software (ProteinLynx Global Server, RRID:SCR_016664), using the internal standard for normalization.  Filtered tables were generated to include proteins found at least in two out of three technical replicates and to exclude proteins showing less than 30% change (corresponding to a ratio of ± 1.3) and those showing no statistical significance according to the PLGS software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3d cell culture, Mdm4, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomic and Metabolomic Unit, IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation, Roma 
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation Roma ITALY

### Submitter
Luisa Pieroni

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Pieroni
Proteomics and Metabolomics Unit IRCCS-S.Lucia Foundation Roma ITALY


