### Accession
PXD034050

### Title
Characterization of the redox proteome of Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells and w1118 fly eyes.

### Description
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) serve as intracellular signaling molecules; however, in excess ROS molecules are damaging to biomacromolecules such as DNA, lipids, and proteins. The excess accumulation of ROS leads to oxidative stress, disrupting redox homeostasis in the cell and has been linked with aging and neurodegenerative disease. The eye is particularly vulnerable to oxidative stress due to the tissue’s high energy demand and generation of ROS by products. In proteins, the thiol group on cysteine residues is susceptible to oxidation. Cysteine residues have multiple oxidation states that can be classified into two categories—reversible and irreversible. Irreversible oxidation states include sulfinic and sulfonic acids, which may alter or impair the activity of the protein depending on the position of the cysteine residue. In contrast, reversible oxidation states include sulfenic acid or inter- and intramolecular disulfides, and can often function as redox sensors in the cell. Here, we sought to evaluate how increasing amounts of oxidative stress alters the redox proteome landscape in Drosophila. To characterize the redox proteome, we developed an iodoTMT-multiplex isolation, labeling, and enrichment method to identify cysteine availability and potential oxidation in both S2 cells and w1118 fly eyes. To do this, we exposed S2 cells to 20mM H2O2 relative to control (untreated), and w1118 flies to prolonged blue light versus an untreated control, followed by redox proteome profiling with iodoTMT-sixplex reagents.

### Sample Protocol
SICyLIA protocol: The following protocol was modified from a SICyLIA based approach by Van der Reest et al., 2018 in Proteome-wide analysis of cysteine oxidation reveals metabolic sensitivity to redox stress. Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells were treated with 20mM H2O2 for 15-minutes and harvested immediately post treatment with two replicates of each. Cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 300uL of 8M urea/50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. One replicate of the treated cells and one replicate of the untreated cells were labeled with 60ul iodoacetamide (IAA) light (12C2H4INO), and the other corresponding replicates were labeled with 60ul IAA heavy (13C2D2H2INO). Samples then incubated for one hour at room temperature in the dark. After incubation, samples were centrifuged at 20,000xg for 10 minutes at 4C. Protein was quantified with a Qubit Fluorometer. Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells were treated with 20mM H2O2 for 15-minutes and harvested immediately post treatment. Cells were washed in PBS and lysed and then ultrasonicated in a Covaris E220 in HES buffer [50mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS].  Protein was quantified with a Qubit Fluorometer, and all samples were set at 250ug of protein in HES buffer. 50ug of each sample was reserved for global proteomic analysis, and the remaining 200ug were labeled with iodo-TMT-sixplex reagents. Each sample received an independent iodo-TMT-sixplex tag, and then was reduced with 0.5M DTT. After reduction, all samples were labeled with iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were combined, and an acetone precipitation was performed. After precipitation, the combined sample was dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin overnight. The sample was then acidified with TFA and lyophilized. Last, the lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1x TBS prior to enrichment. 100ug was set aside for fractionation, and the remaining peptides were enriched using an anti-TMT resin and eluted with TMT elution buffer.  Drosophila melanogaster w1118 flies were aged to day 5 post-eclosion under 12:12 light: dark conditions at 25C, and then exposed to 8 hours of blue light. Eyes were manually removed post light treatment, and were lysed and ultrasonicated in a Covaris E220 in HES buffer. Protein was quantified using a Qubit Fluorometer, and 250ug of protein in HES buffer [50mM HEPES, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS] was used for analysis. 50ug of each sample was reserved for global proteomic analysis, and the remaining 200ug was labeled with iodo-TMT-sixplex reagents. Each sample received an independent iodo-TMT-sixplex tag, and was then reduced with 0.5M DTT. After reduction, all samples were labeled with iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were combined, and an acetone precipitation was performed. After the precipitation, the combined sample was dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin overnight. The sample was then acidified with TFA and lyophilized. Lastly, the lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1x TBS prior to enrichment. 100ug was set aside for fractionation, and the remaining peptides were enriched using an anti-TMT resin and eluted with TMT elution buffer.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discover™ 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, RRID: SCR_014477) with a Drosophila melanogaster UniProt FASTA plus common contaminants (downloaded Feb 2021, 3629 total sequences). SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 3 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. For iodoTMT samples, a max of 3 dynamic mods were allowed per peptide and dynamic modifications of oxidation (M), iodoTMT6plex (Cys), carbamidomethyl (Cys); dynamic protein terminus modifications of acetylation (N-terminus), Met-loss or Met-loss plus acetylation (N-terminus).  For global proteome samples, the same precursor/fragment/missed cleavage/max dynamic mod settings were used in addition to static modifications of TMT6plex on lysines (K) and carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; Dynamic modifications of oxidation on (M), TMT label on the N-termini of peptides, phosphorylation on (S,T,Y); dynamic Protein terminus modifications of acetylation (N-terminus), Met-loss or Met-loss plus acetylation (N-terminus). Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. IMP-ptm-RS node was used for all modification site localization scores. In the consensus workflows, data were normalized to total peptide. Co-isolation thresholds of 50% and average reporter ion S/N cutoffs of 5 were used for quantification. Lot specific isotopic impurity levels were applied. Protein Abundance based protein ratio calculation with no imputation and ANOVA (individual proteins) was performed. Resulting normalized abundance values for each sample type (iodo-TMT labeled peptides or global proteins), abundance ratio and log2(abundance ratio) values; and respective p-values (t-test) from Proteome Discover™ were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The retina is one of the highest oxygen-consuming tissues because visual transduction and light signaling processes require large amounts of ATP. Thus, because of the high energy demand, oxygen-rich environment, and tissue transparency, the eye is susceptible to excess production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting in oxidative stress. Oxidative stress in the eye is associated with the development and progression of ocular diseases including cataracts, glaucoma, age-related macular degeneration, and diabetic retinopathy. ROS can modify and damage cellular proteins, but can also be involved in redox signaling. In particular, the thiol groups of cysteines can undergo reversible or irreversible oxidative post-translational modifications (PTMs). Identifying the redox-sensitive cysteines on a proteome-wide scale provides insight into those proteins that act as redox sensors or become irreversibly damaged upon exposure to oxidative stress. In this study, we profiled the redox proteome of the Drosophila eye under prolonged, high intensity blue light exposure and age using iodoacetamide isobaric label sixplex reagents (iodo-TMT) to identify changes in cysteine availability. Although redox metabolite analysis of the major antioxidant, glutathione, revealed similar ratios of its oxidized and reduced form in aged or light-stressed eyes, we observed different changes in the redox proteome under these conditions. Both conditions resulted in significant oxidation of proteins involved in phototransduction and photoreceptor maintenance but affected distinct targets and cysteine residues. Moreover, redox changes induced by blue light exposure were accompanied by a large reduction in light sensitivity that did not arise from a reduction in the photopigment level, suggesting that the redox-sensitive cysteines we identified in the phototransduction machinery might contribute to light adaptation. Our data provide a comprehensive description of the redox proteome of Drosophila eye tissue under light stress and aging and suggest how redox signaling might contribute to light adaptation in response to acute light stress.

### Keywords
Drosophila eye, Redox proteome, Blue light, Drosophila melanogaster schneider s2 cells

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Center for Proteome Analysis, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber L. Mosley
Center for Proteome Analysis, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN


