### Accession
PXD024656

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii Tgj1 Hsp40 protein interaction LC-MS/MS

### Description
We identified an Hsp40 Ydj1 / Hdj2 ortholog in T. gondii, which is involved in various biological roles in T. gondii as deduced from its interactome and analysis of the ΔCXXX mutant. Among these roles are differentiation and DNA damage, as well as metabolic pathways such as translation and energy generation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE. The resultant gel was stained with Coomassie Blue G-250 (Sigma-Aldrich, Argentina). Each lane of the gel was cut into individual slices. Each band was then cut into 1 mm3 cube and further destained with three washes of 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% CH3CN with 10 min incubations. Each group of gel cubes was then dehydrated in CH3CN for 10 min and dried in a Speed Vac. Protein samples were reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated by iodoacetamide {Spiess PC, Deng B, Hondal RJ, Matthews DE, van der Vliet A.Proteomic profiling of acrolein adducts in human lung epithelial cells. J Proteomics. 2011 Oct 19;74 (11):2380-94}. A solution of 10 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was used to re-swell the gel pieces completely at 4oC for 30 min, followed by a 37oC digestion overnight. A small amount of 10% formic acid was then added to stop the digestion. The sample was then centrifuged at 2,800 x g, and the supernatant was collected for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS spectra were searched against the T. gondii ToxoDB-42 _TgondiiME49 protein database using Proteome Discovery 2.2 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). The search parameters permitted a 10 ppm peptide MS tolerance and a 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerance. Carboxymethylation of cysteines was setup as fixed modifications, and Oxidation of methionine (M) as dynamic modifications. Up to two missed tryptic peptide cleavages were considered. The proteins for which the False Discovery Rate (FDR) was less than 1% at the peptide level in the following analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is an obligate intracellular apicomplexan that causes toxoplasmosis in humans and animals. Central to its dissemination and pathogenicity is the ability to rapidly divide in the tachyzoite stage and infect any type of nucleated cell. Adaptation to different cell contexts requires high plasticity in which heat shock proteins (Hsps) could play a fundamental role. Tgj1 is a type I Hsp40 of <i>T. gondii</i>, an ortholog of the DNAJA1 group, which is essential during the tachyzoite lytic cycle. Tgj1 consists of a J-domain, ZFD, and DNAJ_C domains with a CRQQ C-terminal motif, which is usually prone to lipidation. Tgj1 presented a mostly cytosolic subcellular localization overlapping partially with endoplasmic reticulum. Protein-protein Interaction (PPI) analysis showed that Tgj1 could be implicated in various biological pathways, mainly translation, protein folding, energy metabolism, membrane transport and protein translocation, invasion/pathogenesis, cell signaling, chromatin and transcription regulation, and cell redox homeostasis among others. The combination of Tgj1 and Hsp90 PPIs retrieved only 70 interactors linked to the Tgj1-Hsp90 axis, suggesting that Tgj1 would present specific functions in addition to those of the Hsp70/Hsp90 cycle, standing out invasion/pathogenesis, cell shape motility, and energy pathway. Within the Hsp70/Hsp90 cycle, translation-associated pathways, cell redox homeostasis, and protein folding were highly enriched in the Tgj1-Hsp90 axis. In conclusion, Tgj1 would interact with a wide range of proteins from different biological pathways, which could suggest a relevant role in them.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Gondii hsp40, Interaction

### Affiliations
UVM

### Submitter
BIN DENG

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Deng
UVM


