### Accession
PXD003335

### Title
Chicken plasma proteome LPS -  Proteomic Changes in Chicken Plasma Induced by Salmonella typhimurium Lipopolysaccharides

### Description
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are cell wall components of gram-negative bacteria and endotoxins that cause inflammation and sickness in vertebrate animals. Our objective to identify the plasma proteomic changes in an avian model of inflammation. Chickens were treated with either saline or LPS and the blood was collected 24 hours after injection. The pooled plasma samples were depleted of high abundant proteins, analyzed by Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) and liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). MALDI-TOF analyses showed an increase in fibrinogen beta derived peptide and decrease in apolipoprotein AII- isoform X1 derived peptide in LPS samples. Label free quantitation of LC-MS/MS spectra revealed an increase in alpha-1 acid glycoprotein, chemokine-CCLI10, and cathelicidin-2 and decrease in interferon stimulated gene-12-2 in the LPS group. These differentially expressed proteins are associated with inflammation, cytokines, immunomodulation, and defense which are useful as candidate biomarkers of infection and inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma were separated from blood samples by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and stored at -20°C until further analyses. Three pooled samples in each group were prepared by combining equal volumes of plasma from three birds each, centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, to remove insoluble precipitates. Samples were then mixed with acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 60% ACN, sonicated for 10 min in an ultrasonic water bath, and kept at -20°C for 24 h to deplete high abundant proteins by precipitation (Fernández, et al., 2011; Kay, et al., 2008). The supernatant containing high abundant protein depleted (HAPD) plasma, obtained by centrifugation, were dried in a CentriVap vaccum concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO) and redissolved in the starting volume with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). The protein concentrations of the solutions were then estimated by BCA protein method (Pierce, IL) and adjusted to a concentration of 1 µg/µL with 50 mM AMBIC for subsequent analyses.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS spectra were exported from Data analysis version 4.0 SP 4 (Bruker) in mzXML format and searched for proteins in Global proteome machine (GPM) (http://h.thegpm.org/tandem/thegpm_tandem.html) (Bjornson, et al., 2008). The parameters used were, Gallus gallus, fragment mass error of 0.6 Da with carbamidomethylation, and methionine oxidation as fixed and variable modification, trypsin as enzyme, semi-style cleavage, and ion trap (4 Da) as the predefined method.  Protein identifications were considered true based on at least one unique peptide per protein and a false positive rate <5%. The results were downloaded as *.xml files for Skyline v 3.1 software quantitation and as Excel (*.xls) files for qualitative analyses. Qualitative analysis. The common proteins present in all three samples from each group were selected using an online comparison program (www.xlcomparator.net). The identified list of proteins from Control and LPS groups were converted to ENSEMBL Gene ID using Biomart online software (Guberman, et al., 2011).  The genes were analyzed for enrichment of annotation terms using  the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) program with an EASE score of 0.1 (www. david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) (Huang, et al., 2009). The clusters enriched only in the LPS group but not in Control or vice versa were considered to be differentially expressed. Lest where GO annotations for protein/gene IDs were not available in DAVID database or Uniprot, the sequence was subjected to BLAST search to obtain relevant matching protein annotations.

### Publication Abstract
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are cell wall components of Gram-negative bacteria that produce inflammation and sickness in higher animals. The objective was to identify plasma proteomic changes in an avian model of inflammation. Chickens were treated with either saline or LPS, and blood was collected at 24 hours postinjection. The pooled plasma samples were depleted of high-abundant proteins and analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)-time-of-flight mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). MALDI analyses showed an increase in fibrinogen beta-derived peptide and a decrease in apolipoprotein-AII-derived peptide in LPS samples. Label-free quantitation of LC-MS/MS spectra revealed an increase in the levels of &#x3b1;1-acid glycoprotein, a chemokine CCLI10, and cathelicidin-2, but a decrease in an interferon-stimulated gene-12-2 protein in the LPS group. These differentially expressed proteins are associated with immunomodulation, cytokine changes, and defense mechanisms, which may be useful as candidate biomarkers of infection and inflammation.

### Keywords
Acute phase proteins, Biomarkers, Innate immunity, Endotoxin

### Affiliations
PPPSRU USDA ARS
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR

### Submitter
Balamurugan Packialakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr Narayan C Rath
PPPSRU USDA ARS


