### Accession
PXD025982

### Title
RapiGest Precipitation Depends on Peptide Concentration

### Description
The mass spectrometry-compatible surfactant RapiGest promotes the enzymatic digestion of proteins by facilitating their unfolding while retaining enzymatic activity. RapiGest consists of a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail, which can be separated by acid hydrolysis. This allows for removal of RapiGest prior to mass spectrometric analysis via precipitation and solid phase extraction. During in-solution digestion experiments with RapiGest, we noticed a high variability in the formation of precipitates after acid hydrolysis, implying that RapiGest precipitation is sample-dependent. We show that RapiGest hydrolyzes efficiently under acidic conditions and that differences in precipitation are solely due to protein/peptide concentration. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RapiGest precipitation can be triggered by the addition of intact proteins, providing a strategy for its efficient removal from highly diluted samples.

### Sample Protocol
The HeLa cell pellet was resuspended in 4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, and cells were lyzed by incubation at 95°C for 10 minutes, sonication for 3 x 30 s at 60% duty cycle using a sonifier and a second heating step. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 30 minutes at RT, the clear supernatant was recovered, the protein content determined, and a sample containing 1 mg of protein was transferred to a new microtube. Proteins were precipitated by chloroform-methanol (2:1 v/v) precipitation, and the air-dried protein pellet was solubilized in 0.3% RapiGest, 100 mM ABC pH 7.8 for 15 minutes at 95°C. To enhance solubilization trypsin was added at an enzyme to sample ratio of 1:500 (w/w) and the sample was incubated for another 60 minutes. For RapiGest digestion of bovine serum albumin protein was dissolved at a concentration of 2.6 mg/ml in 0.13% RapiGest, 0.1 M NH4HCO3 pH 7.8 (ABC). For urea digestion, an equimolar mixture of the six standard proteins BSA, β-lactoglobulin (BLG), ovalbumin (OVA), carbonic anhydrase (CAH), α-casein (CASA), β-casein (CASB) was prepared at a concentration of 10 mg/ml in 8 M urea, 0.1 M 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 7.5. All samples were reduced using 5 mM DTT (final concentration) for 45 min at 56°C, alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature (RT), and the reaction was quenched at 5 mM DTT (final concentration). Subsequently, the samples were diluted to adjust the RapiGest and urea concentration to 0.1% and 0.8 M, respectively, trypsin was added at an enzyme to sample ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. RapiGest precipitation was performed by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubation for 45 min at 37°C. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at RT or 4°C, and the supernatant transferred to a new microtube. Peptide amounts of 10 µg were desalted using Empore C18 StageTips as described elsewhere, while larger amounts were desalted by 3cc SepPak C18 cartridges. Peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN/5% FA and analyzed with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Analytical columns were prepared in-house as follows: spray tips were generated from 100 µm inner diameter, 360 µm outer diameter fused silica capillaries with a P2000 laser puller and packed to a length of 40 cm with 1.9 or 3 µm Reprosil AQ C18 particles. Peptides were loaded to the analytical column at a flow rate of 600 nl/min with 100% solvent A (water with 0.1% FA) and eluted with linear gradients from 1% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) to 35% solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For BSA and the six standard protein samples 30 minutes, for HeLa samples 120 minutes gradients were applied. Eluting peptides were ionized in the positive ion mode and survey scans were performed from 330 - 1500 m/z in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000. The most abundant peptides with charge states from 2-7 were fragmented by HCD (30% collision energy) and analyzed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 in the top speed mode with a cycle time of 2 s (30 minutes gradient) or 3s (120 minutes gradient). The precursor isolation width was set to 1.4 m/z at the quadrupole, the AGC target settings to 4xe5 and 5xe4 for survey and MSMS scans, respectively, and the dynamic exclusion to 15 s

### Data Protocol
Files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.5.0 utilizing either a customized data base containing the six standard proteins or Swiss-Prot human (release date: 2021-07 with 20,371 entries) as well as the default contaminants list. Oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-termini), and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications while propionamide (C) was defined as fixed modification. Trypsin/P was set as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for the first and the main search, respectively. The tolerance for fragment ion spectra matching was set to 20 ppm. Due to the small size of the database, FDR filtering was deactivated (PSM and protein FDR: 1) and a fixed Andromeda score cutoff of 40 was applied for BSA samples and the six standard protein mixture. For HeLa samples an FDR of 0.01 was applied. Follow-up analyzes were done in MS Excel and Perseus 1.6.15. Non-normalized peptide intensities were used for label free quantification and protein intensities were calculated by MaxQuant by summing peptide intensities for the individual six standard proteins. For HeLa samples we considered only peptides quantified with three valid values in at least one of the two conditions and performed missing value imputation based on a downshifted normal distribution. We then performed a two-sided t-test with an FDR of 0.05 and applied a fold-change cut-off of 1.5-fold for the determination of up-/downregulated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The mass spectrometry-compatible surfactant RapiGest promotes the enzymatic digestion of proteins by facilitating their unfolding while retaining enzymatic activity. RapiGest consists of a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail, which can be separated by acid hydrolysis. This allows for removal of RapiGest prior to mass spectrometric analysis via precipitation and solid phase extraction. During in-solution digestion experiments with RapiGest, we noticed a high variability in the formation of precipitates after acid hydrolysis, implying that RapiGest precipitation is sample-dependent. We show that RapiGest hydrolyses efficiently under acidic conditions and that differences in precipitation are solely due to protein/peptide concentration. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RapiGest precipitation can be triggered by the addition of intact proteins, providing a strategy for its efficient removal from highly diluted samples. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025982.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Precipitation, Detergent, Rapigest, In-solution digestion

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
Institut fuer Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB,) Med. Fak. Universtitaet Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Robert Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institut fuer Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IBMB,) Med. Fak. Universtitaet Bonn, Nussallee 11, 53115 Bonn, Germany


