### Accession
PXD004247

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the spatiotemporal based molecular kinetics of acute spinal cord injury identifies a time- and segment-specific window for effective tissue repair - IgG identification

### Description
Spinal cord injury (SCI) represents a major debilitating health issue with a direct socioeconomic burden on the public and private sectors worldwide. Although several studies have been conducted to identify the molecular progression of injury sequel due from the lesion site, still the exact underlying mechanisms and pathways of injury development have not been fully elucidated. In this work, based on OMICs, 3D matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) imaging, cytokines arrays, confocal imaging we established for the first time that molecular and cellular processes occurring after SCI are altered between the lesion proximity, i.e., rostral and caudal segments nearby the lesion (R1-C1) whereas segments distant from R1-C1, i.e., R2-C2 and R3-C3 levels co-expressed factors implicated in neurogenesis. Delay in T regulators recruitment between R1 and C1 favor discrepancies between the two segments. This is also reinforced by presence of neurites outgrowth inhibitors in C1, absent in R1. Moreover, the presence of immunoglobulins (IgGs) in neurons at the lesion site at 3 days, validated by mass spectrometry, may present additional factor that contributes to limited regeneration. Treatment in vivo with anti-CD20 one hour after SCI did not improve locomotor function and decrease IgG expression. These results open the door of a novel view of the SCI treatment by considering the C1 as the therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
CM(150µL) obtained from lesion site(∼1.5 mg of protein in 2 ml) after SCI3, 7 or10 days after SCI and from the corresponding segment of control spinal cord were bound with 50µL of Dynabeads Protein-A 200µL of PBS-Tween 20 and incubated 10 minutes with rotation at room temperature. The beads coupled with IgGs were harvested using a magnet (1minute) and the recovered supernatant solution was removed. The remaining beads-IgG complex was washed with PBS-Tween 20. Afterwards, IgGs bound to microbeads were eluted  by adding 30µL of 0.1M glycine (pH 3), incubated 10  minutes at 70°C temperature to dissociate the  beads-IgG complex and then neutralized by adding 30µL  of 1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Afterwards, a magnet was used to remove the beads from the eluate containing IgGs. The eluate was then separated on SDS-PAGE (12% polyacrylamide gel slabs) followed by silver staining to check the bands corresponding to IgGs of the Mw of 25 kDa, 50 kDa and 75 kDa. Shot-gun mass spectrometry analysis was performed to identify the band corresponding to the appropriate Mw. Silver destaining was performed using 30mM of potassium ferricyanide and 100mM sodium thiosulfate (1:1) 200µL per band for 20 minutes in the dark. Bands were washed 2 times for 15 minutes with Milli-Q water followed by an in-gel digestion as previously described(29). The samples were reconstituted with 10 L of 5% AcN/0.1% FA and injected on a UPLC MS instrument. Separation was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 75 m x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column with nanoViper fittings and a 50 m ID x 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted using a gradient of AcN starting from 5% to 30% over 1 hour at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive instrument was set to acquire top 10 MS2. The survey scans were taken at 70,000 FWHM (at m/z 400) resolving power in positive mode and using a target of 1E6 and default charge state of +2. Unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds. The scan range was set to m/z 300-1600 m/z. For the MS2, 1 microscan was obtained at 17,500 FWHM and isolation window of 3.0 m/z, using a scan range between m/z 200-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed with Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software version 1.3. Spectra were searched against UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot (version March 2014) filtered with Rattus norvegicus (25678 sequences) taxonomy using the SEQUEST HT algorithm (version 1.3.0.339). The search was performed choosing trypsin as the enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da. N-terminal acetylation; and cysteine carbamidomethylation; methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide validation was performed with the Percolator algorithm by filtering based on a q-value below 0.01, which corresponds to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal cord injury (SCI) represents a major debilitating health issue with a direct socioeconomic burden on the public and private sectors worldwide. Although several studies have been conducted to identify the molecular progression of injury sequel due from the lesion site, still the exact underlying mechanisms and pathways of injury development have not been fully elucidated. In this work, based on OMICs, 3D matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) imaging, cytokines arrays, confocal imaging we established for the first time that molecular and cellular processes occurring after SCI are altered between the lesion proximity, i.e. rostral and caudal segments nearby the lesion (R1-C1) whereas segments distant from R1-C1, i.e. R2-C2 and R3-C3 levels coexpressed factors implicated in neurogenesis. Delay in T regulators recruitment between R1 and C1 favor discrepancies between the two segments. This is also reinforced by presence of neurites outgrowth inhibitors in C1, absent in R1. Moreover, the presence of immunoglobulins (IgGs) in neurons at the lesion site at 3 days, validated by mass spectrometry, may present additional factor that contributes to limited regeneration. Treatment in vivo with anti-CD20 one hour after SCI did not improve locomotor function and decrease IgG expression. These results open the door of a novel view of the SCI treatment by considering the C1 as the therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Igg, Spinal cord injury, Mass spectrometry, 1d gel

### Affiliations
Michel Salzet, Univ. Lille, Inserm, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France
University of Lille

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Michel Salzet, Univ. Lille, Inserm, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France


