### Accession
PXD019207

### Title
Urine Large Extracellular Vesicle LC-MS/MS Data from a Chronic Kidney Disease Rat Model

### Description
This study examined large renal tubule extracellular vesicles (LRT-EVs) isolated from urine of a 5/6 nephrectomy (5/6Nx) rat model that recapitulates many elements of human chronic kidney disease (CKD).  Within weeks of 5/6Nx rats spontaneously exhibit proximal tubular damage including brush boarder shedding and the production of LRT-EVs. Analysis of the LRT-EV size and a lack of TUNEL staining in 5/6Nx rats, suggested LRT-EVs to be distinct from exosomes, microvesicles, and apoptotic bodies.

### Sample Protocol
LRT-EVs were isolated from 5/6Nx rat urine 10 weeks after surgery. Sham and 5/6Nx rats (n=3/group) were housed in wire-bottom metabolic cages and urine was collected into ice-immersed conical tubes for 24 hours.  All subsequent steps were performed at room temperature.  Urine was filtered (70 µm mesh), then centrifuged at 300 x g for 15 min (Spin A).  The resulting pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of PBS and centrifuged again (Spin B).  Supernatant from both spins (A & B) was combined and centrifuged at 650 x g for 10 minutes (Spin C) to remove any larger material or shed cells.  The supernatant from Spin C was centrifuged at 2000 x g for 10 minutes (Spin D), to pellet the LRT-EV’s.  The pellet was then washed in 1 mL of PBS and centrifuged at 580 x g for 10 minutes (Spin E). An aliquot of this final isolate was inspected and imaged under light microscopy for the presence of LRT-EVs.  No LRT-EVs were observe in samples fractionated from sham-operated rat urine. The size 5/6Nx LRT-EVs was measured from the light microscopy images using the Analyze Particles feature of FIJI Software. The remaining LRT-EVs were transferred to a Dounce homogenizer and mechanically lysed on ice followed by 30 minutes of water bath sonication at room temperature.  Homogenized LRT-EVs were then buffer swapped (5x) and concentrated into 250 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, using 3K MWCO Amicon Ultra Filtration Units (Millipore) as described by the manufacturer protocol. The concentrated LRT-EV protein fractions then had 0.1% of the MS compatible RapiGest surfactant (Waters) added, followed by incubation on ice for 10 minutes. Samples were then reduced (10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37oC), alkylated (20 mM IAA for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature), and Trypsin Gold (Promega) digested.  Following protein digestion, all samples were desalted/concentrated using OMIX C18 zip-tips (VARIAN) according to manufacturer protocol and prepared for liquid chromatography MS/MS analysis.   Peptides were separated on a NanoAccuity UPLC system (Waters) with a C18 (Phenomenex) column with a 240 minute gradient (2%-98% acetonitrile) and analyzed with a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The Thermo .RAW MS/MS spectral files were converted to MASCOT Generic Files and searched against the rodent SwissProt database in the MASCOT algorithm.  Parameters utilized were the Rodentia (Rodents) taxonomy, Trypsin cleavage, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, peptide charges of 2+, 3+ and 4+, a peptide tolerance of +/-1.5 Da, a MS/MS tolerance +/-0.6 Da, vaariable modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M).  mxIdentML files with a p < 0.05 were downloaded from MASCOT following the search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
Associate Professor  Department of Physiology  Medical College of Wisconsin
Medical College of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Brian Hoffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Alison Kriegel, PhD
Associate Professor  Department of Physiology  Medical College of Wisconsin


