### Accession
PXD023574

### Title
Comparative proteome signatures of trace samples by multiplexed Data-Independent Acquisition

### Description
Single cell transcriptomics have revolutionized fundamental understanding of basic biology and disease. Since transcripts often do not correlate with protein expression, it is paramount to complement transcriptomics approaches with proteome analysis at single cell resolution. Despite continuous technological improvements in sensitivity, mass spectrometry-based single cell proteomics ultimately faces the challenge of reproducibly comparing the protein expression profiles of thousands of individual cells. Here, we combine two hitherto opposing analytical strategies, DIA and Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT)-multiplexing, to generate highly reproducible, quantitative proteome signatures from ultra-low input samples. While conventional, data-dependent shotgun proteomics (DDA) of ultra-low input samples critically suffers from the accumulation of missing values with increasing sample-cohort size, data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategies do usually not to take full advantage of isotope-encoded sample multiplexing. We also developed a novel, identification-independent proteomics data analysis pipeline to quantitatively compare DIA-TMT proteome signatures across hundreds of samples independent of their biological origin to identify cell types and single protein knockouts. We validate our approach using integrative data analysis of different human cell lines and standard database searches for knockouts of defined proteins. These data establish a novel and reproducible approach to markedly expand the numbers of proteins one detects from ultra-low input samples, such as single cells.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests were obtained from Promega (K562, V6951) and Thermo Fisher (HeLa, 88328) were labeled according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were labeled in 100 mM TEAB and 10% ACN for 1 hr at room temperature. Unreacted TMT reagent was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine/HCl for 20 minutes at RT and subsequently mixed corresponding to each TMT10 plex. Mixes were compiled as follows (Mix 1: 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C -K562; 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131 – HeLa; Mix 2: inverted Mix 1; Mix 3: 126, 127C, 128C, 129C, 130C – K562, 127N, 128N, 129N, 130N, 131 - HeLa to exclude any label specific effects.

### Data Protocol
Reporter ion quantification was performed within the Proteome Discoverer environment (version 2.3.0.484) using the in-house developed, freely available PD node “IMP-Hyperplex” (pd-nodes.org) with a reporter mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The software extracts raw reporter ion intensities from respective spectra for quantification. Peptide identification was performed using the standard parameters in SpectroMineTM 2.0 against the human reference proteome sequence database (UniProt; version:2018-11-26 accessed April 2019) and yeast reference proteome sequence database (Uniprot; version: 2019-07-25; accessed November 2019). TMT spectral libraries were generated from the DDA files with the highest input and adapted a customized script, kindly provided by Oliver Bernhard from Biognosys. Identification-dependent data aggregation was performed using standard parameters via SpectronautTM or SpectroMineTM for DIA or DDA, respectively. By default, global median normalization is performed across all experiments. Reporter ion intensities were directly imported into R for further processing. PSMs were filtered to unique peptides using the best scoring (Q-value) PSM for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell transcriptomics has revolutionized our understanding of basic biology and disease. Since transcript levels often do not correlate with protein expression, it is crucial to complement transcriptomics approaches with proteome analyses at single-cell resolution. Despite continuous technological improvements in sensitivity, mass-spectrometry-based single-cell proteomics ultimately faces the challenge of reproducibly comparing the protein expression profiles of thousands of individual cells. Here, we combine two hitherto opposing analytical strategies, DIA and Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT)-multiplexing, to generate highly reproducible, quantitative proteome signatures from ultralow input samples. We developed a novel, identification-independent proteomics data-analysis pipeline that allows to quantitatively compare DIA-TMT proteome signatures across hundreds of samples independent of their biological origin to identify cell types and single protein knockouts. These proteome signatures overcome the need to impute quantitative data due to accumulating detrimental amounts of missing data in standard multibatch TMT experiments. We validate our approach using integrative data analysis of different human cell lines and standard database searches for knockouts of defined proteins. Our data establish a novel and reproducible approach to markedly expand the numbers of proteins one detects from ultralow input samples.

### Keywords
Dia-tmt, Identification-independent, Ultra-low input samples

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology (GMI) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
IMP

### Submitter
Claudia Ctortecka

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology (GMI) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.


