### Accession
PXD030547

### Title
Impact of nitrate on the proteome of the primary root tip of Medicago truncatula

### Description
The impact of nitrate on the proteome of the primary root tip of Medicago truncatula were compared in R108, a wild and sensitive genotype, and npf6.8, a mutant and insensitive line by shotgun analysis. Each genotype were cultivated in N-free condition or with 5mM of nitrate in three independent biological replicate. Sample collection was performed of 10 days old seedlings

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol : Protein sample was digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) II protocol. In details, 5 µg of each sample was diluted to 200 µl with 8 M urea in 0.1 M TRIS pH 8.5, transferred in a filter (30 KDa) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. The filter was incubated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in darkness for 20 min to alkylate the reduced cysteine groups, followed by a centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min. The filter was then washed with 100µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) pH 8 two times, to reduce the concentration of urea to less than 1 M. 40 µl ABC with 300 ng trypsin were added to digest protein at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration of 1%). Samples were desalted in individual tube (Strata-xl C18 30 mg/ 1 ml; ref: 8b-s043-tak, Phenomenex, Le Pecq, France) as follows. Samples were first diluted in a final volume of 500µl  with 0,6% acetic acid(AA) and 0,2% acetonitrile(ACN) (Washing buffer). The cartridge are first condtionned with 500µl of ACN and then rinsed with 3*500µl of washing buffer before loading the sample. Peptide were then rinsed with three time with 500µl of washing buffer and eluate with 2*300µl of 0,6% AA and 40% ACN. The desalted samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation  Desalted samples were resuspended in 25µl of 2 % ACN (v/v) and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA), and were analysed on a NanoLC-Ultra 2D system (Eksigent) coupled with Qexactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer. 4µl of resuspended samples (corresponding to 800ng) were loaded onto a Biosphere C18 trap column (particle size: 5 mm, pore size: 12 nm, inner/outer diameters: 360/100 mm, length: 20 mm; NanoSeparations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands)  and rinsed with loading buffer for 6 minutes at 7.5 µl/ minute. Peptides were then separated on a Biosphere C18 column (particle size: 3 mm, pore size: 12 nm, inner/outer diameters: 360/ 75 mm, length: 300 mm; NanoSeparations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands) using buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) at 300 nl/ min as follows:     o Equilibration at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B in 9 min     o A linear gradient from 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B to 65% of buffer A and 35% of buffer B in 75 min     o A linear gradient from 65% of buffer A and 35% of buffer B to 5% of buffer A and 95% buffer B in 3 min     o 5% of buffer A and 95% buffer B for 15 min     o Equilibration at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B in 5 min Electrospray ionization was performed at 1.6 KV with uncoated capillary probe (non-coated capillary silica tips, 360/ 20-10, new objective Inc.). Peptide ion analysis was realized with Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher). The Full MS Orbitrap was set up with a resolution of 70,000, a scan range of 350-1400 m/z, an AGC target of 3e6, a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Parameters for precursor selection were set as follow: TOP 8; analysed charge states, 2-4; intensity threshold, 8.3e3; dynamic exclusion, 50 s. For MS/MS, the AGC target was 1e5, the maximum injection time 120 ms and the fragmentation mode was HCD with normalized collision energy of 27 % and a resolution of 17,500.  Raw data were converted to mzxml format using msconvert (proteowizard 3.0.7069, Kessner et al., 2008)

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and filtering were performed by querying MS/MS data against M. truncatula genome Mt5.0 database (Pecrix et al., 2018) together with a custom contaminant database (trypsin, keratins), using X!Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.4; Craig and Beavis, 2004) . Cysteine carbamidomethylation as set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and tryptophane, deamidaion of glutmaine and asparagine, N-terminal proteins acetylation with or without excision of first methionine, deamidation of N-terminal glutamine and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid and N-terminal carbamidomethylated cystein were set as potential Modification. Result were filtered using X!TandemPipeline v3.4.3 (Langella et al., 2017). maximal peptide Evalue was set to 0.01 and maximal protein Evalue to 0.00001. The minimal number of peptides to identify a protein was set to 2. The false discovery rates (FDRs) for proteins and peptides were 0.2 % and 0.14 %, respectively. Inference Result could be view using xpip File

### Publication Abstract
Nitrate is not only an essential nutrient for plants, but also a signal involved in plant development. We have previously shown in the model legume <i>Medicago truncatula</i>, that the nitrate signal, which restricts primary root growth, is mediated by MtNPF6.8, a nitrate transporter. Nitrate signal also induces changes in reactive oxygen species accumulation in the root tip due to changes in cell wall peroxidase (PODs) activity. Thus, it was interesting to determine the importance of the role of MtNPF6.8 in the regulation of the root growth by nitrate and identify the POD isoforms responsible for the changes in POD activity. For this purpose, we compared in <i>M. truncatula</i> a <i>npf6.8</i> mutant and nitrate insensitive line deficient in MtNPF6.8 and the corresponding wild and sensitive genotype for their transcriptomic and proteomic responses to nitrate. Interestingly, only 13 transcripts and no protein were differently accumulated in the primary root tip of the <i>npf6.8-3</i> mutant line in response to nitrate. The sensitivity of the primary root tip to nitrate appeared therefore to be strongly linked to the integrity of MtNPF6.8 which acts as a master mediator of the nitrate signal involved in the control of the root system architecture. In parallel, 7,259 and 493 genes responded, respectively, at the level of transcripts or proteins in the wild type, 196 genes being identified by both their transcript and protein. By focusing on these 196 genes, a concordance of expression was observed for most of them with 143 genes being up-regulated and 51 being down-regulated at the two gene expression levels. Their ontology analysis uncovered a high enrichment in POD genes, allowing the identification of POD candidates involved in the changes in POD activity previously observed in response to nitrate.

### Keywords
Medicago truncatula, Nitrate, Primary root tip, Proteome, Sensitive and insensitive genotypes

### Affiliations
Plateforme d'Analyse Proteomique Paris Sud-Ouest Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
Univ Angers, Institut Agro, INRAE, IRHS, SFR QUASAV, F-49000 Angers, France

### Submitter
Thierry Balliau

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Françoise Montirchard
Univ Angers, Institut Agro, INRAE, IRHS, SFR QUASAV, F-49000 Angers, France


