### Accession
PXD024236

### Title
Semi-automated positive pressure FASP in 96-well format (PF96) enables highly reproducible and time-efficient proteomics sample preparation of larger cohorts

### Description
As novel technologies allow for a substantial increase in the number of LC-MS run per day, proteomics sample preparation appears as new bottle-neck for throughput. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel strategy for positive pressure 96-well filter-aided sample preparation (PF96) on a commercial positive pressure solid-phase extraction unit allowing for a 5-fold reduction in lab-time. Similar as conventional FASP, PF96 allows for robust processing of protein amounts between 3 and 60 µg, with higher analyte recovery observed for higher protein loads (36-60 µg). Notably, even lower amounts can be processed reproducibly, but at the expense of loss of peptide signal intensity (~40 % of signal intensity for 3 µg compared to 60 µg ) - more pronounced for peptides of higher retention time (reversed phase) and higher share of the hydrophobic amino acids F, L, M, W. Processing of 40 technical replicates of mouse heart tissue lysate highlights its reproducibility with Pearson Product-Moment correlations of r=0.9992 and r=0.9891 on protein and peptide level, respectively, which is similar to the reproducibility of LC-MS for replicate injections of identical samples.

### Sample Protocol
After lysis, cysteines were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated in presence of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted at least 1:4 in 8 M Urea dissolved in 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and transferred to a 30 kDa AcroPrep Omega filter membrane plate (PALL, New York, US). The filter plate was placed on top of a 2.2 mL-MegaBlock collection plate (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) and the liquid of the protein solution was forced through the filter using a Resolvex A200 (Tecan, Crailsheim, Germany) connected to nitrogen gas (N2, 5.5 bar, purity 4.8 or higher, Linde, Dublin, Ireland) using a relative pressure of 20 % of the low profile setting. Subsequently the dispensing function of the A200 was used to wash the filter 2 times with 200 µL 8 M Urea buffer in Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and 2 times with 200 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) After each washing step, the liquid was forced through the filter using the same pressure profile as for loading. In most cases, 30 minutes of pressure were sufficient, however, in case of residual liquid, positive pressure was applied for additional 15 minutes. For digestion, 100 µL digestion buffer comprising 100 mM Urea, 50mM ABC, 1 mM CaCl2 was added to each well including sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a concentration to meet a 1:33 enzyme-to-sample ratio. After incubation for 15 h at 37°C, the digested protein fraction was forced through the filter and collected in a 500 µl LoBind plate (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). 20 µl aliquots were transferred to 700 µl glass-vial plates (Waters, Milford, MA, US) using a Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent, Boeblingen, Germany) for injection on a monolithic column-HPLC (quality control) and nanoLC-MS/MS. LC-MS was conducted using a U3000 RSLCnano ProFlow system online-coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany, including HPLC columns). Samples were loaded in 0.1 % TFA at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. After 5 min, the pre-column was switched in line with the main column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18; 75 μm × 50 cm) and peptides were separated using a binary acetonitrile gradient in presence of 0.1 % formic acid at 60 °C and a flow rate of 250 nL/min. In case of HeLa protein load ladders, a 35 min binary gradient ranging from 4-34 % acetonitrile was used and, in case for heart tissue experiments, a 65 min binary gradient from 6-32 % ACN. The MS was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 followed by 15 MS/MS scans at a resolution of 15,000 (top15). Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS by intensity, isolated in a 1.6 m/z window and subjected to fragmentation by higher energy collision induced dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 27. Automatic gain control target values were set to 106 and 5x104 and the maximum ion injection was set to 120 ms and 50 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Precursor masses were excluded from re-fragmentation for 20 sec (dynamic exclusion) and the polysiloxane at m/z 371.1012 was used as internal calibrant [4].

### Data Protocol
All files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK)as database search algorithm and Percolator in conjunction with Peptide validator for adjusting the false discovery rate to 1 % on PSM and peptide level. Quantification was done exclusively with unique peptides using the Minora feature detector in conjunction with the feature mapper node with disabled scaling and normalization. Database search was conducted against Uniprot mouse (Sept-2019, 17,027 target sequences) or human (July-2018, 20,385 target sequences) with error tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions and the following settings: trypsin as enzym, oxidation of Met as variable modification (+15.9949 Da) and carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Automation, Sample preparation, 96-well format, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b, 44227 Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11, 44139 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Loroch

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11, 44139 Dortmund, Germany


