### Accession
PXD005008

### Title
Negative regulation of Type I IFN signaling by phosphorylation of STAT2 on T387

### Description
The samples were derived from STAT2 IP experiments from human fibrosarcoma cells. This experiment involved the transfection of cells with a flag tagged STAT2 and the goal of these experiments is to identify STAT2 binding partners.

### Sample Protocol
For the protein digestion, 9 bands were cut from each gel lane, and the bands were then washed/destained in 50% ethanol, 5% acetic acid and then dehydrated in acetonitrile. The samples were then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to the in-gel digestion. All bands were digested in-gel using trypsin, by adding 10 μL 5 ng/μL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight at room temperature to achieve complete digestion. The peptides that were formed were extracted from the polyacrylamide in two aliquots of 30μL 50% acetonitrile with 5% formic acid. These extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% acetic acid to make up a final volume of ~30 μL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by capillary column LC-tandem MS and the CID spectra searched against the human reference sequence database using Sequest and Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor ISGF3, comprised of IRF9 and tyrosine-phosphorylated STATs 1 and 2, transmits the signal from the type I interferon receptor to the genome. We have discovered a novel phosphorylation of STAT2 on T387 that negatively regulates this response. In most untreated cell types, the majority of STAT2 is phosphorylated on T387 constitutively. In response to interferon-&#x3b2;, the T387A mutant of STAT2 is much more effective than wild-type STAT2 in mediating the expression of many interferon-stimulated genes, in protecting cells against virus infection, and in inhibiting&#xa0;cell growth. Interferon-&#x3b2;-treated cells expressing wild-type STAT2 contain much less ISGF3 capable of binding to an interferon-stimulated response element than do cells expressing T387A STAT2. T387 lies in a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) consensus sequence, and CDK inhibitors decrease T387 phosphorylation. Using CDK inhibitors to reverse the constitutive inhibitory phosphorylation of T387 of U-STAT2 might enhance the efficacy of type I interferons in many different clinical settings.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stat2

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, Department of Research Core Services, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Belinda Willard
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, Department of Research Core Services, Cleveland Clinic


