### Accession
PXD028437

### Title
Impact of infection on proteome-wide glycosylation revealed by distinct signatures for bacterial and viral pathogens

### Description
Mechanisms of infection and pathogenesis have predominantly been studied based on differential gene or protein expression. Less is known about posttranslational modifications, which are essential for protein functional diversity. We applied an innovative glycoproteomics method to study the systemic proteome-wide glycosylation in response to infection. The protein site-specific glycosylation was characterized in plasma derived from well-defined controls and patients. We found 3862 unique features, of which we identified 463 distinct intact glycopeptides, that could be mapped to more than 30 different proteins. Statistical analyses were used to derive a glycopeptide signature that enabled significant differentiation between patients with a bacterial or viral infection. Furthermore, supported by a machine learning algorithm, we demonstrated the ability to identify the causative pathogens based on the distinctive host blood plasma glycopeptide signatures. These results illustrate that glycoproteomics holds enormous potential as an innovative approach to improve the interpretation of relevant biological changes in response to infection.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were denaturated, reduced, alkylated, and digested by trypsin/LysC digestion. The glycopeptides were enriched by means of (sepharose beads) HILIC enrichment. The samples were analysed using shotgun LC-MS/MS (MaXis Plus, Bruker Daltonics). The glycan moiety was analysed using low energy CID fragmentation and the peptide moiety was analysed using high energy CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
After post-acquisition calibration the MS/MS data were converted to mzML files and processed by OpenMS to generate a consensus feature map. The MS/MS xml files were processed in BioPharma Compass to classify glycopeptide fragmentation spectra by HexNAc-Hex- mass distance pattern matching and searched against the Consortium for Functional Glycomics database. Classified and non-classified fragmentation spectra were searched against the human SwissProt protein sequence database, using the following main settings: trypsin digestion, a precursor mass tolerance of 20.0 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da, allowing for 1 missed cleavage and a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (cys), and variable deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M), acetyl (N-term), HExNac (N) and pyro-carbamidomethyl (N-term) modifications, with percolator enabled to achieve a FDR of ≤1.0%.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanisms of infection and pathogenesis have predominantly been studied based on differential gene or protein expression. Less is known about posttranslational modifications, which are essential for protein functional diversity. We applied an innovative glycoproteomics method to study the systemic proteome-wide glycosylation in response to infection. The protein site-specific glycosylation was characterized in plasma derived from well-defined controls and patients. We found 3862 unique features, of which we identified 463 distinct intact glycopeptides, that could be mapped to more than 30 different proteins. Statistical analyses were used to derive a glycopeptide signature that enabled significant differentiation between patients with a bacterial or viral infection. Furthermore, supported by a machine learning algorithm, we demonstrated the ability to identify the causative pathogens based on the distinctive host blood plasma glycopeptide signatures. These results illustrate that glycoproteomics holds enormous potential as an innovative approach to improve the interpretation of relevant biological changes in response to infection.

### Keywords
Infectious disease, Glycoproteomics, Biomarker, Site specific glycosylation, Intact glycopeptides, Mass spectrometry, Α1-acid glycoprotein (agp)

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboudumc

### Submitter
Esther Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Alain van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


