### Accession
PXD043792

### Title
Oncogenic signals prime cancer cells for toxic cell growth during a G1 cell cycle arrest

### Description
A long-term goal in cancer research has been to inhibit the cell cycle in tumour cells without causing toxicity in proliferative healthy tissues. The best evidence that this is achievable is provided by CDK4/6 inhibitors, which arrest the cell cycle in G1, are well-tolerated in patients, and are effective in treating ER+/HER2- breast cancer. CDK4/6 inhibitors are effective because they arrest tumour cells more efficiently than some healthy cell types and, in addition, they affect the tumour microenvironment to enhance anti-tumour immunity. We demonstrate here another reason to explain their efficacy. Tumour cells are specifically vulnerable to CDK4/6 inhibition because during the G1 arrest, oncogenic signals drive toxic cell overgrowth. This overgrowth causes permanent cell cycle withdrawal by either preventing progression from G1 or by inducing replication stress and genotoxic damage during the subsequent S-phase and mitosis. Inhibiting or reverting oncogenic signals that converge onto mTOR can rescue this excessive growth, DNA damage and cell cycle exit in cancer cells. Conversely, inducing oncogenic signals in non-transformed cells can drive these toxic phenotypes and sensitize cells to CDK4/6 inhibition. Together, this demonstrates how oncogenic signals that have evolved to stimulate constitutive tumour growth and proliferation  driven subverted to cause toxic cell growth and irreversible cell cycle exit when proliferation is halted in G1.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scraped in 2% SDS lysis buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop, Roche) and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche). Extracts were heated to 95 °C, cooled to room temperature, and treated with benzonase (Millipore, 70664) for 30 min at 37 °C. The benzonase treatment was repeated until the extract was free flowing. The protein concentration was determined and 50 µg protein aliquots were precipitated using acetone-ethanol. Precipitated protein was then digested with trypsin (1:100), once for 16 hours before another aliquot of trypsin is added (1:100) and incubated for an additional 4 hours. Peptides were then desalted using SepPak cartridges (Waters). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach implemented on a RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) using DIA windows reported previously (Reyes et al, 2021 [https://doi.org/10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16584.2]). Peptides were separated on a 50-cm (2-µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and operated constantly at 50 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC–MS-grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded on to the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl min−1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μl min−1 according to the following gradient: 2–40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (160 min in total). The spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the ion capillary temperature at 280 °C. Survey scans were performed at 15,000 resolution, with a scan range of 350–1,500 m/z, maximum injection time 50 ms and AGC target 4.5 × 105. MS/MS DIA was performed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution with a scan range of 200–2,000 m/z. The mass range was set to ‘normal’, the maximum injection time to 54 ms and the AGC target to 2.0 × 105. An inclusion mass list with the corresponding isolation windows was used as previously reported. Data for both survey and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. A blank sample (0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN, 1:1 v:v) was run between each sample to avoid carryover.

### Data Protocol
The DIA data were analysed with Spectronaut 16.2.220903.53000 using the directDIA option. Cleavage rules were set to Trypsin/P, peptide maximum length was set to 52 amino acids, peptide minimum length was set to 7 amino acids and missed cleavages set to 2. Calibration mode was set to Automatic. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. The FDR threshold was set to 1% q-value at both the Precursor and Protein level. The single hit definition was to stripped sequence. The directDIA data were searched against the human UniProt database (May 2021) and included isoforms. The Major Group Quantity was set to the Sum of peptide quantity and the Minor Group Quantity was set to the Sum of the precursor quantity; Cross Run Normalization was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
CDK4/6 inhibitors are remarkable anti-cancer drugs that can arrest tumor cells in G1 and induce their senescence while causing only relatively mild toxicities in healthy tissues. How they achieve this mechanistically is unclear. We show here that tumor cells are specifically vulnerable to CDK4/6 inhibition because during the G1 arrest, oncogenic signals drive toxic cell overgrowth. This overgrowth causes permanent cell cycle withdrawal by either preventing progression from G1 or inducing genotoxic damage during the subsequent S-phase and mitosis. Inhibiting or reverting oncogenic signals that converge onto mTOR can rescue this excessive growth, DNA damage, and cell cycle exit in cancer cells. Conversely, inducing oncogenic signals in non-transformed cells can drive these toxic phenotypes and sensitize the cells to CDK4/6 inhibition. Together, this demonstrates that cell cycle arrest and oncogenic cell growth is a synthetic lethal combination that is exploited by CDK4/6 inhibitors to induce tumor-specific toxicity.

### Keywords
Oncogenic, Cell cycle, G1, Cancer

### Affiliations
Division of Cellular and Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, UK. DD1 9SY
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Juan Manuel Valverde

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian Saurin
Division of Cellular and Systems Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, UK. DD1 9SY


