### Accession
PXD019975

### Title
Porcine intestinal epithelial cells

### Description
Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is an emerging pathogen of swine belonging to family Coronaviridae, genus Deltacoronavirus. PDCoV predominantly infects the porcine intestinal epithelial cells (IPECs) causing severe diarrhea and/or vomiting, dehydration, and death in piglets. However, there are no researches for clarifying the changes of proteins expression levels in the IPECs infected with PDCoV. To better understand the host response to PDCoV infection, in this study, an isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based quantitative proteomic analysis of PDCoV-infected IPEC-J2 cells were performed to investigate the differentially expressed cellular proteins in the PDCoV-infected IPEC-J2 cells. As a result, a total of 5,502 host proteins were quantified at 24 hours post-infection (hpi) in mock and infected cells, among which 78 cellular proteins were differentially expressed with 23 up-regulated proteins and 55 down-regulated proteins. Bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that most of these regulated proteins participated in immune system process and structural molecule activity. Further, expression levels of two representative proteins, ANAPC7 and IFIT1, were confirmed by relative real-time RT-PCR and western blot analysis. The data presented here will provide an overview of host cell response to PDCoV, which could benefit the development of potential antiviral research.

### Sample Protocol
At 24 hours post-infection (hpi), three independent biological replicates of both PDCoV- and mock-infected IPEC-J2 cells grown in T25 flasks were washed twice with prechilled PBS, and then harvested with cell scrapers. After centrifugation at 300g for 10 min, the cell pellets from each flask were lysed with 800 µl RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, Shanghai, China) containing 8 M urea, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitors (Beyotime). The cell lysates were further sonicated on ice for 5min with 10 s bursts and 10 s pauses between cycles. After centrifugation at 12000 g for 20 min at 4℃, the supernatant was collected as the total cellular proteins. Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).  For tryptic digestion and iTRAQ labeling, an aliquot of each protein sample containing 100 μg of total cellular proteins was adjusted to a final volume of 100 µl using the RIPA lysis buffer. After adding tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to a final concentration of 10 mM, the protein solution was incubated at 37℃ for 1h. Afterwards, iodoacetamide was added to the protein solution at a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, prechilled acetone was added to the protein solution in a ratio of 6:1 and precipitated at -20℃ for 4 h. The protein solution was then centrifuged at 10000 g for 20 min at 4℃, and the precipitate was dissolved with 100 µl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The processed protein samples were digested with 2 μg/μL of trypsin overnight at 37℃. After tryptic digestion, the generated peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and redissolved with 20 µl of 0.5 M TEAB. The prepared peptides were then labeled with an iTRAQ reagents-8 plex kit (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturerʼs protocol. Briefly, the three independent biological replicates of mock-infected samples were each labeled with iTRAQ-113, iTRAQ-114 and iTRAQ-115; the three independent biological replicates of PDCoV-infected samples were each labeled with iTRAQ-116, iTRAQ-119 and iTRAQ-121. All of the labeled samples of each group were mixed with an equal amount, and then fractionated using an ACQUITY ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) combined with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm×150 mm). Finally, a total of 10 fractions of each group were collected. After merging two fractions of each group into one, the pooled 10 fractions were dried with a rotary vacuum concentrator.LC-MS/MS analyses of the labeled peptides were performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA ) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After loading 2 µg of the labeled peptides onto a C18 reversed phase HPLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were chromatographed for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over gradients from 2%-80% (mobile phase A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile; mobile phase B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). The ion source parameters were set as follows: spray voltage 1.8 kV, capillary temperature 275℃, and declustering potential 100 V. The mass spectrometer was operated in a Top-20 data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. A full MS scan ranging from 350 to 1300 m/z was conducted at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3×106 ions and a maximum ion transfer (IT) of 20 ms. The precursor ions were fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and subjected to MS/MS scans with the following parameters: resolution 17500; AGC 1×105 ions; maximum IT 50 ms; dynamic exclusion duration 18 s; normalized collision energy 30%; and intensity threshold 1.6×10^5.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS raw data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer Software (Version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA ). The MS/MS data were searched against the Sus scrofa UniProt database (February 26, 2017, containing 26,103 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000008227, version: uniprot-proteome-UP000008227-Sus scrofa (Pig)-26103s-20170226.fasta). The parameters for database searching were as following: instrument, TripleTOF 5600; cysteine alkylation, iodoacetamide; digestion, trypsin; dynamic modification, oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus), and iTRAQ8plex (Y); static modification, iTRAQ8plex (K), iTRAQ8plex (N-terminus), and carbamidomethyl (C); maximum missed cleavages, 2; precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.05Da; validation based on, q value. To ensure the accuracy of the MS data analysis, the cutoff value for the peptide and protein confidences was set to >95% and >1.20, respectively, coupled with the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications ≤1%. The t-test function in the R language software was used to calculate the p value of the expression difference of cellular proteins between mock- and PDCoV-infected IPEC-J2 cells, and only proteins presenting fold changes >1.20 or <0.83 and a p value <0.05 were considered as being significantly differentially expressed. Bioinformatics analysis The data for the identified differentially expressed proteins of PDCoV-infected IPEC-J2 cells were submitted to Gene Ontology (GO) Terms (http://geneontology.org/) for GO analysis, by which the regulated proteins were assigned into three branches of ontology–biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function (MF). GO enrichment analysis was performed using the Goatools software (https://github.com/tanghaibao/GOatools) with Fisher’s exact test, and p-values <0.05 were considered as significantly enriched. Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) of Proteins System (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) was employed for the functional annotation of genes from new genomes and for analyzing the genome evolution. Pathway analyses were performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) platform (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). The differentially expressed proteins were annotated using the Blastp program of the Diamond software against the KEGG database with a cut-off E-value ≤ 1e-5 and identity ≥ 0.98. The pathway enrichment statistics were performed using the KOBAS software (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do/) with the Fisher’s exact test, and those with p-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant (28, 29). Furthermore, the protein-protein interaction networks were constructed using the online STRING database (http://string-db.org/) and visualized by Cytoscape (https://cytoscape.org/), which was widely used for analyzing the relationships between differentially expressed proteins (30).

### Publication Abstract
Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is an emergent enteropathogenic coronavirus associated with swine diarrhea. Porcine small intestinal epithelial cells (IPEC) are the primary target cells of PDCoV infection in vivo. Here, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to quantitatively identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in PDCoV-infected IPEC-J2 cells. A total of 78 DEPs, including 23 upregulated and 55 downregulated proteins, were identified at 24 h postinfection. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD019975. To ensure reliability of the proteomics data, two randomly selected DEPs, the downregulated anaphase-promoting complex subunit 7 (ANAPC7) and upregulated interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1), were verified by real-time PCR and Western blot, and the results of which indicate that the proteomics data were reliable and valid. Bioinformatics analyses, including GO, COG, KEGG, and STRING, further demonstrated that a majority of the DEPs are involved in numerous crucial biological processes and signaling pathways, such as immune system, digestive system, signal transduction, RIG-I-like receptor, mTOR, PI3K-AKT, autophagy, and cell cycle signaling pathways. Altogether, this is the first study on proteomes of PDCoV-infected host cells, which shall provide valuable clues for further investigation of PDCoV pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Porcine intestine lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
China agricultural university, preventive veterinary medicine
China agricultural university,

### Submitter
Xinrong Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Hanchun Yang
China agricultural university, preventive veterinary medicine


