### Accession
PXD003306

### Title
Deep mapping of the mouse podocyte proteome

### Description
We analyzed the proteome of mouse FACS-sorted podocytes. We compared podocytes ("green cells") with non-podocyte ("red cells") cells of the glomerulus.

### Sample Protocol
FACS-sorted podocytes were solubilized in buffer containing 8M urea, and peptides were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Samples were fractionated using SCX (6 fractions). For detailed methods, please see the method section of the accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using MaxQuant as indicated in the method section in the accompanying paper.

### Publication Abstract
Damage to and loss of glomerular podocytes has been identified as the culprit lesion in progressive kidney diseases. Here, we combine mass spectrometry-based proteomics with mRNA sequencing, bioinformatics, and hypothesis-driven studies to provide a comprehensive and quantitative map of mammalian podocytes that identifies unanticipated signaling pathways. Comparison of the in&#xa0;vivo datasets with proteomics data from podocyte cell cultures showed a limited value of available cell culture models. Moreover, in&#xa0;vivo stable isotope labeling by amino acids uncovered surprisingly rapid synthesis of mitochondrial proteins under steady-state conditions that was perturbed under autophagy-deficient, disease-susceptible conditions. Integration of acquired omics dimensions suggested FARP1 as a candidate essential for podocyte function, which could be substantiated by genetic analysis in humans and knockdown experiments in zebrafish. This work exemplifies how the integration of multi-omics datasets can identify a framework of cell-type-specific features relevant for organ health and disease.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Mouse, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Benzing
University Hospital Cologne


