### Accession
PXD000175

### Title
Proteomic analysis uncover a new function and mode of action for mDia2

### Description
mDia2 is an auto-inhibited Formin influencing actin dynamics upon conversion to the active conformation. mDia2 regulates actin-based protrusions and cell invasion, cell differentiation, vesicle trafficking and cytokinesis. However, whether mDia2 has additional functions and how its action is functionally specified remain unknown. Here we draw the interactome of auto-inhibited and constitutively active mDia2 to address these issues. We embed mDia2 in protein networks accounting for its attributed functions and unexpectedly link it to the Ubiquitin Proteasome System. Taking FBXO3 as a test case, we show that mDia2 binds FBXO3 and p53, and regulates p53 transcriptional activity in an actin-nucleation-independent and conformation-insensitive manner. Increased mDia2 and FBXO3 levels elevate p53 activity and expression thereby sensitizing cells to p53-dependent apoptosis, whereas their decrease produces opposite effects. Thus, we discover a new role of mDia2 in p53 regulation suggesting that the closed conformation is biologically active and an FBXO3-based mechanism to functionally specify mDia2’s activity.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of mDia2-Based Immunocomplexes and Mass Spectrometry 293T cells were transfected with Flag-tagged full-length mDia2 (either the wild type or the MA mutant) or empty vector. Cell lysates were prepared as previously described (7, 19). One and a half milligrams of cell lysates were immunoprecipitated using anti-Flag M2® Affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed three times in NET buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 0.1% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5 mM NaF and 1 mM NaVO4. Proteins were eluted with Laemmli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE (NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gel (Invitrogen)). The gel was fixed and stained with Colloidal Blue according to manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen).   Mass Spectrometry Protein reduction and alkylation was performed in gel with DTT (56°C, 1 h) and 2-chloro-iodoacetamide (dark, RT, 30 min), respectively, after which digestion was performed with trypsin over night at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 100% ACN. The samples were analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap or LTQ OrbitrapVelos instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) connected to an Agilent 1200 HPLC system. The nanoLC was equipped with a 20 mm 100 µm i.d.Reprosil C18 trap column and a 400 mm 50 µm i.d.Reprosil C18 analytical column (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) all packed in-house. Solvent A consisted of 0.1M acetic acid (Merck) in deionized water (Milli-Q, Millipore), and solvent B consisted of 0.1M acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Biosolve). Trapping was performed at a flow of 5 µl/min for 10 min and the fractions were eluted using a flow rate passively split to either 100 nl/min (60 min LC method) or 50 nl/min (90 min LC method). The gradient used was: 90 min LC method, 10 min solvent A; 13-28% solvent B in 45 min; 28-50% solvent B in 10 min; 50-100% solvent B in 3 min; 100% solvent B for 1 min; 20 min solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. For the Orbitrap analysis the three most intense ions in the survey scan (350 to 1500 m/z, resolution 60, 000, AGC target 5e5) were fragmented in the linear ion trap (AGC target 1e4), and for the OrbitrapVelos analysis the five most intense ions in the survey scan (350 to 1500 m/z, resolution 30, 000, AGC target 5e5) were subjected to HCD fragmentation (resolution 7,500, AGC target 3e4), with the normalized collision energy set to 35% for both CID and HCD. The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass with a target lock mass abundance of 0%. The low mass cut-off for HCD was set to 180 m/z. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 25 s).

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis  Peak lists were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). For each IP, one peak list was generated per entire gel lane. Peak lists were searched against concatenated reversed Uniprot Human (version 2010-12) including a list of common contaminants using Mascot software version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, UK). Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity with a single missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) was set as a full as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 50 ppm, which was sliced to the real mass accuracy of 7 ppm after the database search, and a product ion tolerance of 0.6 Da (ion trap CID) or 0.05 Da (HCD). Only PSMs with Mascot scores >20 were accepted to ensure that only high quality data is allowed for this study. The following result filters were applied for all datasets: peptide length 6-35; peptide score >20; maximum search engine rank 1; peptide mass deviation 7 ppm. Leucine and isoleucine were considered as equal for protein grouping. Confidence scores to protein-protein interactions were calculated using the 'significance analysis of interactome' (SAINT), computational tool, as described previously (17, 20), which uses label-free quantitative data to construct separate distributions for true and false interactions to derive the probability of a bona fide protein-protein interaction. The probability of Cdk2 (p = 0.24), the validated mDia2-binding protein having the poorest confidence score, was taken as cutoff to discriminate between true and false interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Proteomics, Mdia2

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Maarten Altelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Utrecht University


