### Accession
PXD017275

### Title
Eudiplozoon nipponicum (Monogenea) - tissue specific proteome of parasitic worm

### Description
The aim was to investigate, whether the approach usinf laser capture microdissection combined with LC-MSMS analysis is suitable for preparation of tissue specific proteomes of E. nipponicum. This could be then used for protein localization purposes in almost any organism as the researchers should be able to go through the list of proteins identified in tissue of choice and see if their protein of interest is identified or not.

### Sample Protocol
The OCT-embedded worms were cut on cryotome (Leica CM1900 UV, -20°C) into 12 µm thin sections. These were placed onto microdissection slides (MembraneSlide 1.0 PEN, Carl Zeiss). Slides prior the laser capture microdissection (LCM) had to be deprived of OCT surrounding the cut tissue. This has been achieved by careful dripping the slides into ddH2O. After that tissue has been dehydrated by EtOH (96%, 2 washes for 30 s). Then slides were taken for LCM immediately or stored in 4°C for short term. During cryosectioning we were able to put 10–12 sections of the worm onto single membrane slide. Chosen tissue were cut out from the histological sections using the microdissector PALM MicroBeam (Carl Zeiss) running software PALMRobo 4.6 Pro (Carl Zeiss). Dissected samples have been collected into special caps filled with adhesive material for dry collection (AdhesiveCap 500, Carl Zeiss). Cutting options (laser intensity, focus) had to be adjusted for each type of tissue individually. Total area of each tissue was 1 mm2, which means volume around 0.012 µm3 (12 nl). Two sets of tissue samples (biological replicates) were prepared and analyzed. Microdissected tissue samples were lysed in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 7.6) in thermomixer (30 min, 95°C, 750 rpm). After that, samples were centrifuged (15 min, 20 000 x g) and supernatant was used for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described elsewhere (Wisniewski et al 2009), using 0.5μg/sample of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). Resulting peptides were used for LC-MS/MS analyses. For peptide separation prior the MS analysis was used UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was achieved using capillary column filled with non-polar stationary phase (500 mm x 75 µm, C18 anchors, 3 µm particles, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) during 150 min gradient elution (0.3 µl/min). Mobile phase consisted of polar (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and non-polar phase (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0,1% FA). Eluted peptides were ionized with nanospray (nanoESI) and analyzed in mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (resolution 120,000 in range 350-2000 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS spectra acquisition was 22 ms (resolution 15 000 at 200m/z) and the isolation window for fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z. Resulting MS and MS2 spectra were used for identification of proteins.

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation was used MaxQuant software (v1.6.2.10) (Cox and Mann 2008) with inbuild search engine Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011). Searches have been done against relevant databases: E. nipponicum (37 076 sequences, prepared 2019-04), C. carpio (63 928 sequences, prepared 2019-04) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences, prepared 2018-11). Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was tryptic with two allowed miscleavages. Peptides and proteins with false discovery rate threshold <0.01 and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered only. Protein relative abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidase, Nipponicum, Microdissection, Eudiplozoon, Lc-msms, Parasite, Inhibitor, Orbitrap, Lumos

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic
Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic


