### Accession
PXD004745

### Title
LSD1 complexes -  Lsd1 Ablation Triggers Metabolic Reprogramming of Brown Adipose Tissue

### Description
Lsd1 ablation triggers metabolic reprogramming of brown adipose tissue. Lsd1 protein complexes were purified from mouse adipose tissue and analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS. Mice were kept under different conditions prior complex isolation.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates are submitted: Affinity purification followed by in-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS identification and label-free quantification

### Data Protocol
Data was processed by MaxQuant using following parameters: carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Three miss cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peak lists were searched by Andromeda for peptide identification using a Uniprot mouse database containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion. Peptide lists were further used by MaxQuant to identify and relatively quantify proteins using the following parameters: peptide, and protein false discovery rates were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the PEP was based on Andromeda score, minimum number peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to one and must be unique, and identified proteins have been re-quantified.

### Publication Abstract
Previous work indicated that lysine-specific demethylase 1 (Lsd1) can positively regulate the oxidative and thermogenic capacities of white and beige adipocytes. Here we investigate the role of Lsd1 in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and find that BAT-selective Lsd1 ablation induces a shift from oxidative to glycolytic metabolism. This shift is associated with downregulation of BAT-specific and upregulation of white adipose tissue (WAT)-selective gene expression. This results in the accumulation of di- and triacylglycerides and culminates in a profound whitening of BAT in aged Lsd1-deficient mice. Further studies show that Lsd1 maintains BAT properties via a dual role. It activates BAT-selective gene expression in concert with the transcription factor Nrf1 and represses WAT-selective genes through recruitment of the CoREST complex. In conclusion, our data uncover Lsd1 as a key regulator of gene expression and metabolic function in BAT.

### Keywords
Lsd1, Ap-ms, Adipose tissue, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg


