### Accession
PXD036966

### Title
Identification of mouse lncRNA ENSMUST00000219456(GM32255) interacting proteins in HL-1 cardiomyocytes by pull-down assays coupled to MS

### Description
In this study, pull down assays combined with mass spectrometry analysis were performed in HL-1 cardiomyocytes transfected with control plasmid (OE-Vector) or LOC107984012-overexpression plasmid to identify the repertoire of LOC107984012 interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HL-1 cardiomyocytes were transfected with control plasmid (OE-Vector) or ENSMUST00000219456(GM32255)-overexpression plasmid. The cell protein lysate was harvested by 500 ul Cell lysis buffer (containing fresh protease inhibitor, RNAse inhibitor, DTT). Pierce™ Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (Thermo Fisher) provides reagents to efficiently enrich RNA Binding Proteins. Sense or antisense of ENSMUST00000219456(GM32255) were in vitro transcription using the T7 RNA transcription system (Large Scale RNA ProductionSystem-T7, Promega) and biotin-labeled with the Pierce™ RNA 3’ End Desthiobiotinylation Kit (Thermo Scientific). The primer sequences were: ENSMUST00000219456(GM32255)-sense: 5’-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGTGACACATCTGGAGATTTTCC-3’ (forward), 5’-AGTCAGAGGATAACTTGGGGG-3’ (reverse); ENSMUST00000219456(GM32255)-antisense: 5’-GTGACACATCTGGAGATTTTCC-3’ (forward), 5’-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGTCAGAGGATAACTTGGGGG-3’ (reverse). RNA was then purified with QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). 30 μg of whole-cell protein lysates were incubated with purified biotinylated transcripts for 1 h at 4°C with rotation, then they were eluted for mass spectrometry identification. The entire stacking gel was rinsed with water for several times and the bands of interest were excised and cut into cubes (～1×1 mm). These gel pieces were then transferred into an Eppendorf tube followed by adding neat acetonitrile to shrink them. After that, about 50 μL of the DTT solution (10 mM, in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added to completely cover the gel pieces. The tubes were incubated at 56℃ for 30 min and then cooled down to room temperature. Neat acetonitrile was added to shrink the gel pieces. All the liquid has been removed. 50 μL of the iodoacetamide solution (55 mM, in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added to completely cover the gel pieces. The tubes were incubated at 37℃ in the dark for 10 min and then cooled down to room temperature. Neat acetonitrile was added again to shrink the gel pieces. All the liquid has been removed. 50% acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate were then added and the tubes were vortexing at room temperature till the Coomassie staining has been removed. Neat acetonitrile was added and after the gel pieces became shrink, all the liquid has been removed. Enough trypsin buffer (13 ng/μL, in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) were added to cover the dry gel pieces followed by incubating the samples at 37℃ overnight. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequentially adding 0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile. Combine the extraction products and lyophilized for the following step.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the database of uniprot-homo sapiens (version201907, 20428 entries) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 7 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) was specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), Acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. The peptides with -10lgP≥20 and the proteins with -10lgP≥20 and containing at least 1 unique peptide were filtered.

### Publication Abstract
Reversing ventricular remodeling represents a promising treatment for the post-myocardial infarction (MI) heart failure (HF). Here, we report a novel small molecule HHQ16, an optimized derivative of astragaloside IV, which effectively reversed infarction-induced myocardial remodeling and improved cardiac function by directly acting on the cardiomyocyte to reverse hypertrophy. The effect of HHQ16 was associated with a strong inhibition of a newly discovered Egr2-affiliated transcript lnc9456 in the heart. While minimally expressed in normal mouse heart, lnc9456 was dramatically upregulated in the heart subjected to left anterior descending coronary artery ligation (LADL) and in cardiomyocytes subjected to hypertrophic stimulation. The critical role of lnc9456 in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was confirmed by specific overexpression and knockout in vitro. A physical interaction between lnc9456 and G3BP2 increased NF-&#x3ba;B nuclear translocation, triggering hypertrophy-related cascades. HHQ16 physically bound to lnc9456 with a high-affinity and induced its degradation. Cardiomyocyte-specific lnc9456 overexpression induced, but knockout prevented LADL-induced, cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction. HHQ16 reversed the effect of lnc9456 overexpression while lost its protective role when lnc9456 was deleted, further confirming lnc9456 as the bona fide target of HHQ16. We further identified the human ortholog of lnc9456, also an Egr2-affiliated transcript, lnc4012. Similarly, lnc4012 was significantly upregulated in hypertrophied failing hearts of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. HHQ16 also specifically bound to lnc4012 and caused its degradation and antagonized its hypertrophic effects. Targeted degradation of pathological increased lnc4012/lnc9456 by small molecules might serve as a novel promising strategy to regress infarction-induced cardiac hypertrophy and HF.

### Keywords
Mouse lncrna ensmust00000219456(gm32255)

### Affiliations
Naval medical university
Sencond Military Medical University

### Submitter
Jingjing Wan

### Lab Head
Dr Jingjing Wan
Sencond Military Medical University


