### Accession
PXD044230

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of stationary-phase E. coli treated with semapimod

### Description
There is a need to discover and develop non-toxic antibiotics that are effective against metabolically dormant bacteria, which underlie chronic infections and promote antibiotic resistance. Traditional antibiotic discovery has historically favored compounds effective against actively metabolizing cells, a property that is not predictive of efficacy in metabolically inactive contexts. Here, we combine a stationary-phase screening method with deep learning-powered virtual screens and toxicity filtering to discover compounds with lethality against metabolically dormant bacteria and favorable toxicity profiles. The most potent and structurally novel compound without any obvious mechanistic liability was semapimod, an anti-inflammatory drug effective against stationary-phase E. coli and A. baumannii. Integrating microbiological assays, biochemical measurements, and single-cell microscopy, we show that semapimod selectively disrupts and permeabilizes the bacterial outer membrane by binding lipopolysaccharide. This work illustrates the value of harnessing non-traditional screening methods and deep learning models to identify non-toxic antibacterial compounds that are effective in infection-relevant contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Ec BW was grown in LB overnight at 37°C with shaking at 300 rpm, and then diluted 1:2,000 and grown to an OD600 of 0.5. Cells were then spun at 4,000 x g for 5 minutes and resuspended in PBS, followed by lysis on ice in buffer containing 0.8% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich I3021-50ML), 50 µg/ml lysozyme (Sigma-Aldrich L6876-5G), 1X Halt protease inhibitor (Life Technologies 87786), 250 U/ml benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich E1014-25KU), and 1 mM MgCl2. The lysate was divided and incubated with 10 µM semapimod or an equivalent volume of DMSO for 20 minutes at room temperature with gentle agitation. The lysates were split into 120 µl aliquots in PCR tubes and heated at the following temperatures on two 48-well heat blocks: 40°C, 43.5°C, 47°C, 51.3°C, 54.9°C, 58°C, 60.4°C, 62.5°C, 65.6°C, and 70°C. After 3 minutes, the tubes were removed from the heat blocks and were chilled on ice for 5 minutes. The lysates were transferred to a TLA-100 rotor and spun at 100,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C in a Beckman Ultra MAX benchtop ultracentrifuge. The soluble protein fraction was separated from the pellet for further processing.  To perform protein cleanup and digestion, concentrations of the 40°C samples were determined with a DC Protein Assay (BioRad 5000116). A volume corresponding to 50 µg of the 40°C sample was used for further analysis. Equivalent volumes were used from the remaining temperature range samples. Samples were prepared using a modified version of the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2019; Herneisen et al., 2022). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Pierce 20490) for 20 minutes at 50°C, and cysteines were alkylated with 15 mM MMTS (Thermo Fisher Scientific 23011) for 10 minutes at room temperature. Next 500 µg of a 1:1 mix of hydrophobic and hydrophilic beads (GE Healthcare 65152105050250 and 45152105050250) was added to each sample, followed by a 6x volume of 100% ethanol to induce bead aggregation. The samples were agitated at 1,000 rpm on a thermomixer for 10 minutes at room temperature. The beads were magnetically separated, and the supernatant was removed. The beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol and were then resuspended in 35 µl of 50 mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich T7408-100ML) with 2 µg trypsin/LysC protease mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific A40007). Digestion was performed for 16 hours at 37°C and 1,000 rpm. Peptides were eluted in the bead supernatant.  Peptides were TMT10plex-labeled according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific 90111), with the following modifications. Approximately 35 µl of eluate was combined with 100 µg of TMT10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific 90110) in 15 µl of acetonitrile, for an estimated 1:2 w/w peptide:tag labeling reaction. The labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature and was quenched for 15 minutes with 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific 90115). The samples were then pooled, flash-frozen, and lyophilized to dryness. Samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific 84868), according to the manufacturer’s instructions for TMT-labeled peptides, followed by lyophilization to dryness.

### Data Protocol
To acquire mass spectrometry data, the fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 10-20 µl of 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific 28905) and were analyzed on an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020) connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/minute on a gradient of 1-25% B for 90 minutes, 25-40% B for 30 minutes, 40-95% B for 10 minutes, 95% B for 10 minutes, and a seesaw gradient of 95–2% B for 2 minutes, 2% B for 2 minutes, 2–98% B for 2 minutes, 98% B for 2 minutes, 98–2% B for 2 minutes, and 2% B for 2 minutes. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 1800V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 270°C; using standard FAIMS resolution and compensation voltages of -50V and -65V; and an inner and electrode temperature of 100°C with 4.6 ml/minute carrier gas. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range of 350-1200 m/z, automatically determined maximum fill time, standard AGC target, intensity threshold of 5 x 103, 2-5 charge state, and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds with a cycle time of 2 seconds between master scans. MS2 spectra were generated with a HCD collision energy of 36 at a resolution of 30,000 using TurboTMT settings with a first mass at 110 m/z, an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, standard AGC target, and auto injection time.  Raw data files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the E. coli K12 (Uniprot UP000000625) protein database. The search included the following post-translational modifications: dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S, T, Y), dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; any N-terminus), static TMT6plex (+229.163 Da; K), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). Reporter quantification was performed on ions with an average S/N over 10 and co-isolation threshold of 50%. Protein-level quantification was determined from unique peptides only. Normalization was turned off. Otherwise, default settings were used. At the time of publication, the mass spectrometry proteomics data will be deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (Perez-Riverol et al., 2022). TMT reporter ion Abundance ratios relative to the lowest-temperature sample were used as input to the TPP package (Franken et al., 2015) for normalization and curve fitting in R version 4.0.4 (R Core Team 2020). P-values were calculated using the analyseTPPTR function within Bioconductor’s TPP package using the ‘RobustZ’ method (Cox et al., 2008). Overexpression strains were sourced from the ASKA library (Kitagawa et al., 2005). Knockout strains were sourced from the KEIO library (Baba et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Thermal profiling, Tpp, Ms-cetsa, Drug discovery, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute for Technology
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute for Technology


