### Accession
PXD026459

### Title
Tryptic peptide imaging of an urothelial cancer tissue cohort

### Description
Analysis of a clinical urothelial cancer cohort for their spatial tryptic peptide composition in two different tissue types, tumor and stroma, and two tumor subtypes, muscle-infiltrating and non muscle-infiltrating tumors.

### Sample Protocol
The full sample cohort consisted of two tissue microarrays with 49 bladder tissue cores from 47 patients with different diagnoses: Muscle-invasive urothelial cancer (n=12), non-muscle invasive high-grade urothelial cancer (n=5), non-muscle invasive low-grade urothelial cancer (n=20), urothelial carcinoma in situ (n = 2), papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential (n=2) as well as non-cancerous benign malignancies (n=8). 6 µm thick sections were sliced with a microtome and mounted onto indium tin oxide coated glass slides.  Tissue deparaffinization was performed in xylol and ethanol/water solutions. Tissue sections were rinsed twice in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 min. Antigen retrieval was performed in citric acid monohydrate pH 6.0, in a steamer for 1 h at approximately 100 °C. Rinsing in ammonium bicarbonate was repeated twice and the samples were air dried afterwards. Trypsin was sprayed onto the tissue sections using iMatrixSpray; 60 mm height, 1 mm line distance, 180 mm/s speed, 0.5 µl/cm3 density, 10 cycles, 10 s delay. Digestion was performed for 2 h at 50°C in a digestion chamber with 97% humidity maintained by a saturated potassium sulfate solution. 10 mg/ml alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix was prepared in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Matrix solution was mixed 12:1 (v/v) with an internal calibrant mix containing 0.08 µg/ml Angiotensin I (m/z 1296.69), 0.04 µg/ml Substance P (m/z 1347.72),  0.15 µg/µl [Glu]-Fibrinopeptide B (m/z 1570.68) , and 0.30 µg/µl ACTH fragment (18-39) (m/z 2465.19). The matrix-calibrant mixture was sprayed onto the tissue sections using iMatrixSpray; 60 mm height, 1 mm line distance, 180 mm/s speed, 0.5 µl/cm3 density, 20 cycles, 5 s delay. Tissue sections were measured with a 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF Analyzer using the 4000 Series Explorer software to set instrument parameters. A squared region was imaged with 150 µm raster step size, averaging 500 laser shots per spectrum in a mass range from 800 to 2300 m/z in positive ion reflectron mode. Before starting the imaging measurement, internal calibrants in a spectrum outside the tissue region were used for m/z re-calibration.  After MSI measurement, matrix was removed from the slides by rinsing with 70 % ethanol. Hemalum staining of the measured tissue was performed by immersing the tissue sections in Mayer’s acid Hemalum solution for 1 minute and rinsing with water for 1 minute. Dehydration was performed with four short incubations in 100% ethanol and 2 incubations in xylol. Stained tissues were scanned at x20 magnification. A pathologist annotated a coherent area within the largest tumor and stroma regions. Only annotated spectra were considered for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analyze7.5 files were uploaded to the European Galaxy server and the complete analysis was performed on this platform. First, a quality control was performed. Co-registration of the stained image and the MSI image was performed using 6 distinctive spots in the tissues as teachmarks for affine transformation. The obtained warping matrix was applied to extract the coordinates that corresponded to the tumor and stroma regions, while all carcinoma in situ core and papillary urothelial neoplasms of low malignant potential spectra were removed. In the same filtering step both files were cut to their common m/z range 800 to 2300. Both files were binned in 50 ppm m/z steps and combined into one dataset. The Cardinal based MSI preprocessing tool was used for gaussian smoothing (window: 8, standard deviation: 2), baseline reduction (blocks: 750), m/z alignment (tolerance: 200 ppm), peak picking (signal to noise: 5, blocks: 600, window: 10), alignment (tolerance: 200 ppm) and filtering (frequency: 0.01) to obtain a common m/z peak list. Those m/z were used to extract the original peptide intensity from the smoothed and baseline reduced dataset by peak binning (tolerance: 200 ppm) in the MSI preprocessing tool. Mass re-calibration (tolerance: 200 ppm) was performed based on the three internal calibrants and the most abundant tryptic autolysis peptide (m/z 405.42) using the align spectra function of the MALDIquant peak detection tool. Afterwards, potential contaminant m/z features were removed. This included the used internal calibrants as well as CHCA matrix peaks and bovine trypsin peptides, the m/z of the latter two were obtained from the MALDI contaminant list published by Keller. Finally, intensity normalization to the total ion current (TIC) of each spectrum was performed in the MSI preprocessing tool.The pre-processed file was subjected to spectra classification using Cardinal’s spatial shrunken centroids (SSC) algorithm in the MSI classification tool. For each classification the patients were randomly split 5:1 into training and test group and the training group was further split into subgroups to find optimal classification parameters by cross validation. Ion images with contrast enhancement ‘histogram’ were plotted on binned, filtered, combined and TIC normalized data for the top m/z. Average mass spectra plots per group were generated from binned, filtered, combined and smoothed MSI data. All m/z features that were part of the classifiers were matched with 200 ppm tolerance to the MSiMass list to obtain putative identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Maldi imaging, Ffpe, Tissue microarray, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
Institute for Surgical Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg

### Submitter
Melanie Christine Föll

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany


