### Accession
PXD015681

### Title
Multi-omics analysis reveals mechanisms of complete resistance to extreme illumination levels in a green alga isolated from desert soil crusts

### Description
The unparalleled performance of Chlorella ohadii under irradiances of twice-full sun light underlines that we lack essential information on how the photosynthetic machinery operates and what sets its upper functional limit. Rather than succumbing to photodamage, C. ohadii undergoes major structural and compositional changes pointing to unique features of PSII function, and exhibiting highly efficient utilization of reductants downstream of the photosynthetic reaction centers. This remarkable resistance allowed us to investigate, for the first time, the systems response of photosynthesis and growth to extreme illumination in a metabolically active cell. Using redox proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics and lipidomics, we explored the cellular mechanisms underlying inorganic carbon concentration, excess redox dissipation, protein S-glutathionylation, lipid and starch accumulation and increased thylakoid stacking. Frequently, the response in C. ohadii deviated from those reported in model species, reflecting its life history in desert sand crusts. It exhibited a readily available metabolic capacity to utilize a sudden excess of reducing power to support growth and reserve formation. Redox regulation played a pivotal role in this very rapid acclimation process. Comparative global and case-specific analyses, provided insights into the potential evolutionary role of effective reductant utilization in the extreme resistance of C. ohadii to photoinhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteine eluted after thio-based enrichment were mixed with 100µl 8M urea in 10mM Tris-HCl, pH8 (urea-Tris buffer) to the filter column (Merck, 10kDa cutoff), spun shortly at 4⁰C. Next proteins of filter were washed with 100µl urea-Tris buffer and spun at RT, 40min, 14000g. Proteins were reduced with DTT by addition 50µl 10mM DTT in urea-Tris buffer and spun at RT, 30 min, 14000g. Next proteins on filter were modified with iodoacetamide (carbamidomethylation); 50 µl 27mM iodoacetamide in urea-Tris buffer was added to the filter and incubated with mixing, 600rpm for 1 minute, and 5 minutes without mixing. After spinning, RT, 30min, 14000g, one wash was performed with urea-Tris buffer followed by spinning, RT, 40min, 14000g. Next peptides were digested on filters with modified trypsin (Promega) in 100µl 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, in proportion 1:25 trypsin:protein. Digest was performed for 14h in 37⁰C. Peptides were recovered form filter first by centrifugation for 40min, RT, 14000g and next desalting by adding 50µl 0,5M NaCl and centrifugation for 20 min, RT, 14000g. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 10%) was used for peptides acidification to pH<3.0. The peptide mixture was purified and desalted on C18 SEP-Pak columns (Tecknokroma), which were attached to a QIAvac 24 Plus (QIAGEN) vacuum manifold. The columns were equilibrated with 1mL 100 % methanol, once with 1 mL 60 % acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 1ml of 0.1 % TFA. Next peptides were applied to C18 column and allowed to pass through. Then column was washed twice with 1ml of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 800µl  60 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA, dried in the speed vacuum concentrator and stored at -20° prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant version 1.4.1.2 combined with Andromeda search engine was used to annotate peptide sequences using Chlorella ohadii data base (accession number PRJNA573576). Protein were digested with Trypsin, fixed modification was set as Carbaminomethylation. Further setting were as followed: false discovery rate 1% with decoy mode: revert, score cutoff 25 for unmodifided peptides, for quantification unique and razor peptides were used, label free quantification was on, with allowed max 2 miscleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redoxome, Proteome. light, Redox, Chlorella ohadii

### Affiliations
Università degli Studi di Milano Statale
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam, 14476, Germany

### Submitter
Beata Siemiatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Stitt1
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam, 14476, Germany


