### Accession
PXD020179

### Title
Characterisation of FAK- and ILK-dependent nuclear subproteomes

### Description
In addition to central functions in cell adhesion signalling, integrin-associated proteins have wider roles at sites distal to adhesion receptors. In experimentally defined adhesomes, there is clear enrichment of proteins that localise to the nucleus, and conversely, we now report that nuclear proteomes contain a subset of adhesome components that localise to the nucleus of cancer cells. We have defined a nucleo-adhesome, providing evidence for the remarkable scale of nuclear localisation of adhesion proteins, establishing a framework for interrogating nuclear adhesion protein functions. Here, we examined whether there was a role for focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and integrin-linked kinase (ILK) in specifying the nucleo-adhesome and, more broadly, the nuclear proteome in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
For nuclear isolation, we modified an isotonic buffer-mediated cellular dissection method (Shaiken & Opekun, 2014, Sci. Rep. 4, 4923). Proteins (200 µg) from murine SCC nuclear fractions were precipitated and washed with acetone. Samples were clarified by centrifugation, and each pellet was collected and air-dried. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.9, and sonicated. Proteins (40 µg) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. To samples, 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.9, 10 mM DTT was added to dilute urea concentration from 8 M to 6 M, and samples were incubated with MS-grade Lys-C (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) for 3–4 h at 37°C. Samples were further diluted from 6 M to 2 M urea concentration, and samples were incubated with sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) for 16 h at 37°C . Peptides were acidifed with trifluoroacetic acid (~1% (v/v) final concentration), desalted on homemade C18 StageTips and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Purified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptides were injected onto a C18-packed emitter in buffer A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) and eluted with a linear 120-min gradient of 2%–45% (v/v) buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) (for the FAK-dependent nuclear proteome experiment; 240-min gradient for the ILK-dependent nuclear proteome experiment). Eluting peptides were ionised in positive ion mode before data-dependent analysis. The target value for full scan MS spectra was 3 × 10^6 charges in the 300–1,650 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000. Ions were fragmented with normalised collision energy of 26, selecting the top 12 ions. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 s (for the FAK-dependent nuclear proteome experiment; 60 s for the ILK-dependent nuclear proteome experiment) was enabled to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides. The target value for MS/MS spectra was 5 × 10^4 ions, with a resolution of 17,500. All spectra were acquired with 1 microscan and without lockmass.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). Peptide lists were searched against the mouse UniProtKB database (version 2018_07, which consists of 17,038 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entries and 69,415 UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries) and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine cyclisation, N-terminal carbamylation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications (up to five modifications per peptide). Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in other LC runs were matched and transferred between runs (0.7-min time window). MS/MS were required for quantitative comparisons, and large label-free quantification ratios were stabilised. Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, determined by applying a target-decoy search strategy using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, except when followed by proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and at least one peptide ratio was required for label-free quantification. Proteins matching to the reversed or common contaminants databases were omitted. Label-free quantification intensities for proteins quantified in at least three out of four biological replicates were binary-logarithm transformed and sample-median subtracted. Missing values were imputed from a width-compressed, down-shifted normal distribution using Perseus (version 1.5.2.6). Statistical significance of differentially regulated proteins was determined by analysis of variance and two-tailed Student’s t-tests with artificial within-groups variance set to 1 and a permutation-based FDR threshold of 5% (applying 1,000 randomisations).

### Publication Abstract
In addition to central functions in cell adhesion signalling, integrin-associated proteins have wider roles at sites distal to adhesion receptors. In experimentally defined adhesomes, we noticed that there is clear enrichment of proteins that localise to the nucleus, and conversely, we now report that nuclear proteomes contain a class of adhesome components that localise to the nucleus. We here define a nucleo-adhesome, providing experimental evidence for a remarkable scale of nuclear localisation of adhesion proteins, establishing a framework for interrogating nuclear adhesion protein functions. Adding to nuclear FAK's known roles in regulating transcription, we now show that nuclear FAK regulates expression of many adhesion-related proteins that localise to the nucleus and that nuclear FAK binds to the adhesome component and nuclear protein Hic-5. FAK and Hic-5 work together in the nucleus, co-regulating a subset of genes transcriptionally. We demonstrate the principle that there are subcomplexes of nuclear adhesion proteins that cooperate to control transcription.

### Keywords
Human, Nucleus, Fak, Ilk, Adhesion, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret Frame
University of Edinburgh


