### Accession
PXD022894

### Title
Proteogenomic pathogenesis and classification of acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia is a clinically and genetically heterogenous disease characterized by bone marrow infiltration with immature leukemic blasts that cause bone marrow failure. Patient age, comorbidities and genomic disease characteristics have a profound impact on patient outcome. Here, we present an integrated Multi-Omics analysis of protein and gene expression as well as cytogenetics and mutations to capture the rewiring of intracellular protein networks that is most likely caused by genomic aberrations. Because protein networks are downstream of genomic aberrations, we hypothesized that our Multi-Omics approach may add to the current AML classification by identifying proteomic AML subtypes with specific clinical and molecular features that could identify therapeutic vulnerabilities and aid in the identification of predictive biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 1% SDC buffer (1% SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.0, 10mM CAA, 40mM TCEP pH7.0), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and cooled on ice for 20 mins. Followed by 10 cycles of sonication for 10 minutes (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 10x 30 sec) and heated again at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay and 20µg from each samples were digested with LysC (1:100) and Trypsin (1:100) overnight using thermoshaker 1200 rpm at 37°C. To stop the digestion, 5x volume isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed vigorously. The peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips, washed once with isopropanol/1%TFA and once with 0.2% TFA. The peptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried eluates were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.  All the samples were analyzed on nanoflow HPLC coupled to a high resolution mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm reversed phase columns, packed in-house (75 μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column temperature was controlled at 60°C using a homemade column oven. An Easy-nLC 1200 system was connected to the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano spary ion source, and binary buffer system, consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN), was utilized for low pH peptide separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For individual measurements, 400ng of peptide material was loaded and eluted over 120 for patient samples or 140 minute gradient for cell lines. For a 120 minute  sample run, the gradient was stepwise increased from 5% to 30% buffer B over 105 min and stepped up to 60% over 5 min followed by wash in 95% over 10 min before re-equilibration in buffer A.  For DDA experiment, the Thermo Xcalibur (3.0.63) software was used for Q Exactive HF-X instrument respectively.  The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in Top15 mode with a full scan range of 300-1650 m/z at a resolution  R=60,000 at 200m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6 at a maximum injection time of 20 s. Precursor ion selection width was kept at 1.4 m/z and fragmentation was achieved by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 1e5 ions, maximum filling time 120ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, and normalized collision energy 27%). Fragment ion scans were recorded at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s. Charge exclusion (unassigned, 1,6, -8 & >8) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.2) open software environment utilizing Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt reference proteome database (version 2014 containing 88993 entries) including variable modifications oxidation & acetylation at N-terminus and Carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification. Enzyme digestion specificity was set to Trypsin and maximum two missed cleavages were allowed. Parent peptide mass tolerance and fragment peptide mass tolerance up to 4.5-20ppm were allowed. A cut-off 1% FRD was applied first at the peptide level and second at the protein level. We required a minimum of 7 amino acids for peptide identification. Each super SILAC labelled AML samples measured in 23 fraction (23 raw files) were combined as one sample. In the absence of sequence spectrum, peptide identification was transferred through enabling match between run. If proteins could not be distinguished on the basis of unique peptides, they were merged by MaxQuant as one protein group. For the relative quantification of SILAC pair’s a minimum ratio count of 1 was set in Maxquant as a default setting. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm and ‘match-between-runs’ was enabled. For stringent filtering a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 and alteast one razor peptide for protein identification was enabled. Further protein groups found as common contaminants, reverse hits and site modification were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Transcriptome, Proteome, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Dr.Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


