### Accession
PXD041456

### Title
Burkholderia thailandensis stress response to 12-bis-THA

### Description
Examination of the 12-bis-THA stress response in Burkholderia thailandensis strain E555 to investigate its antimicrobial mechanism of action

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown to mid-log phase and incubated with with either 0.8 ug/mL or 8 ug/mL of 12-bis-THA, or an untreated group. Bacteria were exposed for 2.5 hours before the proteomes were extracted and analysed using TMT based proteomics

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were mapped to the proteome of B. thailandensis strain E264 as the proteome of E555 was incomplete at the time of analysis. This was performed using ProteomeDiscover. Statistical analysis and data visualisation was performed using Perseus

### Publication Abstract
<i>Burkholderia pseudomallei</i> is the causative agent of the tropical disease, melioidosis. It is intrinsically resistant to many antimicrobials and treatment requires an onerous regimen of intravenous and orally administered drugs. Relapse of disease and high rates of mortality following treatment are common, demonstrating the need for new anti-<i>Burkholderia</i> agents. The cationic bola-amphiphile, 12,12'-(dodecane-1,12-diyl) bis (9-amino-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroacridinium), referred to as 12-bis-THA, is a molecule with the potential to treat <i>Burkholderia</i> infections. 12-bis-THA spontaneously forms cationic nanoparticles that bind anionic phospholipids in the prokaryotic membrane and are readily internalized. In this study, we examine the antimicrobial activity of 12-bis-THA against strains of <i>Burkholderia thailandensis</i>. As <i>B. pseudomallei</i> produces a polysaccharide capsule we first examined if this extra barrier influenced the activity of 12-bis-THA which is known to act on the bacterial envelope. Therefore two strains of <i>B. thailandensis</i> were selected for further testing, strain E264 which does not produce a capsule and strain E555 which does produce a capsule that is chemically similar to that found in <i>B. pseudomallei</i>. In this study no difference in the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was observed when capsulated (E555) and unencapsulated (E264) strains of <i>B. thailandensis</i> were compared, however time-kill analysis showed that the unencapsulated strain was more susceptible to 12-bis-THA. The presence of the capsule did not affect the membrane permeation of 12-bis-THA at MIC concentrations. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses showed that 12-bis-THA causes a shift in central metabolism away from glycolysis and glyoxylate cycle, and suppressed the production of the F<sub>1</sub> domain of ATP synthase. In summary, we provide insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning the activity of 12-bis-THA against <i>B. thailandensis</i> and discuss its potential for further development.

### Keywords
Atp synthase, 12-bis-tha, Burkholderia, Mechanisn-of-action, Respiration

### Affiliations
University of East Anglia
Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Adam Pattinson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Michael McArthur
Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, United Kingdom


