### Accession
PXD046448

### Title
The CDK Pho85 inhibits Whi7 Start repressor to promote cell cycle entry  in budding yeast

### Description
Pho85 is a multifunctional CDK that signals to the cell when environmental conditions are favorable. It has been connected to cell cycle control, mainly in Start where it promotes the G1/S transition. Here we describe that the Start repressor Whi7 is a key target of Pho85 in the regulation of cell cycle entry. The phosphorylation of Whi7 by Pho85 inhibits the repressor and explains most of the contribution of the CDK in the activation of Start. Mechanistically, Pho85 down-regulates Whi7 protein levels through the control Whi7 protein stability and WHI7 gene transcription. Whi7 phosphorylation by Pho85 also restrains the intrinsic ability of Whi7 to associate with promoters. Furthermore, although Whi5 is the main Start repressor in normal cycling cells, in the absence of Pho85 Whi7 becomes the major repressor leading to G1 arrest. Overall, our results reveal a novel mechanism by which Pho85 promotes Start through the regulation of the Whi7 repressor at multiple levels, which may confer to Whi7 a functional specialization to connect the response to adverse conditions with the cell cycle control.

### Sample Protocol
Protein mixtures were quantified by Machery Nagel (Invitrogen) according the manufacturer’s instructions. After cysteine alkylation with IAM, extracts (ca 10 µg) were cleaned with SP3 protocol to eliminate detergent previous to in solution protein digestion with Trypsin (Müller et al 2019). The digested samples were submitted to IMOC phospho enrichment withTiO2 as described (Thingolm et al 2006).  Tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) was performed in a Tims TOF flex mass spectrometer (Bruker). The eluted peptides in the Evosep One system were ionized in a captive Spray with 1700 V at 200 ºC and analyzed in a ddaPASEF mode with the following settings: MS settings (Scan 100-1700 m/z; Ion Polarity Positive; Scan Mode PASEF), TIMS settings (Mode custom; 1/K0 0.6-1.6 V.s/cm2; ramp time 100 ms; Duty Cycle 100%; Ramp Rate 9.42 Hz; Ms Averaging: 1; Auto Calibration off) and MSMS settings (Number of PASEF ramps 10; Total Cycle time 1.17 s; Charge Minimun 0 unknown; Charge maximum 5; Scheduling target Intensity 20000, Intensity Threshold 2500. Active exclusion ON.  The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2Da. The TIMS elution voltage was calibrated linearly to obtain the reciprocal of reduced ion mobility (1/K0) using three selected ions (m/z 622, 922, and 1,222) of the ESI-L Tuning Mix (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of data was done in the FragPIPE v2.0 pipeline, a suite of computational tools enabling comprehensive analysis of mass spectrometry-based proteomics data. The MSFragger protein identification algorithms were used to search for phosphopeptides with the workflow LFQ-phospho standard parameters. In addition, the pipeline was used for a combined MS1 quantitation by IonQuant and the MaxLFQ procedure (Cox et al 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phospho proteomics, Dda-pasef

### Affiliations
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (BIOTECMED) and Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de València, 46100 Burjassot, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Carlos Igual
Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina (BIOTECMED) and Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat de València, 46100 Burjassot, Spain


