### Accession
PXD021447

### Title
Restoration of energy homeostasis by SIRT6 extends healthy lifespan

### Description
Aging leads to a gradual decline in physical activity and disrupted energy homeostasis. The NAD+-dependent SIRT6 deacylase regulates aging and metabolism through mechanisms that largely remain unknown. Here, we show that SIRT6 overexpression leads to a reduction in frailty and lifespan extension in both male and female B6 mice. A combination of physiological assays, in vivo multi-omics analyses and 13C lactate tracing identified an age-dependent decline in glucose homeostasis and hepatic gluconeogenesis (GNG) capacity in wild type mice. In contrast, aged SIRT6-transgenic mice preserve GNG capacity and glucose homeostasis through an improvement in the utilization of two major GNG precursors, lactate and glycerol. To mediate these changes, mechanistically, SIRT6 increases hepatic GNG gene expression, de novo NAD+ synthesis, and systemically enhances glycerol release from adipose tissue. These findings show that SIRT6 optimizes energy homeostasis in old age to delay frailty and preserve healthy aging.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse tissue lysates from 6 controls and 6 cases were precipitated using standard methanol/chloroform extraction protocol.Protein digests were desalted, purified and labelled with TMT6 plex. High-pH RPLC fractionation was performed on Agilent 1260 bio-inert HPLC system and combined into 15 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS analysis were converted to mascot generic format (.mgf) using MSConvert software (ProteoWizard 3.0.6002) and the spectra were searched with Mascot 2.4.1 and X!Tandem CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1) against  SwissProt mouse sequences from the Uniprot database (version year 2016, appended with 115 known contaminant proteins). The search parameters were set as TMT6plex lysine and n-terminus as fixed modifications and variable modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamate, carbamylation of lysine and n-terminus and oxidized methionine. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.08 Da, respectively, and two missed cleavages were allowed for precursor and fragment ions in agreement with the instrument mass accuracy. Mascot and X!Tandem search engine results were analyzed in Scaffold Q+ 4.4.6 (Proteome Software, Inc). Peptide and protein probability were calculated by PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet probability model. Protein results were filtered at 1% thresholds of both protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and required at least one unique peptide for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucose homeostasis, Aging, Sirt6, Multi-omics, Gluconeogenesis

### Affiliations
NIA
The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences Bar-Ilan University  Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel

### Submitter
Ceereena Ubaida-Mohien

### Lab Head
Dr Haim Y. Cohen
The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences Bar-Ilan University  Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel


