### Accession
PXD045984

### Title
RBM47 ISGylation confers broad immunoprotection in the lung

### Description
The experimental purpose is to investigate the protein interactions involving RBM47 through mass spectrometry experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of the target proteins was accomplished by FLAG-immunoprecipitation (FLAG-IP) from cells expressing RBM47. Subsequently, the purified proteins were separated using 10% SDS-PAGE gel, and subjected to Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 (BioFroxx) staining at room temperature for 1 hour to facilitate the determination of protein distribution on the lanes. After decolorizing, the full-size lanes were excised and transferred to Gene Create Bioengineering Co. Ltd. (Wuhan, China), where the samples were processed in accordance with standard procedures.

### Data Protocol
Retrieve the region containing proteins from the SDS-PAGE, cut into small pieces of approximately 1 mm^3; immerse the gel pieces in double-distilled water, shake for 10 minutes, and remove the wash solution; immerse the gel pieces in a 50% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) solution, shake for 10 minutes, and remove the wash solution, repeating this process three times; immerse the gel pieces in 100% ACN, shake for 10 minutes, remove the wash solution, and then dry the gel pieces in a vacuum desiccator; add a solution of 10 mM DTT/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) to the gel pieces, and incubate at 56°C for 1 hour for the reduction reaction, then remove the soaking solution; subsequently, add a solution of 55 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) to the gel pieces, allow it to react in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes, and then remove the soaking solution; add 100% ACN, shake for 20 minutes, remove the soaking solution, and dry the gel pieces; add an appropriate amount of trypsin to the gel pieces and supplement with a solution of 50 mM NH4HCO3 to completely cover the gel pieces, incubate at 37°C overnight for enzymatic cleavage; then add an extraction solution of 60% ACN/5% formic acid to the gel pieces, sonicate for 10 minutes, and after centrifugation, collect the supernatant into a new centrifuge tube; repeat the extraction process twice, combine the extraction solutions, and dry them in a centrifugal concentrator; perform peptide desalting using a C18 column, and store at -20°C until analysis.

### Publication Abstract
ISGylation is a well-established antiviral mechanism, but its specific function in immune and tissue homeostasis regulation remains elusive. Here, we reveal that the RNA-binding protein RBM47 undergoes phosphorylation-dependent ISGylation at lysine 329 to regulate immune activation and maintain lung homeostasis. K329R knockin (KI) mice with defective RBM47-ISGylation display heightened susceptibility to LPS-induced acute lung injury and lung tumorigenesis, accompanied with multifaceted immunosuppression characterized by elevated pro-inflammatory factors, reduced IFNs/related chemokines, increased myeloid-derived suppressor cells, and impaired tertiary lymphoid structures. Mechanistically, RBM47-ISGylation regulation of the expression of TSC22D3 mRNA, a glucocorticoid-inducible transcription factor, partially accounts for the effects of RBM47-ISGylation deficiency due to its broad immunosuppressive activity. We further demonstrate the direct inhibitory effect of RBM47-ISGylation on TSC22D3 expression in human cells using a nanobody-targeted E3 ligase to induce site-specific ISGylation. Furthermore, epinephrine-induced S309 phosphorylation primes RBM47-ISGylation, with epinephrine treatment exacerbating dysregulated cytokine expression and ALI induction in K329R KI mice. Our findings provide mechanistic insights into the dynamic regulation of RBM47-ISGylation in supporting immune activation and maintaining lung homeostasis.

### Keywords
Rbm47

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Shihui Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Min Zhang
Huazhong Agricultural University


