### Accession
PXD008856

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Bombyx mori after BmNPV challenge

### Description
Employed BmN cell after 10 MOI (multiplicity of infection) BmNPV 36 hpi (hour post-infection) to compare the proteomics by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Cell line and virus BmN cell line, originated from B.mori ovary, was maintained in our laboratory by culturing at 27 °C in Sf-900 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with 10% inactivated fetal bovine serum. BmN cells were infected with preserved BmNPV at 10 multiplicity of infection (MOI) and collected after 36 h (experimental group), in comparison with normal BmN cells (control group). Both groups were performed in biological triplicates. After centrifugation at 3000 g, cells of different groups were harvested by discarding the supernatant. Finally, the pellets were washed twice with PBS. Protein extraction  The pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 mM urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and then sonicated three times in ice by an intensive ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo Scientz Biotechnology Co., Ltd). After centrifugation at 20,000 g, 4 °C for 10 min, debris was removed. Next, proteins soluble in supernatant were precipitated by 15% cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at -20 °C for 2 h and centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min. After discarding supernatant, pellets were washed with cold acetone three times. Proteins were then dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0). The concentration of extracted proteins was determined with BCA Quant Kit (Beyotime biotechnology, China) by following manufacturer’s instruction. Digestion by trypsin Initially, extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 45 min in darkness. Thereafter, diluting the proteins with 100 mM TEAB enabled urea concentration lower than 2 M. Protein digestion was performed overnight by adding trypsin based on the trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50. During the second digestion, proteins were digested by trypsin for 4 h following the trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:100.  TMT labeling The peptides after digestion were desalted through Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and dried in vacuum. Peptides were mixed with 0.5 M TEAB and modified with 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, one unit of thawed TMT reagent was sufficient for labeling 100 μg protein. Finally, the proteins were reconstituted with 24 μL acetonitrile (ACN) and were incubated at room temperature for 2 h, then pooled, desalted, and finally centrifuged under vacuum-dry. HPLC fractionation  The harvested peptides were fractionated with a gradient concentration of 2 to 60% ACN in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 10) to 80 segments by a reverse-phase HPLC in Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Then 80 fractions were simply integrated into 18 groups followed by centrifugation and vacuum dry.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were firstly mixed with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and loaded in a reverse-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). By means of analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific), samples were separated with a gradient concentration of 6 to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for more than 22 min, followed by 20 to 36% solvent B for 10 min and 36 to 85% solvent B for 5 min and finally maintained at 85% solvent B for 3 min. These procedures were driven by the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system with a stable flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed through Q ExactiveTM plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Scientific). Concisely, all peptides subjected to nanospray ion (NSI) source were detected by tandem mass spectrometer, which was coupled online with UPLC system. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 with NCE setting as 30. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. In the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion, the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 need to follow a data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans. 2.0 kV electrospray voltage was applied and automatic gain control (AGC) is responsible for prevention of Orbitrap overfilling. Accumulation of 5E4 ions was to generate MS/MS spectra. In MS scan, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 and first fixed mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis The MS/MS data was screened by Maxquant search engine (v.1.4.1.2) and tandem mass spectra was searched against Bombyx mori database. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing over 2 missing cleavage. Mass error was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and that of ion fragments was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was designated as fixed modification when specifying oxidation on Met as variable modification. In relation to quantitative method, TMT-6-plex was selected in Mascot. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was less than 1% and peptide ion scores ≥ 20. Bioinformatics analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome, derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), was frequently employed to attribute gene and gene product according to biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was conducted to annotate protein pathway and complexes. InterProScan is also able to annotate functional description of identified proteins domain by InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). Subcellular localization was predicted by an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II, namely WoLF PSORT for eukaryotic sequences. Enriched functional analysis of three categories (GO annotation, KEGG pathway, Domain) was performed to further elaborate annotating consequences. Functional enrichment-based clustering analysis was followed in the present study, and quantified proteins were divided into four quantiles according to quantitation ratio: Q1 (0~1/2), Q2 (1/2~1/1.5), Q3 (1.5~2), Q4 (>2). Clustering results were illustrated through a heat map by applying the “heatmap.2” from “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
The domesticated silkworm is an ideal and economic insect model that plays crucial roles in sericulture and bioreactor. Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) is not only an infectious pathogen to B. mori, but also an efficient vector expressing recombinant proteins. Although, the proteomics of silkworm and BmN cell membrane lipid raft towards BmNPV infection had been investigated, proteome results of BmN cells upon BmNPV challenge currently remain ambiguous. In order to explore the interaction between silkworm and BmNPV, we analyzed several pivotal processes of BmNPV infected BmN cell by quantitative mass spectrometry. Our study indicated that a total of 4205 identified proteins, among which 4194 were with quantitative level. Concretely, during BmNPV infection, several transcription factors and epigenetically modified proteins showed substantially different abundance levels. Especially, proteins with binding activity, displayed significant changes in their molecular functions. Disabled non-homologous end joining by BmNPV reflects irreversible breakage of DNA. Nevertheless, highly abundant superoxide dismutase suggests that the cellular defense system is persistently functional in maintaining biochemical homeostasis. Our comparative and quantitative proteomics will be helpful to unravel the dynamics of B.mori after BmNPV infection and could provide new insights to decipher the mechanism of interaction between BmN cell and BmNPV.

### Keywords
Bombyx mori; bmnpv; moleccular function; biological process

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, College of Life Science,
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

### Submitter
Fuxiang Mao

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yu
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, College of Life Science,


