### Accession
PXD001032

### Title
SIK2 phosphorylation in response to glucagon or insulin in murine hepatocytes

### Description
The phosphorylation state of human HA-tagged-SIK2, adenovirally introduced in murine hepatocytes (C57/BL/6 strain) was analysed in unstimulated and in response to glucagon- or insulin- treated conditions. Background:- LKB1 is a master kinase that regulates metabolism and growth through AMPK and 12 other closely-related kinases. Liver-specific ablation of LKB1 causes increased glucose production in hepatocytes in vitro and hyperglycaemia in fasting mice in vivo. The salt-inducible kinases (SIK1, 2 and 3), members of the AMPK-related kinase family, play a key role as gluconeogenic suppressor downstream of LKB1 in the liver. A selective SIK inhibitor (HG-9-91-01) promotes dephosphorylation of transcriptional co-activators CRTC2/3 resulting in enhanced gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose production in hepatocytes, an effect that is abolished when an HG-9-91-01-insensitive-mutant-SIK is introduced or LKB1 is ablated. Although SIK2 was proposed as a key regulator of insulin-mediated suppression of gluconeogenesis, we provide genetic evidence that liver-specific ablation of SIK2 alone has no effect on gluconeogenesis and insulin does not modulate SIK2 phosphorylation/activity. Collectively, we demonstrate that the LKB1-SIK pathway functions as a key gluconeogenic gatekeeper in the liver.

### Sample Protocol
Two methods of Mass Spec analysis used. The first step in both instances was that human HA-SIK2 was adenovirally introduced in mouse primary hepatocytes, left untreated (as control), stimulated with insulin or glucagon, immunoprecipitated and the samples trypsin digested for mass spectrometry/phosphopeptide analysis. The first analysis method used precursor ion scanning to compare the phosphorylation state of SIK2 from control, glucagon & insulin treated murine hepatocytes (performed on on an Applied Biosystems 4000 QTrap coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system. The MS was set up to use a precursor ion scan of m/z 79 in negative ion mode followed by an ion trap high resolution and a high sensitivity MS-MS scan in positive mode), Reference (Williamson BL, Marchese J, Morrice NA. Automated identification and quantification of protein phosphorylation sites by LC/MS on a hybrid triple quadrupole linear ion trap mass spectrometer. Mol Cell Proteomics 5, 337-346 (2006)). For the second analysis method, SIK2 Phosphopeptides from  Glucagon treated hepatocytes were analyzed by LC-MS-MS on a Thermo LTQ-Orbitrap Classic equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) and coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC system. Multi-Stage-Activation was used to provide an MS3 scan of any parent ions showing a neutral loss of 48.9885, 32.6570, 24.4942, allowing for 2+, 3+ and 4+ charge states respectively. The resulting MS3 scan was automatically combined with the relevant MS2 scan prior to data analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analyst (ABSciex) was used to produce mgf files from QTrap data. RAW2msm (Mann Laboratory) was used to produce msm (mgf) files from OrbiTrap data. Database searches were performed against an in house database containing the SIK sequences using the Mascot algorithm Version 2.3 and 2.4 (www.matrixscience.com) to identify peptides. Phosphorylation sites on the peptides were also analyzed with Xcalibur software (V2.2 SP 1.48) and Proteome Discoverer (V1.3 and 1.4) (both Thermo Scientific). Analyst (ABSciex) was used to collate QTrap precursor ion scanning data from the 3 treatment types.

### Publication Abstract
LKB1 is a master kinase that regulates metabolism and growth through adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and 12 other closely related kinases. Liver-specific ablation of LKB1 causes increased glucose production in hepatocytes in vitro and hyperglycaemia in fasting mice in vivo. Here we report that the salt-inducible kinases (SIK1, 2 and 3), members of the AMPK-related kinase family, play a key role as gluconeogenic suppressors downstream of LKB1 in the liver. The selective SIK inhibitor HG-9-91-01 promotes dephosphorylation of transcriptional co-activators CRTC2/3 resulting in enhanced gluconeogenic gene expression and glucose production in hepatocytes, an effect that is abolished when an HG-9-91-01-insensitive mutant SIK is introduced or LKB1 is ablated. Although SIK2 was proposed as a key regulator of insulin-mediated suppression of gluconeogenesis, we provide genetic evidence that liver-specific ablation of SIK2 alone has no effect on gluconeogenesis and insulin does not modulate SIK2 phosphorylation or activity. Collectively, we demonstrate that the LKB1-SIK pathway functions as a key gluconeogenic gatekeeper in the liver.

### Keywords
Crtc2, Ampk-related kinase, Hepatocytes, Glucagon, Hepatic glucose production, Ampk, Lkb1, Sik2, Creb, Insulin, Camp

### Affiliations
Head of Diabetes Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA Campus EPFL Quartier de l'innovation, bâtiment G 1015 Lausanne (Switzerland)
Dundee University, UK

### Submitter
David Campbell

### Lab Head
Dr Kei Sakamoto
Head of Diabetes Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA Campus EPFL Quartier de l'innovation, bâtiment G 1015 Lausanne (Switzerland)


