### Accession
PXD004867

### Title
The human amyloid beta peptide interactome

### Description
The amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide represents a 37 to 49 amino acids endoproteolytic fragment of the amyloid precursor protein. The cellular biology that governs the formation and clearance of Aβ has been understood to play a critical role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD).  The primary objective of this study was to generate an in-depth inventory of human brain proteins that oligomeric preparations of Aβ1-42 can bind to using an unbiased in vitro discovery approach. Synthetic Aβ1-42 peptides and a brain extract generated from adult human frontal lobe tissue served in these studies as baits and biological source material, respectively. oAβ1-42 was prepared by aggregating the peptide at 4 ºC for 24 h, using previously described procedures known to generate amyloid-β-derived diffusible ligands (ADDLs). Because the interaction with a given binding partner may rely on a binding epitope that comprises N- or C-terminal residues of Aβ1-42, two separate experiments (I and II) were conducted, which differed in the orientation the oAβ1-42 bait was tethered to the affinity matrix. To facilitate meaningful comparisons across experiments, the method of Aβ1-42 capture was not based on immunoaffinity reagents. Instead, alternative Aβ1-42 baits were equipped with biotin moieties attached to the N- or C-terminus by a 6-carbon linker chain, enabling their consistent affinity-capture on streptavidin agarose matrices. Biotin-saturated streptavidin agarose matrices served as negative controls and three biological replicates of samples and controls were generated for each of the three separate interactome datasets by reproducing the affinity-capture step side-by-side on three separate streptavidin agarose affinity matrices that had been saturated with the biotinylated baits. To identify differences in protein-protein interactions of monomeric versus oligomeric Aβ1-42, a 3rd interactome experiment was conducted in which oAβ1-42-biotin or mAβ1-42-biotin served as baits. Digitonin-solubilized brain extracts, which are known to comprise extracellular and most cellular proteins (except for nuclear proteins) served as biological starting material, consistent with the main subcellular areas previously reported to harbor Aβ. Following extensive washes of affinity matrices in their protein-bound state, binders to the bait peptides were eluted by rapid acidification, fully denatured in 9 M urea, and trypsinized. To avoid notorious confounders related to variances in the subsequent handling and analysis of samples, individual peptide mixtures were labeled with distinct isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) in a six-plex format, then combined and concomitantly subjected to ZipTip-based pre-analysis clean-up by strong cation exchange (SCX) and reversed phase (RP) separation. Four-hour split-free reversed phase nanospray separations were online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, which was configured to run an MS3 analysis method. 

### Sample Protocol
The biotinylated Aβ oligomers or monomers were captured on Streptavidin UltraLink Resin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Burlington, ON, Canada) by overnight incubation in PBS at 4 °C and continuous agitation on a slow-moving turning wheel. Additional negative control samples were generated by saturation of Streptavidin UltraLink Resin (catalog number 53113, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) with biotin. Subsequently, the bait peptide- or biotin-saturated beads were washed with Lysis Buffer (0.15% digitonin, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0). As biological source materials served human frontal lobe tissue samples from individuals (two males and two females) who had died in their early 70s of non-dementia causes. These samples were adopted from a former Canadian Brain Tissue Bank at the Toronto Western Hospital and are held in -80 °C freezers in the biobank of the Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases. 1 g pieces each of these brain tissue samples were combined and homogenized in Lysis Buffer supplemented with Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mississauga, ON, Canada). Following the removal of insoluble debris by centrifugation for 30 min at 14,000 g, the protein concentration was adjusted to 2 mg/mL before the brain homogenates were added to the pre-saturated affinity capture beads for overnight incubation at 4 °C. Following the affinity capture step, the affinity capture beads (100 μL per biological replicate) were extensively washed in three consecutive wash steps with a total of 150 mL of Lysis Buffer. Subsequently, the beads were additionally washed with 50 mL of 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.0, and transferred to Pierce Spin columns (catalog number 69705, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) to remove primary amines stemming from the Tris buffer and to prepare the samples for elution. Captured proteins were finally eluted by rapid acidification mediated by a solution comprising 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and 20% acetonitrile in deionized water (pH 1.9). Next, sample tubes were moved to a centrifugal evaporator to remove the organic solvent. Additional acidity of the sample was removed following the addition of water and continuous evaporation. Subsequently, protein solutions were denatured by the addition of 9 M urea (to achieve a final concentration of 6 M urea) and 10 min incubation at room temperature. Next, the pH was raised by the addition of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, and proteins were reduced for 30 min at 60°C in the presence of 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), and alkylated for 1 h at room temperature in the presence of 10 mM 4-vinylpyiridine (4-VP). To ensure that the residual urea concentration did not exceed 1.5 M, protein mixtures were diluted with 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB), pH 8.0, to a total volume of 100 μL. Samples were then digested with side-chain-modified porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) overnight at 37°C. The covalent modifications of primary amines with isobaric labels provided in the form of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) or isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) followed instructions provided by the manufacturers. Equal amounts of the labeled digests were pooled into a master mixture and purified with C18 (catalog number A5700310) or SCX (catalog number A5700410) Bond Elut OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada) using manufacturer instructions. Peptide mixtures were finally reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry analysis on a Tribrid Orbitrap Fusion instrument. Instrument parameters during the data acquisition were as described in detail before.

### Data Protocol
The post-acquisition data analyses of interactome data sets was conducted against the human international protein index (IPI) database (Version 3.87) which was queried with Mascot (Version 2.4; Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and Sequest HT search engines within Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Spectra exceeding a stringent false discovery rate (FDR) target of ∆Cn of 0.05 for input data and a FDR of 0.01 for the decoy database search were detected and removed by the Percolator algorithm [76] as described before [73]. PEAKS Studio software (Version 6.0; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) was used to assess the reproducibility of nano-HPLC separations. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages and naturally occurring variable phosphorylations of serines, theonines and tyrosines were considered. Other posttranslational modifications considered were carbamylations, oxidation of methionines and deamidation of glutamines or asparagines.

### Publication Abstract
The amyloid &#x3b2; peptide (A&#x3b2;) is a key player in the etiology of Alzheimer disease (AD), yet a systematic investigation of its molecular interactions has not been reported. Here we identified by quantitative mass spectrometry proteins in human brain extract that bind to oligomeric A&#x3b2;1-42 (oA&#x3b2;1-42) and/or monomeric A&#x3b2;1-42 (mA&#x3b2;1-42) baits. Remarkably, the cyclic neuroendocrine peptide somatostatin-14 (SST14) was observed to be the most selectively enriched oA&#x3b2;1-42 binder. The binding interface comprises a central tryptophan within SST14 and the N-terminus of A&#x3b2;1-42. The presence of SST14 inhibited A&#x3b2; aggregation and masked the ability of several antibodies to detect A&#x3b2;. Notably, A&#x3b2;1-42, but not A&#x3b2;1-40, formed in the presence of SST14 oligomeric assemblies of 50 to 60 kDa that were visualized by gel electrophoresis, nanoparticle tracking analysis and electron microscopy. These findings may be relevant for A&#x3b2;-directed diagnostics and may signify a role of SST14 in the etiology of AD.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Frontal lobe, Amyloid beta, Alzheimer’s disease, Orbitrap, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
University of Toronto


