### Accession
PXD018304

### Title
Multi-layered proteomic analysis for colorectal cancer

### Description
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) plays a role in cell migration and invasion that involve degradation of extracellular matrix proteins as well as vascular remodeling. Increased expression of MMP-2 has often been observed in the tumors of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. In order to unveil the perturbed proteomic signal during MMP-2-induced cancer progression, we analyzed MMP-2 dependent secretome change in HCT116 cancer cells by stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), together with the plasma proteome profile of CRC patients by label-free quantification according to disease progression from TNM stage I to IV. We also analyzed public database of CRC tissue proteome deposited by Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (NCI/NIH). As a strategy for integrating the multi-layered proteomes, we first performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering on plasma and tissue proteomes according to TNM stage, and then Fisher’s exact test to find out which clusters were significantly represented by the secretome decreased by more than 1.5-fold upon MMP-2 knock down. The resultant cluster included CD9-ITGB1-ITGA7 protein complex as well as MMP-2. The proteins included in this cluster were mostly related to cell-cell communications and cell motility, and showed remarkable increased expression in tissue and plasma upon disease progression from TNM I to II. MMP-2 induced activation of FAK phospho-signaling in an activity-dependent manner. With the comparative and integrative multi-layered proteomic analysis, we suggest that high invasiveness featured in the disease progression of colorectal cancer with increased secretion of MMP-2 is because MMP-2 activates FAK signaling through CD9-integrin complex and consequently induces positive feedback of MMP-2 upregulation.

### Sample Protocol
The secretomes (50 µg each) from light and heavy SILAC conditions were pooled. The pooled sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C for 25 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at 25ºC for 30 min. Then, the sample was diluted by 8-fold to decrease urea concentration to at least 1 M and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:25 (w/w) enzyme to protein ratio at 37 ºC for 16 h. Tryptic digest was separated based on isoelectric point by using an OFFGEL electrophoresis fractionator (Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA) as described elsewhere (19). The fractionated peptides were collected into 12 fractions, desalted with C18 macrospin spin column (Harvard Apparatus, MA), dried in vacuo and stored at -20 °C until MS analysis. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.4% acetic acid and analyzed by using a reversed-phase C18 column (20 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 300 Å, packed in-house; Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an Eksigent MDLC system at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5-40%B over 90 min followed by 80%B wash and re-equilibration with 5%B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 120 min. The HPLC system was connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in DDA mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 100,000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9 kV; capillary temperature, 275 ºC. The MS/MS spectra of the 10 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥2 were acquired in the ion-trap with the following options: isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 35%; dynamic exclusion, 30 sec.  The depleted plasma samples (150 µg) were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 25 C for 1 h and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at 25 C for 1 h in the dark. The samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2) and treated with mass spectrometry grade mixed trypsin/lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 C for 16 h. The ratio of enzyme to protein was 1:25 (w/w). Tryptic digests were desalted using a C18 macrospin spin column (Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA) and the eluents were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (miVac Duo concentrator, Genevac, Suffolk, UK). Dried peptide samples were stored at -20 °C until use. Peptides were reconstituted with 0.4% acetic acid and analyzed with a reversed-phase C18 column (20 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 120 Å, packed in-house; Dr. Maisch) on an Eksigent nanoLC-ultra 1D plus system at a flow rate of 3 μL/min. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5% to 50% buffer B over 186 min followed by 80% B wash for 10 min and aqueous re-equilibration at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 230 min. A Q Exactive quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in DDA mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–1800) were acquired with a resolution of 70000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2.5 kV; capillary temperature, 300 C; and s-lens level, 44.0. The MS peak width at half height was <30 s. The MS/MS spectra of the 12 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥2 were acquired with the following options: resolution, 17500; isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 27%; ion selection threshold, 4.00E±03 counts; and peptide match, ‘preferred’.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant (ver.1.5.8.2) software with Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (released in Jan. 2016). In case of secretome, sequences for 199 experimentally validated FBS proteins (common Repository of FBS proteins) were added to the human database to reduce false-positives originated from FBS contamination. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity, up to two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both at the peptide and the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) level. For quantification of SILAC-labeled secretome, multiplicity was set as two to match the number of SILAC labels used (i.e. light and heavy) with Arg10+Lys8 set as heavy. Relative abundance was measured based on the ratio of MS1 resolved peak areas of the isotopic clusters for the SILAC pairs. For quantification of plasma proteome, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
The role of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in tumor cell migration has been widely studied, however, the characteristics and effects of MMP-2 in clinical sample of metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) remain poorly understood. Here, in order to unveil the perturbed proteomic signal during MMP-2 induced cancer progression, we analyzed plasma proteome of CRC patients according to disease progression, HCT116 cancer secretome upon MMP-2 knockdown, and publicly available CRC tissue proteome data. Collectively, the integrative analysis of multi-layered proteomes revealed that a protein cluster containing EMT (Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition)-associated proteins such as CD9-integrin as well as MMP-2. The proteins of the cluster were regulated by MMP-2 perturbation and exhibited significantly increased expressions in tissue and plasma as disease progressed from TNM (Tumor, Node, and Metastasis) stage I to II. Furthermore, we also identified a plausible association between MMP-2 up-regulation and activation of focal adhesion kinase signaling in the proteogenomic analysis of CRC patient tissues. Based on these comparative and integrative analyses, we suggest that the high invasiveness in the metastatic CRC resulted from increased secretion of MMP-2 and CD9-integrin complex mediated by FAK signaling activation.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mmp-2, Colorectal cancer, Silac, Secretome, Focal adhesion kinase, Label-free

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yumi Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Korea Institute of Science and Technology


