### Accession
PXD043162

### Title
Proteomic profiling for elucidating the molecular mechanism in early seed development in rice

### Description
Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying early seed development is important for improving grain yield and quality in crop plants. To investigate the molecular mechanisms that occur during early seed development, we performed comparative label-free quantitative proteomic analysis on developing WT rice seeds between 0 and 1 day after pollination (DAP). A total of 5231 proteins were identified, and 902 proteins showed differential accumulation between 0 and 1 DAP seeds. Further analysis focused on the proteins preferentially expressed at 1 DAP and revealed an enrichment of proteins involved in DNA replication and pyrimidine biosynthetic pathways. Notably, the transcript of OsCTPS1, a cytidine triphosphate synthase known to play an essential role in early endosperm development, did not differ between 0 and 1 DAP, but OsCTPS1 protein accumulated more specifically at 1 DAP than at 0 DAP. We then found that inhibiting phosphorylation increased the stability of this protein. Furthermore, in osctps1-2, minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins were significantly reduced compared to WT at 1 DAP, and mutations in OsMCM5 caused defects in seed development. In this study, we tried to understand the molecular mechanisms of early seed development at the post-transcriptional regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein isolation from rice ovary samples, the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method was performed. Briefly, 1 g of each finely ground powder was homogenized with 10 mL of ice-cold RIPA extraction buffer [150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl), 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)] and centrifuged at 15,922 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The collected clear homogenate was then precipitated with 4 volumes of 12.5% TCA/acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol for overnight at -20 °C. Finally, the resulting pellets were further washed with 80% acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol with centrifugation at 15,922 g for 5 min at 4 °C and stored at -20 °C for further analysis. Sequential protein digestion was performed followed by filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP). Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer [4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5]. Proteins were denatured after sonication for 3 min and heating at 99 °C for 30 min and loaded onto a 30K spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) after dilution to a final volume of 300 μL in urea buffer [8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5]. The buffer was then replaced three times with 300 μL of urea buffer by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min at 20 °C to remove SDS. In addition, cysteine alkylation was performed by adding 200 μL of alkylation buffer [50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark and exchanging the buffer with urea buffer to TEAB [50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5] in a spin filter unit. Trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 5% ACN was then added for digestion and incubated at 37°C for overnight. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The digested peptide samples were desalted using a HLB OASIS column and lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation according to the manufacturer's instructions. After desalting, the dried peptides were redissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer [15 mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN] and loaded onto a proprietary stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reverse phase resin in the 200 μL yellow tip. Before loading the peptide samples, the stage tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% CAN, and equilibrated with loading buffer. After peptide loading, three fractions of each sample were then eluted with pH 10 buffer solution containing 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 60, 80, and 100% ACN. Finally, each fraction was lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80℃ for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, the peptide fractions obtained were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system combined UHPLC Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) instrument and Orbitrap ExplorisTM 240 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, Waltham, USA). The fractionated peptides were dissolved in solvent A (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a Dionex UltiMate ® 3000 UHPLC instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). A two-column system with a trap column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap 100 capillary column, 75 μm × 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) was used for peptide separation. Peptides samples were separated using a 90-min nonlinear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent-B (100% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) in all samples. The electrospray ionization source was coupled to an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 240 MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, Waltham, USA). The resulting peptides were electrosprayed through a coated silica emitting tip (Scientific Instrument Service, NJ, Amwell Township, USA) at an ion spray voltage of 2000 eV. Mass spectra were measured in a data-dependent mode for the 15 most abundant peaks (Top15 method). Precursor ions were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z in a mass range of 350-1800 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 x 106 and the MS/MS isolation window was 1.2 m/z. Ion activation/dissociation with Higher Energy C-trap Dissociation (HCD) scans were acquired at 35,000 resolution and 32 normalized collision energy (NCE). The AGC target for MS/MS was 2 x 105. The maximum ion injection time for the survey scan and MS/MS scan was 30 ms and 120 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0) was used to analyze the acquired LC-MS/MS data. The 3-replicates of the MS/MS spectra were matched against the Oryza sativa database (MSU v6.0, 67,393 entries). Label-free quantification (LFQ) data were processed using Andromeda's default precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for subsequent searches. LFQ data were searched based on 0.5 Da of a product mass tolerance with a maximum of two missed tryptic digests. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, acetylation of lysine residues, and oxidation of methionine residues were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR), set at 1% for peptide identifications, was determined based on a reverse nonsense version of the original database. Sequential statistical analysis of the LFQ data was performed using Perseus (ver. 1.6.15.0) software. Missing value imputation of protein intensities by calculating normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8), hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and multiple-sample test (one-way ANOVA) controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, and the determination of significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change) between different samples using Perseus software. Functional classification including subcellular localization and MapMan analysis were performed using CELLO2GO and MapMan software, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying early seed development is important in improving the grain yield and quality of crop plants. We performed a comparative label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of developing rice seeds for the WT and <i>osctps1-2</i> mutant, encoding a cytidine triphosphate synthase previously reported as the <i>endospermless 2</i> (<i>enl2</i>) mutant in rice, harvested at 0 and 1 d after pollination (DAP) to understand the molecular mechanism of early seed development. In total, 5231 proteins were identified, of which 902 changed in abundance between 0 and 1 DAP seeds. Proteins that preferentially accumulated at 1 DAP were involved in DNA replication and pyrimidine biosynthetic pathways. Notably, an increased abundance of OsCTPS1 was observed at 1 DAP; however, no such changes were observed at the transcriptional level. We further observed that the inhibition of phosphorylation increased the stability of this protein. Furthermore, in <i>osctps1-2</i>, minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins were significantly reduced compared with those in the WT at 1 DAP, and mutations in <i>OsMCM5</i> caused defects in seed development. These results highlight the molecular mechanisms underlying early seed development in rice at the post-transcriptional level.

### Keywords
Mcm proteins, Proteomic profiling, Ctp synthase, Protein stability, Early seed development, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biosience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Biosience, Pusan National University, Miryang 50463, Republic of Korea


