### Accession
PXD034383

### Title
Venom dynamics across populations of Nematostella

### Description
Here we perform semi quantitative analysist of the proteome of Nematostella vectensis from different locations in the USA to compare abundance of different toxins

### Sample Protocol
Semi-quantitative MS/MS analysis was performed using adults (four replicates, each made of three individuals) from both North Carolina and Florida. Samples were snap frozen and lysed using in 8M urea and 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Lysed samples were centrifuged (22,000 × g, 20 min, 4°C) and supernatant collected. Protein concentrations were measured with BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Ten μg of protein were dissolved in 100 μl of 8M urea, 10 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 30 min at 22°C. Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added and followed by incubation for 30 min (22°C, in the dark). The samples were diluted with 8 volumes of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 followed by addition of sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) (0.4 μg/ sample) and incubation overnight at 37°C. The peptides were acidified by addition of 0.4% formic acid and transferred to C18 home-made Stage tips for desalting. Peptide concentration was determined by Absorbance at 280 nm and 0.3 µg of peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument, Ultimate 3000 Dionex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). Peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid were separated without a trap column over an 80 min acetonitrile gradient run at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min on a reverse phase 25-cm-long C18 column (75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo PepMapRSLC). The instrument settings were as described by (Scheltema et al., 2014). The Q Exactive HF, a Benchtop mass spectrometer with a pre-filter, high-performance quadrupole and an ultra-high-field Orbitrap analyzer. Survey scans (300–1,650 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection time 20 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 27). A resolution of 60,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions, with “peptide preferable” profile were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (target value 1E5 charges, maximum ion injection times 25 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 20 sec. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). To avoid a carryover, the column was washed with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 25 min between samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 2.0.3.0. Peak lists were searched against an NVE FASTA sequence database. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and allowed up to two miscleavages. The ‘match-between-runs’ option was used. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino-acids were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). MaxLFQ allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction.  Statistical analysis (n=3) was performed using the Perseus statistical package, Version 1.6.2.2 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Only those proteins for which at least 3 valid LFQ values were obtained in at least one sample group were accepted for statistical analysis by t-test (p-value < 0.05). After application of this filter, a random value was substituted for proteins for which LFQ could not be determined ("Imputation" function of Perseus). The imputed values were in the range of 10% of the median value of all the proteins in the sample and allowed calculation of p-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Venom, Evolution, Nematostella

### Affiliations
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences Faculty of Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
joachim surm

### Lab Head
Dr Yehu Moran
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences Faculty of Science The Hebrew University of Jerusalem


