### Accession
PXD012419

### Title
Pratylenchus penetrans PME -  Identification and characterization of the first pectin methylesterase gene discovered in the root lesion nematode Pratylenchus penetrans

### Description
Similar to other plant-parasitic nematodes, root lesion nematodes possess an array of enzymes that are involved in degradation of the plant cell wall. Here we report the identification of a gene encoding a cell wall degrading enzyme, pectin methylesterase PME (EC 3.1.1.11), in the root lesion nematode Pratylenchus penetrans. Both genomic and coding sequences of the gene were cloned for this species, showing the presence of four introns that excluded a potential bacterial contamination. Expression of the Pp-pme gene was localized in the esophageal glands of P. penetrans as determined by in situ hybridization. Temporal expression of Pp-pme in planta was validated for early time points of infection. The possible function and activity of the gene were assessed by transient expression of Pp-pme in N. benthamiana plants via a Potato virus X-based vector. To our knowledge, this is the first report on identification and characterization of a PME gene within the phylum Nematoda.

### Sample Protocol
Symptomatic leaves from two individual plants infected with PVX-Pp-PME recombinant virus vector and two plants infected with empty vector (PVX-WT) were sent to Bioproximity LLC (Virginia, USA) for protein extraction and identification services to reveal top 100 most abundant protein groups expressed in the infected plants.  All procedures were performed according to the company protocols and protein assays were carried out on a Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (https://www.bioproximity.com/protein-identification). The obtained Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography - Tandem Mass Spectrometer (UPLC-MS/MS) peptide datasets

### Data Protocol
Data file .mzML was exported as Mascot generic format (.mgf) file using PRIDE Inspector software (Perez-Riverol et al., 2016) for protein identification and validation in the PeptideShaker version 1.16.36 (Vaudel et al., 2015). Protein identification was performed against a concatenated target/decoy version of Nicotiana tabacum cv. TN90 proteome (ID UP000084051) (Sierro et al., 2014) retrieved from the UniProtKB (Universal Protein Resource Knowledgebase - http://www.uniprot.org/), with 73,605 proteins complemented with Pp-PME protein sequence (3 Jan, 2019). Decoy sequences were generated by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI 3.3.11 (Barsnes and Vaudel, 2018). Identifications settings were: Trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm for precursor m/z tolerance (MS1) and 0.5 Da for fragment m/z tolerance MS2; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464Da), and variable modifications: deamination of N (+0.984016 Da), deamination of Q (+0.984016 Da), oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), pyrolidone from E (-18.010565 Da) and pyrolidone from Q (-17.026549 Da).   Peptides and protein inference were identified from the spectrum identification results. Protein Inference was considered with 100 % confidence and when identification was based on 2 or more validate peptides. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Reports were exported in .xlsx format for evaluation and curation in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Similar to other plant-parasitic nematodes, root lesion nematodes possess an array of enzymes that are involved in the degradation of the plant cell wall. Here we report the identification of a gene encoding a cell wall-degrading enzyme, pectin methylesterase PME (EC 3.1.1.11), in the root lesion nematode Pratylenchus penetrans. Both genomic and coding sequences of the gene were cloned for this species, that included the presence of four introns which eliminated a possible contamination from bacteria. Expression of the Pp-pme gene was localized in the esophageal glands of P. penetrans as determined by in situ hybridization. Temporal expression of Pp-pme in planta was validated at early time points of infection. The possible function and activity of the gene were assessed by transient expression of Pp-pme in plants of Nicotiana benthamiana plants via a Potato virus X-based vector. To our knowledge, this is the first report on identification and characterization of a PME gene within the phylum Nematoda.

### Keywords
Plant parasitic nematode, Lc-ms/ms, Pme

### Affiliations
Molecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, United States of America
ICAAM - University of Evora

### Submitter
Cláudia Vicente

### Lab Head
Dr Paulo Vieira and Len Nemchinov
Molecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, United States of America


