### Accession
PXD017456

### Title
A balanced Oct4 protein interaction network is crucial for maintaining pluripotency

### Description
Oct4 is considered a master transcription factor for pluripotent cell self-renewal and embryo development. It primarily collaborates with other transcriptional factors or coregulators to maintain pluripotency. However, it is still unclear how Oct4 interacts with its partners. Here, we show that the Oct4 linker interface mediates competing and balanced Oct4 protein interactions which are crucial for maintaining pluripotency. Linker mutant ESCs maintain the key pluripotency genes expression, but show decreased expression of self-renewal genes and increased expression of differentiation genes which result in impaired ESCs self-renewal and early embryonic lethality. Linker mutation dose not affect Oct4 genomic binding and transactivation potential, but breaks the balanced Oct4 interactome. In mutant ESCs, the interaction between Oct4 and Klf5 was decreased, but interactions between Oct4 and Cbx1, Ctr9, Cdc73 were increased which disrupt the epigenetic state of ESCs. Overexpression of Klf5 or knockdown Cbx1, Cdc73 rescue the cellular phenotype of linker mutant ESCs by rebalancing Oct4 interactome indicating that different partners interact with Oct4 competitively. Thus, by showing how Oct4 interacts with different partners, we provide novel molecular insights to explain how Oct4 contributes to the maintenance of pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling: Flag-WT and Flag-L80A Oct4 ZHBTc4 ESCs were cultured in SILAC DMEM mediumwithout lysine and arginine (with glutamine) (88364, Thermo Fisher), containing 10% dialyzed serum (F0392, Sigma), light Lysine and Arginine or heavy Lysine and Arginine (13C, 15N)(Silantes) for 6 passages. Then the labelling efficiency was determined by mass spectrometry.  Crosslinking Co-IP: Cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature followed by quenching with 125 mM glycine. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM 0.5 M EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% IGEPAL CA630, 0.25% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, Sigma) for 30 min at 4C and washed in lysis buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA). The nuclear pellet was resuspended in IP Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20% Glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 1.5 mM MgCl2) containing protease inhibitor cocktail followed by mild sonication using Diagenode Bioruptor. Insoluble proteins were separated by spinning for 30 min at 13000 rpm at 4 C. The extract was incubated with anti-flag M2 agarose beads (A2220, Sigma) and benzonase (71205-3, Merck) overnight on a rotating wheel. The beads were washed in IP buffer for 5 times and eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer for 5 mins.    Mass Spectroemtry: Proteins eluted from the beads were first acetone precipitated to remove detergent and salts and were then subjected to an in-solution digest. Briefly, following solubilization of the precipitate in 50µl UB (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 20mM HEPES pH7.5), proteins were first reduced by addition of DTT (10mM final conc.) for 1 h at 37°C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (55mM final conc.) at RT in the dark for 30min and then pre-digested using LysC (1µg/sample) for 2-3h at 37°C. Following dilution of the digest with 250µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, trypsin was added (0.5µg/sample) and the digest completed by over night incubation at 37°C. Digests were then acidified by addition of TFA and subjected to Stage tipping to remove salts and contaminants. Tryptic digests were stored on-tip at 4°C until further analyzed by mass spectrometry.  All mass spectrometry measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) online coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 nano-HPLC via a Nanospray Flex ion source and an 30cm long in-house packed reversed-phase fused silica capillary column with integrated emitter tip (nanoseparations; 360µm OD, 75µm ID; Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9µm by Dr. Maisch). Samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and separated using a multilinear gradient running from 2 – 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) in 220min, from 40 – 60% B in 20 min, followed by a washing step at 98% solvent B and re-equilibration at starting conditions. Mass spectrometry was performed in data-dependent mode (spray voltage 2.1 kV; column temperature maintained at 45°C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany)). MS1 scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range to m/z 300-1750. AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Fragmentation of peptides was achieved by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a top17 method (MS2 scan resolution 15.000 at 200 m/z; AGC Target value 1E5; maximum fill time 50 ms; isolation width 1.6 m/z; normalized collision energy 27). Dynamic exclusion of previously identified peptides was allowed and set to 20 s, singly charged compounds and peptides assigned with a charge of 8 and more were excluded from the analysis. Data were recorded using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.5.3.8; Cox and Mann, 2008)). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse mouse Uniprot database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; version from 12/2015) including common lab contaminants. Allowed initial mass deviation were set to 20ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, in the search for precursor and fragment ions. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids was selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the ‘match between runs’ option was turned on. Arg10 and Lys8 were defined as the heavy SILAC amino acids, carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N - acetylation at the protein N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required. All mass spectrometry proteomics data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) (Vizcaino et al., 2014) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier XXXXXXXX The list of identified proteins was first filtered and potential contaminants, reverse hits derived from the target-decoy search as well as proteins that were identified by a single modified peptide only were removed. In addition, only proteins that were identified by at least two peptides, one of which being unique for the protein group were considered in the subsequent outlier analysis. To determine which of the proteins were enriched in the co-immunoprecipitation experiments significance B was calculated in Perseus (version 1.5.6.0; Tyanova et al. Nature Methods volume 13, pages731–740(2016)) on log2 transformed H/L ratios using a p-value of  0.05 for truncation. Only proteins determined as significant outliers were considered for further evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oct4, Protein-protein interaction, Embryonal development, Proteomics, Stem cells, Transcription factor, Mass spectrometry, Pluripotency, Pou5f1

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanayltical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanayltical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


