### Accession
PXD039927

### Title
Composition of the mitoribosome of Diplonema papillatum

### Description
Biosynthesis of mitochondrial genome-encoded proteins is carried out by the mitoribosome, a specialized apparatus that has evolved and diverged dramatically since its bacterial origin. Recent studies across various eukaryotes have demonstrated widespread structural and compositional diversity of mitoribosomes. We used affinity pulldown of four mitoribosomal proteins to carry out a detailed analysis of mitoribosomes in Diplonema papillatum, the type species of diplonemids, a widespread group of single-celled marine flagellates. Using as baits mitoribosomal proteins integrating at distinct sites and phases during subunit maturation also allowed us to sample populations of mitoribosome assembly intermediates.

### Sample Protocol
About 5×108 cells were used for each immunoprecipitation experiment. Cells were lysed in 1 mL of IPP150 lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH6.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% IGEPAL, 1× cOmplete EDTA-free) by passage five times through a syringe fitted with a 30-gauge needle. The resulting cell lysate was cleared by two centrifugation steps (15,871×g, 10 min, 4 °C) and subsequently incubated with 50 µL of IgG sepharose 6 Fast Flow (Sigma) for 3 h at 4 °C under rotation. Following five washes with IPP150 (the last one without detergent), bound proteins were eluted twice using 100 µL of 0.1 M glycine pH3.0 for 5 min at RT with rotation. Eluates were immediately neutralized by the addition of 1M Tris pH9.0. Protein samples were taken from the input, flow through, and elution fractions for verification of immunoprecipitation by western blotting. The remaining eluates were stored at −80°C until submission for tryptic digest and mass spectrometry. Trypsin-digestion of eluted PrA-tagged mtRP containing complexes was performed prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) as described in https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234918.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW format was converted to mzML using ThermoRawFileParser v1.3.2. Peptide searches in the raw MS/MS datasets were performed using MSFragger v3.3, followed by filtering and scoring by Philosopher v4.0.0 and quantification by IonQuant v1.7.5. We searched for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) in a custom database of D. papillatum nuclear and mitochondrial proteins supplemented with frequent contaminants and Protein A. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. For trypsin digestions, we allowed up to two missed cleavage sites per protein. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, serine and threonine phosphorylation, and conversion of glutamine and glutamate at peptide N-termini to pyrrolidone-carboxylic acid were specified as variable modifications (up to three per peptide). Minimum and maximum peptide size were set to 7 and 50 amino acid residues and to 500 and 6,000 Da, respectively. False discovery rates for PSM and protein identification probability were determined by the target-reversed decoy approach and set to 1%. IonQuant data processing was done for all ions using the MaxLFQ strategy and included normalization, but not match-between-runs option. Precursor intensity-based protein quantification was done by calculating iBAQ values. Precursor intensities determined by IonQuant were normalized by the theoretical number of trypsin peptides as determined by the MS-Digest tool from the ProteinProspector v6.3.1 suite. We used the following parameters: trypsin digest; no missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl at Cys residues as fixed modification; no variable modification; minimal length of 7 amino acids; and peptide mass range from 900 to 5,000 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial ribosome (mitoribosome) has diverged drastically from its evolutionary progenitor, the bacterial ribosome. Structural and compositional diversity is particularly striking in the phylum Euglenozoa, with an extraordinary protein gain in the mitoribosome of kinetoplastid protists. Here we report an even more complex mitoribosome in diplonemids, the sister-group of kinetoplastids. Affinity pulldown of mitoribosomal complexes from Diplonema papillatum, the diplonemid type species, demonstrates that they have a mass of &gt; 5 MDa, contain as many as 130 integral proteins, and exhibit a protein-to-RNA ratio of 11:1. This unusual composition reflects unprecedented structural reduction of ribosomal RNAs, increased size of canonical mitoribosomal proteins, and accretion of three dozen lineage-specific components. In addition, we identified &gt;50 candidate assembly factors, around half of which contribute to early mitoribosome maturation steps. Because little is known about early assembly stages even in model organisms, our investigation of the diplonemid mitoribosome illuminates this process. Together, our results provide a foundation for understanding how runaway evolutionary divergence shapes both biogenesis and function of a complex molecular machine.

### Keywords
['Assembly intermediate', 'Diplonema papillatum', 'Immunoprecipitation', 'Lc-msms', 'Protist', 'Mitoribosome']

### Affiliations
['Université de Montréal', 'Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada']

### Submitter
['Matus Valach']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada', 'email': 'gertraud.burger@umontreal.ca', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Gertraud Burger', 'id': '2513181'}]

