### Accession
PXD031333

### Title
Schistosoma mansoni egg-derived thioredoxin and Sm14 drive the development of IL-10 producing regulatory B cells

### Description
During chronic schistosome infections, a complex regulatory network is induced to regulate the host immune system, in which IL-10-producing regulatory B (Breg) cells play a significant role. Schistosoma mansoni soluble egg antigens (SEA) are bound and internalized by B cells and induce both human and mouse IL-10 producing Breg cells. To identify Breg-inducing proteins in SEA, we fractionated SEA by size exclusion chromatography and found 6 active fractions (out of 18) in the high, medium and low MW range. The high MW fractions were rich in heavily glycosylated molecules, including multi-fucosylated proteins. Using SEA glycoproteins purified by affinity chromatography and synthetic glycans coupled to gold nanoparticles, we investigated the role of these glycan structures in inducing IL-10 production by B cells. Then, we performed proteomics analysis on active low MW fractions and identified a number of proteins with putative immunomodulatory properties, notably thioredoxin (SmTrx1) and the fatty acid binding protein Sm14. Subsequent splenic murine B cell stimulations with recombinant SmTrx1 and Sm14 showed their ability to dose-dependently induce IL-10 production and FoxP3 Treg cell priming by B cells. Identification of unique Breg cells-inducing molecules may pave the way to innovative therapeutic strategies for inflammatory and auto-immune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
S. mansoni eggs were isolated from collagenase-digested hamster livers, 50 days post infection. Isolated eggs were washed in RPMI medium with 300 U/mL penicillin, 600 µg/mL streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and kept at -80°C. SEA was prepared as previously described (42). Antigen preparation was checked for endotoxin contamination (less than 40 ng/mg of protein) as tested by Limulus Amoebocyte Lysate (LAL) test. 4 mg of SEA was dialyzed against PBS with Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassettes (3.5K MWCO, Thermo Fisher Scientific, according to manufacturer’s protocol) and then fractionated using Sephacryl S300HR column (diameter 1 cm, length 20 cm) and AKTA Pure apparatus (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). SEA material was separated according to size at 4°C, using PBS at 0.3 mL/min. Protein concentrations in SEA fractions was determined by BCA (Pierce BCA Protein assay kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For sample clean-up, a short SDS-PAGE run of fractions F12, F13 and F14 was performed. Gels were stained with SimplyBlue™ Safe Stain (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at RT and washed with distilled water for 3 hours. The full lane corresponding to each fraction was cut into four bands, and the proteins in each band were then subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol (10 mM), alkylation with iodoacetamide (50 mM) and in-gel digestion with trypsin (Worthington Enzymes), using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices, lyophilized, dissolved in solvent A (95/3/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v/v), and subsequently analyzed by online C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm). The gradient was run from 10 to 40% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/FA v/v/v) in 30 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS (top-10 mode) with a normalized collision energy of 32 % and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. mansoni database (WormBase ParaSite, version 15.0, https://parasite.wormbase.org/Schistosoma_mansoni_prjea36577/, 14499 entries) in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo), using Mascot Version 2.2.07 (Matrix Science). The following settings were used: 10 ppm and 20 milli mass units deviation for precursor and fragment masses, respectively; trypsin was set as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were oxidation (on Met) and acetylation on the protein N-terminus. For the searches, the data from the four gel bands per sample (see above) were merged. Only proteins identified with at least two unique peptides were subsequently selected.

### Publication Abstract
During chronic schistosome infections, a complex regulatory network is induced to regulate the host immune system, in which IL-10-producing regulatory B (Breg) cells play a significant role. Schistosoma mansoni soluble egg antigens (SEA) are bound and internalized by B cells and induce both human and mouse IL-10 producing Breg cells. To identify Breg-inducing proteins in SEA, we fractionated SEA by size exclusion chromatography and found 6 fractions able to induce IL-10 production by B cells (out of 18) in the high, medium and low molecular weight (MW) range. The high MW fractions were rich in heavily glycosylated molecules, including multi-fucosylated proteins. Using SEA glycoproteins purified by affinity chromatography and synthetic glycans coupled to gold nanoparticles, we investigated the role of these glycan structures in inducing IL-10 production by B cells. Then, we performed proteomics analysis on active low MW fractions and identified a number of proteins with putative immunomodulatory properties, notably thioredoxin (SmTrx1) and the fatty acid binding protein Sm14. Subsequent splenic murine B cell stimulations and hock immunizations with recombinant SmTrx1 and Sm14 showed their ability to dose-dependently induce IL-10 production by B cells both in vitro and in vivo. Identification of unique Breg cells-inducing molecules may pave the way to innovative therapeutic strategies for inflammatory and auto-immune diseases.

### Keywords
Schistosoma b cells

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Leiden University Medical Center Leiden the Netherlands

### Submitter
Paul Hensbergen

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Hensbergen
Leiden University Medical Center Leiden the Netherlands


