### Accession
PXD005216

### Title
The differential plasma proteome of obese and overweight individuals undergoing a nutritional weight loss and maintenance intervention

### Description
The nutritional intervention program “DiOGenes” focuses on how obesity can be prevented and treated from a dietary perspective. We have generated differential plasma proteome profiles in the DiOGenes cohort to identify proteins associated with weight loss and maintenance and explore their relation to body mass index, fat mass, insulin resistance and sensitivity. Relative protein quantification was obtained at baseline and after combined weight loss/maintenance phases using isobaric tagging and MS/MS. 473 subjects were measured at baseline and end of the intervention; 183 proteins were quantified in more than 70% of the plasma samples. The MS-based proteomic analysis of this large cohort of non-diabetic overweight and obese individuals concomitantly identified known and novel proteins associated with weight loss and maintenance. ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00390637

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Full details characterizing the workflow and describing the laboratory analysis methodology were previously reported in [1] and [2]. From 25 µL of each plasma sample, 14 abundant plasma proteins were removed, following the manufacturer instructions, with MARS columns (Agilent Technologies) and HPLC systems (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an HTC-PAL (CTC Analytics AG) fraction collectors. After immuno-depletion, samples were snap-freezed. Buffer exchange was performed with Strata-X 33u Polymeric RP (30mg/1mL) cartridges mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold, all from Phenomenex. Samples were subsequently evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 °C. Reduction, alkylation, digestion, tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling, and solid-phase extraction sample purification (Oasis HLB and SCX) were performed on a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler (Hamilton). The pooled 6-plex TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. RP-LC MS/MS. The samples were dissolved in 500 µL H2O/CH3CN/FA 96.9/3/0.1 for RP-LC MS/MS. LC MS/MS was performed on two identical systems composed of a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1.  For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1500 Th. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation at 35% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2 Th), with a resolution of 15000, first mass at m/z = 100 Th, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms in the OT. A maximum of 10 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge-states were rejected from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 seconds within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 Th was used. Each sample was analyzed once on each of the two independent but identical RP-LC MS/MS platforms.  References: [1] Cominetti, O., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Oller Moreno, S., et al., Proteomic biomarker discovery in 1000 human plasma samples with mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2016, 15, 389-399. [2] Dayon, L., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Cominetti, O., Kussmann, M., Comprehensive and scalable highly automated MS-based proteomic workflow for clinical biomarker discovery in human plasma. J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 3837-3845.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantitation and identification methodologies were previously detailed in [1]. Briefly, the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (24/07/2013 release) including the LACB sequence (20268 sequences in total) was used for protein identification. Mascot 2.4.0, (Matrix Sciences) and Scaffold Q+ 4.2.1 (Proteome Software) were employed. Both peptide and protein false discovery rates were fixed at 1%, with a 2 unique peptide criterion. Relative quantitative protein values were exported as Log2 of the protein ratio fold changes with respect to their measurements in the biological plasma reference sample (i.e., pool of all individual samples collected at CID3). Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML files before deposition to the ProteomeXchange Consortium to delete human patient identifications from files and substitute them by untraceable codes.  Reference: [1] Cominetti, O., Núñez Galindo, A., Corthésy, J., Oller Moreno, S., et al., Proteomic biomarker discovery in 1000 human plasma samples with mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2016, 15, 389-399.

### Publication Abstract
Holistic human proteome maps are expected to complement comprehensive profile assessment of health and disease phenotypes. However, methodologies to analyze proteomes in human tissue or body fluid samples at relevant scale and performance are still limited in clinical research. Their deployment and demonstration in large enough human populations are even sparser. In the present study, we have characterized and compared the plasma proteomes of two large independent cohorts of obese and overweight individuals using shotgun mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Herein, we showed, in both populations from different continents of about 500 individuals each, the concordance of plasma protein MS measurements in terms of variability, gender-specificity, and age-relationship. Additionally, we replicated several known and new associations between proteins, clinical and molecular variables, such as insulin and glucose concentrations. In conclusion, our MS-based analyses of plasma samples from independent human cohorts proved the practical feasibility and efficiency of a large and unified discovery/replication approach in proteomics, which was also recently coined "rectangular" design.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Obesity, Biomarker, Proteomics, Diabetes, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


