### Accession
PXD038835

### Title
Triggering the polyurethane and polyethylene-degrading potential of filamentous fungi secretomes

### Description
In the present study, we screened various fungi for their ability to degrade intact polymers, such as ether-based PU and LDPE, using Impranil and a mixture of long-chain alkanes, not only as sole carbon sources but also as enzyme indicators for polymer degradation. The agar plate screening revealed 3 fungal strains belonging to Fusarium and Aspergillus genera, which were further cultured in presence of the same carbon sources, and their secretome was utilized for polymer degradation. Especially for ether-based PU, the secreted proteins of a Fusarium species reduced the weight and the molecular weight of the sample by 24.5 and 20.4%, respectively, while at the same time the secretome of an Aspergillus species caused changes in the molecular structure of LDPE. The proteomic analysis followed proved that the enzymes induced in presence of Impranil can selectively degrade the urethane bond of ether-based PU, a discovery that offers a new alternative in PU waste treatment. Meanwhile, the mechanism of LDPE degradation was not completely understood, although the presence of oxidative enzymes probably accompanied by reactive oxygen species, could be the main factors contributing to polymer functionalization.

### Sample Protocol
1. Fungal cultures and protein extracts After selecting the most promising fungal strains for PU and PE degradation, the secreted proteins in presence of Impranil and MM/lcAlk solution were identified by proteomic analysis. Specifically, each strain was initially grown in 50 mL MMI, MMH, and MMHA at 27 oC, under continuous stirring at 120 rpm for 4 days. The preculture was used for the inoculation (10% v/v) of a 500 mL sterilized growth medium, which was incubated under the same conditions. Subsequently, the culture broth was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 15 min at 4 ℃, sterilized using a 0.22 um filter, and concentrated 10-fold using an Amicon ultrafiltration apparatus (exclusion size, 10 kDa; Amicon chamber 8400 with membrane Diaflo PM10, Millipore, Billerica, MA). The concentrated protein extract was dialyzed overnight against a 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.0), freeze-dried under vacuum, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. 2. Sample preparation The freeze-dried protein extracts were dissolved in 5 % SDS in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a final concentration of 1 µg µl-1. To remove sugars, an aliquot from each sample containing 100 µg of protein was filtered with a 3 kDa Nanosep filter (Pall) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Proteins retained on the filter membrane were re-dissolved in 300 µl 5 % SDS in 50 mM TEAB and reduced by the addition of 15 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55 °C followed by alkylation by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2 % to lower the pH to 1, followed by addition of 7 volumes of 90 % methanol in 100 mM TEAB at pH 7.55.  Samples were loaded on mini S-trap columns (Protifi) in aliquots of 400 µl centrifuged each time for 30 seconds at 4000 xg, followed by 3 washing steps with 400 µl 90 % methanol in 100 mM TEAB. Then, 1 µg of MS-grade trypsin (Promega) in 125 µl 50 mM TEAB was added onto the filter and incubated overnight at 37 °C to digest the proteins. Finally, peptides were eluted from the S-trap columns in 3 centrifugation steps of 1 minute at 4000 x g, first with 80 µl 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µl 0.2 % formic acid and finally with 80 µl 50 % acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were transferred into an MS vial, dried completely by vacuum drying and re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) for an additional purification step on Omix C18 tips (Agilent). The resulting purified peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying. 3. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1 % TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and firstly loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Then, they were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ GEN2 column and eluted by a stepped gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) to 30 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 135 min up to 50 % MS solvent B in 15 min, followed by a 5 min wash reaching 95 % solvent B, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano- LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.0 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2,000, AGC target 3 ×E6  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms), acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 5 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 50.000 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3xE4, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8 positively charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25 % Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project (Chiva et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS samples were searched with MaxQuant v2.0.3.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016) against their corresponding proteome and the MaxQuant common contaminant database with default search settings, including, a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 1 % on peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein level. Reversed sequences of all protein entries were concatenated to the database for estimation of the FDR. The sample of Fusarium oxysporum BPOP18 and the sample of Fusarium sp. IA2 grown on Impranil were searched against the proteome of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. narcissi (UP000290540, 20595 sequences) and proteins were quantified with the iBAQ (intensity Based Absolute Quantification) algorithm (Schwanhäusser et al., 2013). The 2 LC-MS/MS samples of MM36 grown in the presence of hexadecane and MM/lcAlk solution were searched together against the proteome of Aspergillus transmontanensis (UP000325433, 14,200 sequences), matching between runs was enabled and proteins were quantified with the iBAQ and the MaxLFQ algorithm (Schwanhäusser et al., 2013) for relative quantification using a minimum ratio count of 2 unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The uncontrollable disposal of plastic waste has raised the concern of the scientific community, which tries to face this environmental burden by discovering and applying new techniques. Regarding the biotechnology field, several important microorganisms possessing the necessary enzymatic arsenal to utilize recalcitrant synthetic polymers as an energy source have been discovered. In the present study, we screened various fungi for their ability to degrade intact polymers, such as ether-based polyurethane (PU) and low-density polyethylene (LDPE). For this, ImpranIil&#xae; DLN-SD and a mixture of long-chain alkanes were used as sole carbon sources, indicating not only the most promising strains in agar plate screening but also inducing the secretion of depolymerizing enzymatic activities, useful for polymer degradation. The agar plate screening revealed three fungal strains belonging to Fusarium and Aspergillus genera, whose secretome was further studied for its ability to degrade the aforementioned non-treated polymers. Specifically for ether-based PU, the secretome of a Fusarium species reduced the sample mass and the average molecular weight of the polymer by 24.5 and 20.4%, respectively, while the secretome of an Aspergillus species caused changes in the molecular structure of LDPE, as evidenced by FTIR. The proteomics analysis revealed that the enzymatic activities induced in presence of Impranil&#xae; DLN-SD can be associated with urethane bond cleavage, a fact which was also supported by the observed degradation of the ether-based PU. Although, the mechanism of LDPE degradation was not completely elucidated, the presence of oxidative enzymes could be the main factor contributing to polymer modification.

### Keywords
Fungi, Lc-msms, Label free, Secretome, Plastics

### Affiliations
Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
 Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Romanos Siaperas

### Lab Head
Dr Evangelos Topakas
Industrial Biotechnology & Biocatalysis Group, Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece


### SDRF
- organism: Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium sp., Aspergillus sp.
- strain/breed: BPOP18, IA2, MM36
- organism part: culture supernatant
- disease: not available
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

