### Accession
PXD043435

### Title
Hijacking of Nucleotide Biosynthesis and Deamidation-mediated Glycolysis by an Oncogenic Herpesvirus

### Description
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the causative agent of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) and multiple types of B cellmalignancies. Emerging evidence demonstrates that KSHV reprograms host-cell central carbon metabolic pathways, which contributesto viral persistence and tumorigenesis. However, the mechanisms underlying KSHV-mediated metabolic reprogramming remain poorlyunderstood. Carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 2, aspartate transcarbamoylase, and dihydroorotase (CAD) is a key enzyme of the denovo pyrimidine synthesis, and was recently identified to deamidate the NF-κB subunit RelA to promote aerobic glycolysis and cellproliferation. Here we report that KSHV infection exploits CAD for nucleotide synthesis and glycolysis. Mechanistically, KSHV vCyclin binds to and hijacks cyclin-dependent kinase CDK6 to phosphorylate Ser-1900 on CAD, thereby activating CAD-mediatedpyrimidine synthesis and RelA-deamidation-mediated glycolytic reprogramming. Correspondingly, genetic depletion orpharmacological inhibition of CDK6 and CAD potently impeded KSHV lytic replication and thwarted tumorigenesis of primaryeffusion lymphoma (PEL) cells in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, our work defines a viral metabolic reprogramming mechanismunderpinning KSHV oncogenesis, which may spur the development of new strategies to treat KSHV-associated malignancies and otherdiseases.

### Sample Protocol
To identify CAD phosphorylation site(s) by vCyclin and CDK6, HEK293T cells were transfected with an expression plasmid containing CDK6 or vCyclin. Whole cell lysates (WCLs) were prepared with the lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and subjected to sonication, reduction (5 mM DTT), and alkylation (25 mM IAA). WCLs were then digested with trypsin overnight and peptides were purified by the C18 Spin Tips (Thermofisher) according to the manufacturer’s instruction, before the samples were dried by Speedvac centrifugation (Thermofisher).              
Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed as previously described. Briefly, the tryptic peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (80% CAN, 6% TFA) and transferred to the Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) spin columns (Thermofisher). The columns were then washed extensively with the wash buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and phosphopeptides were eluted with the elution buffers (1: 10% NH4OH, 2: 80% ACN, 2% FA). Finally, samples were dried at room temperature by Speedvac centrifugation and re-suspended in water containing 0.1% FA for further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the heated EASY-Spray analytical column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 µm × 25 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min for a total duration of 147 min and ionized at 2.0 kV in the positive ion mode. The gradient was composed of 3-38% buffer B (132 min) followed by the wash step at 98% B (15 min); solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: 80% ACN and 0.1% FA. MS1 scans for data-dependent acquisition were acquired at the resolution of 70,000 from 350 to 1800 m/z, AGC target 1e6, and maximum injection time 100 ms. The 10 most abundant ions in MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms, and normalized collision energy of 28. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge +1, +7 and >+7 were excluded. MS2 fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) against in silico tryptic digested Uniprot all-reviewed Homo sapiens database. The maximum missed cleavages was set to 2. Dynamic modifications were set to oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da), phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine (S, T, and Y, +79.966 Da). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C, +57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm, and the MS2 mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using the Percolator Node validated by q-value. Phosphosite localization probabilities were determined by the IMP-ptmRS node, and only phosphosites with >0.75% localization probability were selected. The relative abundance of parental peptides was calculated by integration of the area under the curve of the MS1 peaks using the Minora LFQ node. Spectral annotation was generated by the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator (IPSA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Florida Research and Innovation Center

### Submitter
Jun Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhao
Cleveland Clinic Florida Research and Innovation Center


