### Accession
PXD042041

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of RSV-induced RAW264.7 cells

### Description
In order to further explore the expression of proteins in RSV-infected macrophages, RSV type-L19 was used to stimulate RAW264.7 cells, and then mass spectrometry was conducted to detect the expression of different proteins after RSV infection. The results showed that there were different expression of proteins in RSV activated and inactive RAW264.7 cells.

### Sample Protocol
1 Protein Extraction  Cells was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2 Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. 3 TMT/iTRAQ Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  4 HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5 LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. 6 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
1 Annotation Methods 1.1 GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. 1.2 Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. 1.3 KEGG Pathway Annotation KEGG Pathways mainly including: Metabolism, Genetic Information Processing, Environmental Information Processing, Cellular Processes, Rat Diseases, Drug development. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. 1.4 Subcellular Localization We used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. 2 Functional Enrichment 2.1 Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. 2.2 Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. 2.3 Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.  Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. 3 Enrichment-based Clustering For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Studies already revealed that some E3 ubiquitin ligases participated in the immune response after viral infection by regulating the type I interferon (IFN) pathway. Here, we demonstrated that type I interferon signaling enhanced the translocation of ETS1 to the nucleus and the promoter activity of E3 ubiquitin ligase DTX3L (deltex E3 ubiquitin ligase 3L) after virus infection and thus increased the expression of DTX3L. Further experiments suggested that DTX3L ubiquitinated TBK1 at K30 and K401 sites on K63-linked ubiquitination pathway. DTX3L was also necessary for mediating the phosphorylation of TBK1 through binding with the tyrosine kinase SRC: both together enhanced the activation of TBK1. Therefore, DTX3L, being an important positive-feedback regulator of type I interferon, exerted a key role in antiviral response. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Our present study evaluated DTX3L as an antiviral molecule by promoting IFN production and establishing an IFN-&#x3b2;-ETS1-DTX3L-TBK1 positive-feedback loop as a novel immunomodulatory step to enhance interferon signaling and inhibit respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection. Our finding enriches and complements the biological function of DTX3L and provides a new strategy to protect against lung diseases such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia that develop with RSV.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry analysis, Rsv, Raw264.7 cells

### Affiliations
Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China
Children's Hospital of Soochow University

### Submitter
Jiaqi Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Jinping
Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China


