### Accession
PXD007817

### Title
Proteomics of Nitrospirae -  Rice paddy Nitrospirae encode and express genes related to sulfate respiration: proposal of the new genus Candidatus Sulfobium

### Description
We present the draft genome of Nitrospirae bacterium Nbg-4 as a representative of this clade and couple this to in situ protein expression under sulfate-enriched and sulfate-depleted conditions in rice paddy soil. The proteins were extracted from the soil and analysed via LC-MS/MS measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from the same replicated soil samples as used for metagenome sequencing. Protein extraction and subsequent in-gel tryptic digestion followed the procedure outlined in Starke et al (2016). Briefly, 2 g of soil was used for a phenol extraction procedure with a subsequent ammonium acetate precipitation. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using a UPLC-LTQ Orbitrap Velos LC-MS/MS (Herbst et al 2013).

### Data Protocol
Peptide searches were performed using the Maxquant algorithm with the following parameters: tryptic cleavage with maximum two missed cleavages, a peptide tolerance threshold of ±10 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance threshold of ±0.5 Da, and carbamido methylation at cysteines as static and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. As sample specific database, the Nbg-4 genome was used. Proteins were considered as identified with at least one unique peptide with high confidence (false discovery rate-corrected p-value <0.01).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Nitrospirae</i> spp. distantly related to thermophilic, sulfate-reducing <i>Thermodesulfovibrio</i> species are regularly observed in environmental surveys of anoxic marine and freshwater habitats. Here we present a metaproteogenomic analysis of <i>Nitrospirae</i> bacterium Nbg-4 as a representative of this clade. Its genome was assembled from replicated metagenomes of rice paddy soil that was used to grow rice in the presence and absence of gypsum (CaSO<sub>4</sub>&#xb7;2H<sub>2</sub>O). Nbg-4 encoded the full pathway of dissimilatory sulfate reduction and showed expression of this pathway in gypsum-amended anoxic bulk soil as revealed by parallel metaproteomics. In addition, Nbg-4 encoded the full pathway of dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonia (DNRA), with expression of its first step being detected in bulk soil without gypsum amendment. The relative abundances of Nbg-4 were similar under both treatments, indicating that Nbg-4 maintained stable populations while shifting its energy metabolism. Whether Nbg-4 is a strict sulfate reducer or can couple sulfur oxidation to DNRA by operating the pathway of dissimilatory sulfate reduction in reverse could not be resolved. Further genome reconstruction revealed the potential to utilize butyrate, formate, H<sub>2</sub>, or acetate as an electron donor; the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway was expressed under both treatments. Comparison to publicly available <i>Nitrospirae</i> genome bins revealed the pathway for dissimilatory sulfate reduction also in related <i>Nitrospirae</i> recovered from groundwater. Subsequent phylogenomics showed that such microorganisms form a novel genus within the <i>Nitrospirae</i>, with Nbg-4 as a representative species. Based on the widespread occurrence of this novel genus, we propose for Nbg-4 the name "<i>Candidatus</i> Sulfobium mesophilum," gen. nov., sp. nov.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Rice paddies are indispensable for the food supply but are a major source of the greenhouse gas methane. If it were not counterbalanced by cryptic sulfur cycling, methane emission from rice paddy fields would be even higher. However, the microorganisms involved in this sulfur cycling are little understood. By using an environmental systems biology approach with Italian rice paddy soil, we could retrieve the population genome of a novel member of the phylum <i>Nitrospirae</i> This microorganism encoded the full pathway of dissimilatory sulfate reduction and expressed it in anoxic paddy soil under sulfate-enriched conditions. Phylogenomics and comparison to the results of environmental surveys showed that such microorganisms are actually widespread in freshwater and marine environments. At the same time, they represent an undiscovered genus within the little-explored phylum <i>Nitrospirae</i> Our results will be important for the design of enrichment strategies and postgenomic studies to further understanding of the contribution of these novel <i>Nitrospirae</i> spp. to the global sulfur cycle.

### Keywords
Nitrospirae, Soil, Bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


