### Accession
PXD018736

### Title
Characterization of human aging and Parkinson’s disease pre-frontal cortex by multi-omics: a glycomics, proteomics study.

### Description
This study identifies the age and PD related changes in glycans (HS and CS disaccharides) and proteomics in human aging and Parkinson’s disease. We analyzed the prefrontal cortex for changes in HS, CS and proteomic signatures in young versus aged as well as aged and PD in two cohorts. These studies provide insight into age- and PD changes in glycans and proteomics. We assess changes with PD and observe for pathways that may correlate with transcriptomics. We also observe in aging related proteomic changes and transcriptomics for changes in common with PD that may describe risk of disease.

### Sample Protocol
We quantified glycan classes (HS and CS) and proteins from human pre-frontal cortex histological sections. Glycan classes were analyzed using nano-HILIC-WAX chromatography while proteomics using label-free liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
roteomics data were analyzed using PEAKS for database and post-translational modification proteomics searches, following which pathway assessment was done using GSEA. Glycomics data for HS and CS were analyzed manually.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heparan sulfate, Reverse phase, Proteomic, Multi-omics, Pre-frontal cortex, Lc-msms., Label-free proteomics, Glycomic, Hilic-wax, Aging, Chondroitin sulfate, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Boston University
Biochemistry, Boston University

### Submitter
Rekha Raghunathan

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Biochemistry, Boston University


