### Accession
PXD032024

### Title
An Amphipathic Helix in Brl1 is Required for Nuclear Pore Complex Biogenesis in S. cerevisiae - KARMA analysis of Nup170 with/without Brl1 degradation (DIA)

### Description
This project was aimed at investigating nuclear pore complex biogenesis upon inducible degradation of Brl1 using the Kinetic Analysis of incorporation Rates in Macromolecular Assemblies (KARMA, Onischenko et al. 2020) method. In brief, the nuclear pore complex was purified through endogenously tagged Nup170 at several time points following auxin inducible degradation of Brl1. Simultaneously with the degradation of Brl1, newly synthesized proteins were metabolically labeled using a SILAC approach. The metabolic labeling of all nuclear pore complex constituents was assessed. Proteins that depend on Brl1 for their assembly show delayed metabolic labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous Nup170 was tagged with a ZZ-tag and affinity purified at several time points (0, 4, 4.5, 5 hr), following the shift from light to heavy medium, containing isotopically labeled Lysine amino acids. Simultaneously with the labeling onset, degron-tagged Brl1 was either inducibly degraded through auxin addition or yeast cultures were treated with an equivalent amount of solvent control. The samples were electrophoretically concentrated and processed for MS analysis using a standard in-gel digestion protocol. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for library generation and in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode for quantification. For more details see the materials and methods section of the associated publication.

### Data Protocol
Two Hybrid spectral libraries were generated with Spectronaut v.15 (Biognosys AG) using the combination of 20 DDA and 30 DIA datasets originating from APs with 10 NUP baits (Onischenko et al. 2020), and 4 DIA and 6 DDA datasets from Brl1 and Nup170 bait APs acquired in this study. The label-free assay library contained b and y transition ions (for a total of 3’918 protein groups, 75’780 precursors and 105’089 transitions). The SILAC assay library comprised y transitions only, with the heavy-channel (K+8.014199) generated in silico using the “inverted spike in” workflow (for a total of 3’825 protein groups, 97’069 precursors). Only tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were considered. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Spectra were searched against the SGD protein database (downloaded on 13.10.2015, 6’713 entries) concatenated with entries for contaminants and iRT peptides using a 1% FDR control at peptide and protein level. The label-free and SILAC DIA datasets were extracted with the respective spectral libraries using Spectronaut v.15 (Biognosys AG). Default settings were used for the chromatogram extraction, except the machine learning option was set to “across experiment” and “cross run normalization” was excluded. The ion intensities at the fragment level were exported for further analysis in R

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia, Karma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC, ETHZ)
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry (IBC, ETHZ)


