### Accession
PXD046394

### Title
Finding TMEM55B phoshporylation site

### Description
Lysosomes have emerged as critical regulators of cellular homeostasis. Here we show that the lysosomal protein TMEM55B contributes to restore cellular homeostasis in response to oxidative stress by three different mechanisms. Here we find the interactors for TMEM55B and also checked ubiquitination of TMEM55B.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells infected with adenovirus expressing TMEM55B-WT-GFP cells treated with or without 300 μM NaAsO2 for 2 h. Cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation by using GFP beads. Immunoprecipitated proteins were subjected to SDS–PAGE, and gel bands from corresponding molecular weights were excised for enzymatic digestion. Briefly, the samples were first reduced with TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylated with CAA (chloroacetamide, Sigma-Aldrich), and then digested with chymotrypsin (Promega).

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos that is equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide IDs and phosphorylation sites were assigned with Mascot V2.5 (Matrix Science). The confidence of phosphorylation site localization is assessed with ptmRS node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 platform (ThermoFisher Scientific). All peptides were filtered out at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and their relative abundances were compared based on the areas under curve (AUC) of their corresponding chromatographic peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomes have emerged as critical regulators of cellular homeostasis. Here we show that the lysosomal protein TMEM55B contributes to restore cellular homeostasis in response to oxidative stress by three different mechanisms: (1) TMEM55B mediates NEDD4-dependent PLEKHM1 ubiquitination, causing PLEKHM1 proteasomal degradation and halting autophagosome/lysosome fusion; (2) TMEM55B promotes recruitment of components of the ESCRT machinery to lysosomal membranes to stimulate lysosomal repair; and (3) TMEM55B sequesters the FLCN/FNIP complex to facilitate translocation of the transcription factor TFE3 to the nucleus, allowing expression of transcriptional programs that enable cellular adaptation to stress. Knockout of tmem55 genes in zebrafish embryos increases their susceptibility to oxidative stress, causing early death of tmem55-KO animals in response to arsenite toxicity. Altogether, our work identifies a role for TMEM55B as a molecular sensor that coordinates autophagosome degradation, lysosomal repair, and activation of stress responses.

### Keywords
Tmem55b ms

### Affiliations
National institute of health
Cell and Developmental Biology center, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Eutteum Jeong

### Lab Head
Dr Rosa Puertollano
Cell and Developmental Biology center, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA


