### Accession
PXD014626

### Title
Proteotranscriptomic assisted gene annotation and spatial proteomics of the lepidopteran model species Bombyx moriProteotranscriptomic assisted gene annotation and spatial proteomics of the lepidopteran model species Bombyx mori

### Description
We combined transcriptomics and proteomics to perform genome-free de novo gene annotation in Bombyx mori.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation: Subcellular fractionation of Bombyx mori cells was performed in quadruplicates and based on the LOPIT-DC strategy 1⁠ with some modifications. Per replicate 70 million BmN4 cells were collected and suspended in 4 ml lysis buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH7.5, 2mM EDTA, 2mM Magnesium acetate, Roche complete protease inhibitors). Cells were dounced in a 7 ml glass douncer with 50 strokes using a type B pestle. Samples were fractionated using centrifugation speed and times as indicated in the table below following the LOPIT-DC strategy (Geladaki et al, 2019). For centrifugation steps a Heraeus Fresco 21 centrifuge (Thermo) or a Optima Max-XP benchtop centrifuge (Beckmann) with a TLA 100.3 rotor were used. Supernatant of the 9th fractionation step was precipitated using ice cold acetone and the pellet was resuspended in 50mM HEPES/KOH pH7.9 (represents fraction 10). MS Sample preparation and measurement: 50 µg protein from each fraction were loaded on a 4-12 % NOVEX Bis-Tris PAGE gel (Thermo) and separated for 7 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo). Proteins were fixated and stained with Coomassie. After destaining with water, in-gel digest preparation and MS stage tip purification were performed as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 2006; Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed-phase column packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH), directly mounted on the electrospray ion source of the mass spectrometer. We used a ca. 200 min gradient from 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 225 nL/min. The Q Exactive Plus was operated with a Top10 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008)⁠ with enabled LFQ quantitation and the following databases individually: UniProt UP000005204 (14,776 entries), NCBI Bombyx mori Annotation Release 101 (14,998 entries), SilkBase 2017 (16,880 entries) 6⁠ or our Trinity-based ORF library. Detailed information are provided in the parameter files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics; transcriptomics; gene annotation

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


