### Accession
PXD013256

### Title
Chaperone-mediated ordered assembly of the SAGA and NuA4 transcription co-activator complexes

### Description
Transcription initiation involves the coordinated activities of large multimeric complexes that are organized into functional modules. Little is known about the mechanisms and pathways that govern their assembly from individual components. We report here several principles governing the assembly of the highly conserved SAGA and NuA4 co-activator complexes. Using fission yeast, which contain two functionally non-redundant paralogs of the shared Tra1 subunit, we demonstrate that Tra1 contributes to scaffolding the entire NuA4 complex. In contrast, within SAGA, Tra1 specifically promotes the incorporation of the de-ubiquitination module (DUB), defining an ordered assembly pathway. Biochemical and functional analyses elucidated the mechanism by which Tra1 assemble differentially into SAGA or NuA4 and identified a small, conserved region of Spt20 that is both necessary and sufficient to anchor Tra1 within SAGA. Finally, we establish that Hsp90 and its cochaperone TTT are required for Tra1 de novo incorporation into both SAGA and NuA4, indicating that Tra1, a pseudokinase of the PIKK family, shares a dedicated chaperone machinery with its cognate kinases. Overall, our work brings mechanistic insights into the de novo assembly of transcriptional complexes through ordered pathways and reveals the contribution of dedicated chaperones to this process.

### Sample Protocol
S. pombe protein extracts are denatured, reduced and alkylated. Briefly, each sample (dry TCA precipitate) was dissolved in 89 μL of TEAB 100 mM. One microliter of DTT 1 M was added and incubation was performed for 30 min at 60 °C. A volume of 10 μL of IAA 0.5 M was added (incubation for 30 min in the dark). Enzymatic digestion was performed by addition of 1 μg trypsin (Gold, Promega, Madison USA) in TEAB 100 mM and incubation overnight at 30 °C. After completing the digestion step, peptides were purified and concentrated using OMIX Tips C18 reverse-phase resin (Agilent Technologies Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Peptides were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in formic acid (0.1%, buffer A), separated and analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap technology, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant software package (v 1.5.5.1). Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine with label-free quantification (LFQ). The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription initiation involves the coordinated activities of large multimeric complexes, but little is known about their biogenesis. Here we report several principles underlying the assembly and topological organization of the highly conserved SAGA and NuA4 co-activator complexes, which share the Tra1 subunit. We show that Tra1 contributes to the overall integrity of NuA4, whereas, within SAGA, it specifically controls the incorporation of the de-ubiquitination module (DUB), as part of an ordered assembly pathway. Biochemical and functional analyses reveal the mechanism by which Tra1 specifically interacts with either SAGA or NuA4. Finally, we demonstrate that Hsp90 and its cochaperone TTT promote Tra1 de novo incorporation into both complexes, indicating that Tra1, the sole pseudokinase of the PIKK family, shares a dedicated chaperone machinery with its cognate kinases. Overall, our work brings mechanistic insights into the assembly of transcriptional complexes and reveals the contribution of dedicated chaperones to this process.

### Keywords
Multimeric complex, Chromatin, Transcription, Chaperone

### Affiliations
Regulation of gene expression, CRBM, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Helmlinger
Regulation of gene expression, CRBM, France


