### Accession
PXD007810

### Title
Proteomic approach for molecular classification of colorectal cancer

### Description
The main objective of this study was to identify potential protein expression signatures by the SWATH technique of proteomic analysis, to aid in the classification of molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from cancer biopsies and matched healthy tissue were precipitated with TCA/Acetone, and solubilised in 50 µL of 0.2% RapiGest SF. 50 µg of protein were subjected to trypsin digestion. 1 ug of each sample was injected in a nLC (2 hour gradient, 5% to 30% ACN 0.1% formic acid, 300 nL/min, column:Thermo Acclaim PepMap100 25cm x 75 um) coupled to a Sciex Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. For building the spectra library, a top 65 data dependent acquisition method (250 ms TOF MS survey scan from 350 to 1250 m/z, followed by 60 ms MS/MS of the top 65 ions from 230 to 1700 m/z) was used. For quantifying the proteins on each sample, a variable SWATH data-independent method (50 ms TOF MS from 350 to 1250 m/z followed by 50 90 ms variable precursor window MS/MS from 230 to 1500 m/z) was used.

### Data Protocol
DDA runs were searched against a human Swiss-Prot database using Protein Pilot v5.0.1. The spectral library was built using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). The library-assisted targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalisation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal, Proteomics, Swath, Cancer

### Affiliations
IMIBIC
Medical Oncology Department, Reina Sofia University Hospital and IMIBIC, Maimonides Institute for Biomedical Research, Córdoba, Spain

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Rodriguez-Ariza
Medical Oncology Department, Reina Sofia University Hospital and IMIBIC, Maimonides Institute for Biomedical Research, Córdoba, Spain


