### Accession
PXD023209

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of the host-virus interactome of SARS-CoV-2

### Description
Host-virus protein-protein interaction is the key component of SARS-CoV-2 life cycle, which can be targeted for therapeutic intervention. Thus, we conducted a comprehensive interactome study between the virus and host cell using tandem affinity purification (TAP) and BioID2 labeling strategies. In addition, we compared the interactomes of two key SARS-CoV-2 encoded viral proteins, NSP1 and N protein, to the interactomes of their counterparts in other human coronaviruses.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of cells expressing expressed SFB- or BioID2-tagged virus genes were subjected to lysis with NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA; 20 mM Tris HCl; and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4 oC for 20 min. After centrifugation with 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4oC, the supernatant was incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (Fisher Scientific) for 2 hours at 4oC. Then the beads were washed with NETN buffer for four times. The BioID2-tagged samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE, and the gel was fixed and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. Then the whole lane of the sample in the gel was excised and subjected to MS analysis. The SFB-tagged samples were eluted by 2 mg/ml biotin for 1 hour at 4oC. The elutes were incubated with S-protein agarose for 2 hours. After washing four times by NETN buffer, the beads were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Coomassie brilliant blue staining as the BioID2 samples. The samples in gel were excised, and de-stained completely before digestion. The in-gel digestion was performed with trypsin (V5280, Promega Corporation) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 oC overnight. The extracted peptides were vacuum dried, and then reconstituted in the MS loading solution (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The MS sample was loaded onto a nano reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, and eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 5% to 35% for 60 minutes at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. The elute was analyzed by the Q Exactive HF MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with positive ion mode and data-dependent manner, one full scan followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans. The full MS scan was performed with scanning range 350-1200 m/z, resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were submitted to Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database used for searching was Homo sapiens downloaded from Uniprot (July 2020). The sequence of SARS-CoV-2 genes, SFB tag, and BioID2 tag were added into the database with 20,414 entries in total. Oxidation for methionine and carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor was 10 ppm, and for product ion was 0.02 Da. Tolerance of two missed cleavages of trypsin was applied. Common contaminant proteins were removed from the identification list.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Bioid2, Interactome, Sfb-tap, Host-virus protein-protein interaction, Human coronavirus

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


