### Accession
PXD019893

### Title
Proteomics of the transition to naïve human pluripotency

### Description
Epigenetic reprogramming is a cancer hallmark but how it unfolds during early neoplastic events and its role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression is not fully understood. Here we show that resetting from primed to naïve human pluripotency results in acquisition of a DNA methylation landscape mirroring the cancer DNA methylome, with gradual hypermethylation of bivalent developmental genes. We hypothesised that unknown proteins and transcription factors play a role in the DNA hypermethylation process and analysed therefore the proteomics of the very early stages of the resetting process which involves overexpression of Nanog and Klf2. The samples analysed were Primed hESCs (Conventional stem cells), 72hours after induction and 1 week after induction, in triplicate. For our purposes we identified candidate transcription factors and subsequently knocked them down to test their involvement in the DNA hypermethylation (as described in the manuscript related to this data, Patani et al. Nature Communications). More broadly, we believe, this dataset is a useful resource for the wider community interested in pluripotency, resetting, reprogramming, cell identity transitions etc. Our results indicate that transition to naïve pluripotency and oncogenic transformation share common epigenetic trajectories, which implicates reprogramming and the pluripotency network as a central hub in cancer formation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from 3 independent biological replicates per condition were washed twice with ice cold PBS supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF, lysed in urea buffer (8M urea in 20 mM in HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) for 30 min and homogenized by sonication (15 cycles of 30s on 30s off; Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 xg and protein levels in the cell extracts were quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) analysis. For trypsin digestion, 100 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 10 mM DTT and 16.6 mM iodoacetamyde for 1h and 30min, respectively. Urea concentration was diluted to 2 M with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 80 µL of preconditioned trypsin beads [(50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230)] were added and samples were incubated for 16h at 37C with agitation. Peptide solutions were desalted using 10 mg OASIS-HLB cartridges (Waters, Manchester, UK). Briefly, OASIS cartridges were accommodated in a vacuum manifold (-5 mmHg), activated with 1 mL ACN and equilibrated with 1.5 mL washing solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Peptides were loaded into the cartridges, washed with 1 mL of washing solution, eluted with 500 µL of ACN solution (30% ACN, 0.1% TFA), dried in a speed vac (RVC 2-25, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen) and stored at -80C. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3,000 RSL nano instrument coupled to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% solvent B in 120 min at a flow rate 300 nL/min with solvent A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) . The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255C. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500 m/z with the resolution of 70,000 and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17,500. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least 10 data points.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Daemon 2.5.0 was used to automate peptide identification from MS data. Peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data were generated with Mascot Distiller v2.5.1 and loaded into the Mascot search engine (v2.5) in order to match MS/MS data to peptides. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (release December 2015) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, 2 trypsin missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and oxidation of Met as variable modifications were allowed. The in-house developed Pescal software was used for label-free peptide quantification as described before65, XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples were constructed with ±2 min and ±7 ppm retention time and mass windows, respectively. Peak areas from all XICs were calculated. The maximum intensity value for the 2 technical replicates was selected and used for further analysis. Intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. Statistical significance was calculated using two tail unpaired Student’s t-test. Multiplicity correction was performed by applying the Benjamini-Hochberg method on the p-values, to control the false discovery rate (FDR). Differences were considered significant when FDR < 0.05. Proteins with a Mascot score > 40 were used for analysis. Data are available in Supplementary Data 2.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic reprogramming is a cancer hallmark, but how it unfolds during early neoplastic events and its role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression is not fully understood. Here we show that resetting from primed to na&#xef;ve human pluripotency results in acquisition of a DNA methylation landscape mirroring the cancer DNA methylome, with gradual hypermethylation of bivalent developmental genes. We identify a dichotomy between bivalent genes that do and do not become hypermethylated, which is also mirrored in cancer. We find that loss of H3K4me3 at bivalent regions is associated with gain of methylation. Additionally, we observe that promoter CpG island hypermethylation is not restricted solely to emerging na&#xef;ve cells, suggesting that it is a feature of a heterogeneous intermediate population during resetting. These results indicate that transition to na&#xef;ve pluripotency and oncogenic transformation share common epigenetic trajectories, which implicates reprogramming and the pluripotency network as a central hub in cancer formation.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Transcription factors, Reprogramming, Naive embryonic stem cells, Epigenetics, Resetting, Hesc

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Reader | Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pedro R Cutillas
Reader | Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266


