### Accession
PXD035958

### Title
Readthrough Events in Plants Reveal Unprecedented Plasticity of Stop Codons

### Description
Stop codon readthrough (SCR) has important biological implications but remains largely uncharacterized. Here, we identify 1,009 SCR events in plants using a proteogenomic strategy. Plant SCR candidates tend to have shorter transcript lengths and fewer exons and splice variants than non-SCR transcripts. Mass spectrometry evidence shows that stop codons involved in SCR events can be recoded as 20 standard amino acids, some of which are also supported by suppressor transfer RNA analysis. We also observe multiple functional signals in 34 maize extended proteins and characterize the structural and subcellular localization changes in the extended protein of BASIC TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3. Furthermore, the SCR events exhibit non-conserved signature and the extensions likely undergo protein-coding selection. Overall, our study not only characterizes that SCR events are commonly present in plants but also identifies the unprecedented recoding plasticity of stop codons, which provides important insights into the flexibility of genetic decoding. 

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  In this study, maize (B73 inbred line), rice (Oryza sativa L. ssp. japonica cv. Nipponbare), Arabidopsis (Columbia-0), and soybean (ZH13) plants were grown in a greenhouse controlled with temperature and light. The growth conditions for maize were 15-h light/9-h dark photoperiod, 28/25 ℃ day/night air temperature, and the samples were collected at the three-leaf stage. For rice, the growth conditions were 12-h light/12-h dark photoperiod, 28/25 ℃ day/night air temperature, and the samples were collected on day 56. Arabidopsis was grown in a greenhouse under a 16-h light/8-h dark photoperiod, 22/21 ℃ day/night air temperature, and the samples were collected on day 21. Soybean was grown in a greenhouse under the conditions of 16-h light/8-h dark photoperiod, and 22/21 ℃ day/night air temperature to the trifoliate leaf stage at the third round. Three replicates of leaf samples for each of the plant species were harvested, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80℃ until analysis.  Protein extraction  Total proteins from each sample were extracted as previously reported61. Briefly, leaf tissues (1 g) of the four plants were respectively pulverized in liquid nitrogen, and the powders were precipitated in 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid/acetone solution containing 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at -20 °C for 1 h. Then, the solution was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 45 min followed by the removal of the supernatant. The precipitate was then vacuum-dried and solubilized in 1/10 volumes of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). After 3 min incubation in boiling water, the suspensions were ultrasonicated (80 w, ultrasonic 10s/time, every 15 s, repeated 10 times) and incubated at 100 ℃ for 3 min. The extract was further centrifuged at 12,000×g at 25 ℃ for 10 min and the total protein contents were quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Promega Corporation). The supernatants were stored at -80℃ for subsequent analysis. Protein digestion and peptide fractionation The total proteins (250 μg for each sample) were digested by FASP procedure using trypsin (Promega Corporation) as described previously61. Then, the digested peptide filtrate was fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with 2 ml buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH = 2.7) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6×100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH = 2.7) in a gradient of 0%-10% for 2 min, 10-20% for 25 min, 20%-45% for 5 min, and 50%-100% for 5 min. The elution was monitored at the absorbance of 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected 30 fractions were finally combined into 15 pools and desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 standard density, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma-Aldrich). Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All the samples were stored at -80 °C before LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis  The samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide (2 μg) was loaded onto a 25 cm, 75 μm inner diameter C18-reversed phase column packed with 3 μm resin (EASY-Column™ Capillary Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 90 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (m/z 300-1,800) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). The dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 (m/z 200). Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS experiments for each sample were conducted triply for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Customized database construction The complete genome sequences of the four plants were downloaded from the corresponding websites, which were Ensembl database (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-41/fasta/zea_mays/dna/) for maize, MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project (http://rice.uga.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa/annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version_7.0/all.dir/) for rice, National Genomics Data Center (ftp://download.big.ac.cn/gwh/Plants/Glycine_max_Gmax_ZH13_v2.0_GWHAAEV00000000.1/GWHAAEV00000000.1.genome.fasta.gz) for soybean, and TAIR 10 (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-28/fasta/arabidopsis_thaliana/dna/Arabidopsis_thaliana. TAIR10.28.dna.toplevel.fa.gz)  for Arabidopsis in FASTA format. The tailored databases for SCR event identification were generated from the computational translation of plant genome sequences to amino acid sequences by EMBOSS:6.6.0, as previously described with modifications46. The in silico translation process followed the principle that the annotated stop codon (UGA, UAG, or UAA) of a given gene was considered as a translatable codon to be designated as symbol "X", representing any one of the 20 standard amino acids for the in silico translation at each time, and the elongation terminated at the next in-frame stop codon at 3′ UTR. The in silico translation was conducted by in-house scripts based on Shell under a Linux environment to produce a total of 20 customized databases for each plant species. Each of the databases has been in conjunction with a public plant protein database for every plant species. The public protein databases were respectively derived from the Ensembl database (http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/ensemblgenomes/pub/release-41/plants/fasta/zea_mays/pep/Zea_ mays.B73_RefGen_v4.pep.all.fa.gz) for maize, MSU Rice Genome Annotation Project protein database (http://rice.uga.edu/pub/data/Eukaryotic_Projects/o_sativa /annotation_dbs/pseudomolecules/version_7.0/all.dir/all.pep) for rice, National Genomics Data Center for soybean (ftp://download.big.ac.cn/gwh/Plants/Glycine_max_Gmax_ZH13_v2.0_GWHAAEV00000000.1/GWHAAEV00000000.1.Protein.faa.gz), and Ensembl protein database for Arabidopsis (ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.org/pub/plants/release-51/fasta/arabidopsis_thaliana/pep/Arabidopsis_thaliana.TAIR10.pep.all.fa.gz). The conjunction of public protein database could guarantee the searching precision and calculation of false discovery rate (FDR) in the subsequent searching stage. Identification of SCR events by MaxQuant  The raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (v.1.6.1.10)62. The spectra were searched against the 20 customized databases for each of the four plant species. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of trypsin and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Protein quantification was calculated by normalized spectral protein intensity. All the matched peptides were then relocated to the corresponding positions of protein sequences in the reference databases and mapped to their genomic locations. The non-redundant peptides uniquely mapped to the regions spanning the annotated stop codon were labeled as "through", the peptides mapped to the coding sequence (CDS) region were labeled as "before", and the peptides mapped to the 3′ UTR region were labeled as "after". Since one gene in these plants may harbor one or more transcripts sharing a common stop codon at a unique physical position in the chromosome, one or more protein sequences can conclude at the same stop codon. Therefore, every stop codon site was then given an ID for position recognition. Proteins sharing one stop codon site and containing a "through" peptide were merged into one group and the group was defined as one SCR event.

### Publication Abstract
Stop codon readthrough (SCR) has important biological implications but remains largely uncharacterized. Here, we identify 1,009 SCR events in plants using a proteogenomic strategy. Plant SCR candidates tend to have shorter transcript lengths and fewer exons and splice variants than non-SCR transcripts. Mass&#xa0;spectrometry evidence shows that stop codons involved in SCR events can be recoded as 20&#xa0;standard amino acids, some of which are also supported by suppressor tRNA analysis. We also observe multiple functional signals in 34 maize extended proteins and characterize the structural and subcellular localization changes in the extended protein of basic transcription factor 3. Furthermore, the SCR events exhibit non-conserved signature, and the extensions likely undergo protein-coding selection. Overall, our&#xa0;study not only characterizes that SCR events are commonly present in plants but also identifies the recoding plasticity of stop codons, which provides important insights into the flexibility of genetic decoding.

### Keywords
Stop codon readthrough, Recoding plasticity, Proteogenomics, Amino acids, Plants, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science, Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University,China
Henan Agricultural university

### Submitter
Yuqian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liuji Wu
National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science, Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University,China


