### Accession
PXD004736

### Title
Biotinylation by antibody recognition - A novel method for proximity labeling

### Description
Identification of protein-protein interactions is a major goal of biological research. Despite technical advances over the last two decades, important but still largely unsolved challenges include the high-throughput detection of interactions directly from primary tissue and the identification of interactors of insoluble proteins that form higher-order structures. We have developed a novel, proximity-based labeling approach that uses antibodies to guide biotin deposition onto adjacent proteins in fixed cells and primary tissues. We showed our method to be specific and sensitive by labeling a mitochondrial matrix protein. Next, we used this method to profile the dynamic interactome of lamin A/C in multiple cell and tissue types under various treatment conditions. Our results suggest a considerable variation in the composition of the nuclear envelope of different tissues. Of note, DNA damage response proteins Ku70 and Ku80 are more abundant in the vicinity of lamin A/C after thermal stress. The ability to detect proximal proteins and putative interactors in intact tissues, and to compare affinities quantitatively under different conditions or in the presence of disease mutations, can provide a new window into cell biology and disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylation by Antibody Recognition A complete protocol is available online. Briefly, samples were fixed in 4% formaldehyde (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10-30 minutes at room temperature (RT) and washed with PBST (PBS with 0.1% tween 20). Samples were incubated with 0.5% hydrogen peroxide for 10 minutes to deactivate any endogenous peroxidase activity. Samples were then permeabilized in PBS with 0.5% triton X-100 for 7 minutes and blocked for 2 hours in 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBST. Samples were incubated with primary antibody overnight, washed with PBST, and incubated with an appropriate secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) for 3 hours. After extensive washes, samples were incubated with biotin-tyramide (Perkin Elmer) for 10 minutes and a dilution buffer containing hydrogen peroxide was added to a total volume of 150 µL. The reaction was stopped after 1-7 minutes (see Supplementary Dataset: Index) by adding 850 µL of 500 mM sodium ascorbate (Sigma-Aldrich). After two washes with PBST, sample subsets were incubated with FITC-avidin and analyzed under a microscope to validate the expected staining pattern of a given antibody. The remainder of the samples were heated to 99°C for an hour with 1.5% SDS and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Sample volume was adjusted to 1 mL with PBST and biotinylated proteins were extracted with streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol. For some samples, the presence of a specific protein bound to the beads was validated by Western blot using ~10% of the beads. Samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS by incubation for 30 minutes at 37°C in 10 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by 20 minutes in 50 mM Iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room temperature protected from light. Finally, samples were digested overnight in 37°C with 2 μg trypsin (Promega), followed by a second 2 hour digestion. Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture Cells were grown in SILAC MEM medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) lacking lysine and arginine, supplemented with dialysed 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich), 200 mg/l light L-Proline (Sigma-Aldrich) and either heavy L-Lysine (13C615N2; 146 mg/l) and L-Arginine (13C615N4; 84 mg/l) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or their light equivalents (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were passaged with non-enzymatic Gibco Cell Dissociation Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). >95% heavy amino acid incorporation rate was validated by mass-spectrometry. LC-MS/MS analysis Protein identification by LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides was performed using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 1D plus system (Dublin, CA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite or Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using CID fragmentation. Peptides were first loaded onto a Zorbax 300SB-C18 trap column (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) at a flow rate of 6 μl/min for 6 min, and then separated on a reversed-phase PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a 120-min linear gradient of 5–35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. LTQ-Orbitrap Elite settings were as follows: spray voltage 1.5 kV; full MS mass range m/z 300 to 2,000. The LTQ-Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode; i.e., one MS1 high resolution (60,000) scan for precursor ions is followed by six data-dependent MS2 scans for precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 500 with collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Database search criteria Raw files generated by the LTQ Orbitrap Elite or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) or SEQUEST search engines. The search criteria was set to: database, Swiss Prot (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics); taxonomy, Human or Mouse; enzyme, trypsin; miscleavages, 2; variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), isotope labeling of lysine (K+8.014 Da) and arginine (R+10.008 Da); fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); MS peptide tolerance 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance as 0.8 Da. For the in-gel digestion dataset, identifications were accepted based on one or more unique peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 99% or higher. All other datasets accepted based on two or more unique peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 99% or higher.

### Publication Abstract
The high-throughput detection of organelle composition and proteomic mapping of protein environment directly from primary tissue as well as the identification of interactors of insoluble proteins that form higher-order structures have remained challenges in biological research. We report a proximity-based labeling approach that uses an antibody to a target antigen to guide biotin deposition onto adjacent proteins in fixed cells and primary tissues, which allows proteins in close proximity to the target antigen to be captured and identified by mass spectrometry. We demonstrated the specificity and sensitivity of our method by examining the well-studied mitochondrial matrix. We then used the method to profile the dynamic interactome of lamin A/C in multiple cell and tissue types under various treatment conditions. The ability to detect proximal proteins and putative interactors in intact tissues, and to quantify changes caused by different conditions or in the presence of disease mutations, can provide a window into cell biology and disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lmna biotin proximiy labeling

### Affiliations
NHGRI/NIH
NHGRI

### Submitter
Daniel Bar

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Collins
NHGRI/NIH


