### Accession
PXD005296

### Title
Site-specific mapping of the human SUMO proteome reveals co-modification with phosphorylation (part 2)

### Description
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translational modifications (PTMs) that regulate nuclear cellular processes. Here we used an augmented K0–SUMO proteomics strategy to identify 40,765 SUMO acceptor sites and quantify their fractional contribution for 6,747 human proteins. Structural–predictive analyses revealed that lysines residing in disordered regions are preferentially targeted by SUMO, in notable contrast to other widespread lysine modifications. In our data set, we identified 807 SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by phosphorylation, along with dozens of SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by ubiquitylation, acetylation and methylation. Notably, 9% of the identified SUMOylome occurred proximal to phosphorylation, and numerous SUMOylation sites were found to be fully dependent on prior phosphorylation events. SUMO-proximal phosphorylation occurred primarily in a proline-directed manner, and inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases dynamically affected co-modification. Collectively, we present a comprehensive analysis of the SUMOylated proteome, uncovering the structural preferences for SUMO and providing system-wide evidence for a remarkable degree of cross-talk between SUMOylation and other major PTMs. (part 2)

### Sample Protocol
K0-SUMO was stably expressed in HeLa and U2OS cells, and cells were analyzed under standard growth conditionst, and CDKi treatment. All experiments were carried out in biological quadruplicate. SUMO-modified proteins were purified from cells, concentrated, digested with LysC, and SUMO-modified peptides were repurified. SUMOylated peptides were trypsin digested, and afterwards fractionated at high-pH, or otherwise analyzed as single-shot, with all measurement performed at low-pH. A Q-Exactive HF instrument was used to measure all samples. (Part 2)

### Data Protocol
All 128 RAW files (part 2) were analyzed in a single computational run using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30. Default MaxQuant settings were used for data analysis, with exceptions and noteworthy default settings described below. For generation of the theoretical peptide library, a FASTA database containing all human proteins was downloaded from UniProt on the 28th of July, 2016. RAW files were grouped as one of the 16 experimental replicates analyzed. Fraction numbers 0-6 were used to indicate fractionated samples, with fraction number 8 used for single-shot samples. For group-specific parameters, maximum missed cleavages were set to 4, label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with a min. ratio count of 1, Fast LFQ (default), and skipped normalization. Maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 4, with the following variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation (default), methionine oxidation (default), QQTGG on lysine, pyroQQTGG on lysine, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. For global parameters, minimum peptide length was set to 6, maximum peptide mass was set to 6,000, and protein quantification minimum ratio count was set to 1, while allowing the same variable modifications as listed above. Matching between runs was enabled, with a match time window of 2 min and an alignment time window of 40 min. Data was automatically filtered at the peptide-spectrum-match, protein, and site-identification levels by posterior error probability to yield a false discovery rate of <1% (default), a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm was applied (default), and modified peptides were filtered for an Andromeda score of >40 (default) and a delta score of >6 (default). In addition, the SUMO site output of MaxQuant was manually filtered for a localization delta score of >6, the presence of QQTGG mass remnant fragments (diagnostic peaks) in the MS/MS spectra, and the absence of a reversed database hit. (Part 2)

### Publication Abstract
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are post-translational modifications (PTMs) that regulate nuclear cellular processes. Here we used an augmented K0-SUMO proteomics strategy to identify 40,765 SUMO acceptor sites and quantify their fractional contribution for 6,747 human proteins. Structural-predictive analyses revealed that lysines residing in disordered regions are preferentially targeted by SUMO, in notable contrast to other widespread lysine modifications. In our data set, we identified 807 SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by phosphorylation, along with dozens of SUMOylated peptides that were co-modified by ubiquitylation, acetylation and methylation. Notably, 9% of the identified SUMOylome occurred proximal to phosphorylation, and numerous SUMOylation sites were found to be fully dependent on prior phosphorylation events. SUMO-proximal phosphorylation occurred primarily in a proline-directed manner, and inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases dynamically affected co-modification. Collectively, we present a comprehensive analysis of the SUMOylated proteome, uncovering the structural preferences for SUMO and providing system-wide evidence for a remarkable degree of cross-talk between SUMOylation and other major PTMs.

### Keywords
K0-sumo, Phosphorylation, Sumo, Proteome, Deep

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


