### Accession
PXD004012

### Title
Ability of the marine bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens BA3SM1 to
counteract the toxicity of CdSe nanoparticles

### Description
CdSe nanoparticles (CdSe NPs) are extensively used in the industry of renewable energies and it is regrettably expectedthat these pollutants will sometime soon appear in marine environmentthrough surface runoff, urban effluents and rivers. Bacteria living in estuarine and coastal sediments will be among the first targets of these new pollutants. The pseudomonads are frequently encountered in these ecosystems. They are involved in several biogeochemical cycles and are known for their high resistance to pollutants. Consequently, this study focussing on the effect of CdSe NPs on the marine strain P. fluorescensBA3SM1 is highly relevant for a number of reasons. First, it aims at improving knowledge about the interactions between bacteria and NPs. This is fundamental to use effectively NPs against pathogenic bacteria. Secondly, this study shows that CdSe NPs of 8 nm in diameter cause a decrease in the secretion of siderophorepyoverdine, a secondary metabolite having a key role in microbial ecology and also employed as a virulence factor in human pathogenic strains such as P. aeruginosa. Consequently, this study highlights that CdSe NPs can have an impact on secondary metabolism of bacteria with environmental and medical implications.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis: protein extracts were quantified using a Bradford assay prepared as described in a previous study by Romilly et al. (2014). The peptide mixtures obtained after a trypsin digestion were analyzed using a NanoLC-2DPlus system (with nanoFlexChiP module; Eksigent, ABSciex, Concord) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex). The TripleTOF 5600 was operated in data-dependant acquisition mode (DDA).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the complete proteome set from the UniProt P.fluorescens database (strain Pf-5 / ATCC BAA-477) database using a decoy strategy. A Spectral Counting quantitative strategy was first carried on using the Mascot identification results and Proteinscape 3.1 package. The Paragon algorithm (ProteinPilot package, AB Sciex) was then used to perform a second database search on the same nanoLC-MS/MS dataset and proteins validated by Paragon at FDR 1% were submitted to a MS1 label-free quantification (PeakView and MarkerView softwares from Sciex). The combination of these two well-known proteomic techniques including manual validations strengthened the identification and quantification of regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine bacteria; cdse nanoparticles; physiological responses; proteomics; oxidative stress

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut National des Sciences et Techniques de la Mer Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers BP324 50103 Cherbourg-Octeville Cedex France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Poirier
Institut National des Sciences et Techniques de la Mer Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers BP324 50103 Cherbourg-Octeville Cedex France


