### Accession
PXD005717

### Title
Integrin beta 3 regulates cellular senescence by activating the TGFβ pathway

### Description
Cellular senescence is an important in vivo mechanism that prevents the propagation of damaged cells. However, the precise mechanism(s) regulating senescence are not well characterized. Here, we find that ITGB3 (integrin beta 3 or β3) is epigenetically regulated by the Polycomb protein CBX7. β3 expression accelerates the onset of senescence in human primary fibroblasts, by activating the TGFβ pathway in a cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous manner. β3 levels are dynamically increased during oncogeneinduced senescence (OIS) through CBX7 epigenetic regulation. DNA-damage and therapy-induced senescence (TIS) also induce β3 expression. In fact, downregulation of β3 levels override OIS and TIS, independently of its ligand-binding activity. Moreover, cilengitide, a αvβ3 antagonist, has the ability to block the SASP without affecting proliferation. Finally, we show an increase in β3 levels during aging in mice and humans. Altogether, our data show that integrin β3 subunit is a marker and regulator of senescence.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling with Aminoacids in Culture) Mass Spectrometry. SILAC-labeled vector and shCBX7 fibroblasts were generated as before (O'Loghlen et al., 2012). Protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to overnight in gel trypsin digestion. Peptide extracts were analysed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate3000 LC (both Thermo Fisher) using an Easy Spray Nano-source. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition mode selecting the 10 most intense precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant/Andromeda as previously described (Cox and Mann, 2008). Outlier detection was performed using the significance B option available in Perseus software with a p-value cut-off of 0.05 for significance.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is an important in&#xa0;vivo mechanism that prevents the propagation of damaged cells. However, the precise mechanisms regulating senescence are not well characterized. Here, we find that ITGB3 (integrin beta 3 or &#x3b2;3) is regulated by the Polycomb protein CBX7. &#x3b2;3 expression accelerates the onset of senescence in human primary fibroblasts by activating the transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) pathway in a cell-autonomous and&#xa0;non-cell-autonomous manner. &#x3b2;3 levels are dynamically increased during oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) through CBX7 Polycomb regulation, and downregulation of &#x3b2;3 levels overrides OIS and therapy-induced senescence (TIS), independently of its ligand-binding activity. Moreover, cilengitide, an &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;3 antagonist, has the ability to block the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) without affecting proliferation. Finally, we show an increase in &#x3b2;3 levels in a subset of tissues during aging. Altogether, our data show that integrin &#x3b2;3 subunit is a marker and regulator of senescence.

### Keywords
Cbx7, Senescence, Silac

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Bram Snijders Head of Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT T: +442037962038 E: bram.snijders@crick.ac.uk W: https://crims.crick.ac.uk/

### Submitter
Vesela Encheva

### Lab Head
Dr Ambrosius Snijders
Bram Snijders Head of Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT T: +442037962038 E: bram.snijders@crick.ac.uk W: https://crims.crick.ac.uk/


