### Accession
PXD009600

### Title
Updated in-gel digestion for protein analysis by mass spectrometry

### Description
The in-gel digestion of proteins for analysis by liquid chromatograph mass spectrometry has been used since the early 1990s. Although several improvements have contributed to increasing the quality of the data obtained, many recent publications still use sub-optimal approaches. We present an updated in-gel digestion protocol. We show that alternative reducing, alkylating agents and tryptic digestion buffers increase peptide and protein identification and reduce incubation times. Our results indicate that a simultaneous and short, high temperature reduction and alkylation reaction using Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and chloroacetamide (CAA) with a subsequent gel wash improve protein identification and sequence coverage, diminish peptide side reactions. Additionally, use of 4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid buffer (HEPES) allows a significant reduction in the digestion time improving trypsin performance and increasing the peptide recovery. The updated in-gel digestion protocol described here is highly efficient and offers flexibility to be incorporated in any proteomic laboratory.

### Sample Protocol
To generate test samples, 50 µg of HeLa protein extract was mixed in a 6:1 (v/v) ratio with sample loading buffer (0.375 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 12 % SDS, 60 % Glycerol, 0.6M DTT and 0.06 % Bromophenol blue; Sigma) and incubated at 95 C for 5 min. The protein extract was divided into 18 samples, distributed in 6 different experimental conditions with 3 replicates each. All samples were run in 10 % SDS-PAGE mini-gels until the dye front was 1 cm from the bottom. The gels were washed with deionised water and stained with Coomassie protein stain (Expedeon) for 15 min (Supplementary Figure 1). Each lane was cut into cubes of   ̴1 mm2. Gel pieces were destained twice using 50 % ethanol (Fisher-Scientific) in 50 mM ABC (Fluka) at 22 C, for 15 min and dehydrated with 100 % ethanol for additional 5 min, with shaking. The six groups were treated with different methods, and all solutions were shaken at approximately 650 rpm during treatment: Method 1 ‘the classic’: dehydrated gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) at 56 C for 30 min. Alkylation was conducted by replacing the DTT solution with 55 mM IAA (Sigma) and incubated at 22 C for 20 min in the dark followed by washing with 50 % ethanol in 50 mM ABC at 22 C, for 15 min and dehydrated with 100 % ethanol for 5 min. The gel pieces were hydrated with 2.5 ng/µl of trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC and incubated overnight at 37 C. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces with consecutive incubations: twice with 25 % ACN (Fisher Scientific) with 5 min sonication in a water bath; 100 % ACN with 5 min sonication. Supernatants were combined in a fresh vial, dried using a vacuum centrifuge at 50 C, re-suspended in 50 µl of 2 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA (Fluka) and sonicated in a water bath for 5 min.  Methods 2-6 were accumulative variations of method 1 until the final updated method 6 is achieved. Method 2 was the same as method 1 except IAA was replaced by 55 mM CAA (Sigma). Method 3 was the same as method 2 except reduction and alkylation were performed simultaneously with a solution of 10 mM TCEP (Sigma) and 40 mM CAA at room temperature for 20 min. Method 4 was the same as method 3 except reduction/alkylation reaction was incubated at 70 C for 5 min. Method 5 was the same as method 4 but the tryptic protein digestion was performed for 4 h. Method 6 was the same as method 5 but the ABC buffer was replaced by 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 (Alfa Aesar). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000-RSLCnano system (Dionex) and an Orbitrap-Fusion (Thermo-Scientific). 20 µl of sample was loaded on an Acclaim-PepMap µprecolumn (Thermo-Scientific, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) equilibrated in 2 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA, for 8 min at 10 µl/min with an analytical column  Acclaim PepMap RSLC (Thermo-Scientific, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å). Mobile phase A was of 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase B was ACN containing 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were eluted at 250 nl/min by increasing the mobile phase B from 8 % B to 25 % over 90 min, then 35 % B over 9 min followed by  90 % B for 3 min and a 15min re-equilibration at 4 % B. MS data was acquired with Xcalibur v3.0.63 (Thermo-Scientific). Electrospray used a static Nanospray-Flex with a stainless steel emitter OD 1/32’ in positive mode at 2.1 kV (Thermo-Scientific). MS survey scans from 375 to 1,575 m/z, with a 2x105 ion count target, maximum injection time of 150 ms and resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, acquired in profile mode were performed in the Orbitrap analyser. Data dependent mode selected the most abundant precursor ions possible in 2 s cycle time followed by 45 s exclusion and ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.2 m/z window. MS/MS scans were performed in the ion trap in rapid mode with ion count target of 2x104 and maximum injection time of 200 ms and acquired in centroid mode. Precursor ions were fragmented with higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD), normalised collision energy of 33 % and fixed first mass of 120 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Thermo-Scientific raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software v1.6.0.16 against the UniProtKB Human database (UP000005640, 71,785 entries, release March 2017). Peptide sequences were assigned to MS/MS spectra using the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Two separate searches were performed: a) adding peptide N-terminal acetylation as a variable modification b) changing cysteine carbamidomethylation from a fixed to a variable modification. The FDR was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids and was determined by searching a reversed database. Enzyme specificity was trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation of 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The MaxQuant feature ‘match between runs’ was enabled only within experimental replicates. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done with a minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
The in-gel digestion of proteins for analysis by liquid chromatograph mass spectrometry has been used since the early 1990s. Although several improvements have contributed to increasing the quality of the data obtained, many recent publications still use sub-optimal approaches. Updates of the in-gel digestion protocol has been presented in the study. It has been shown that alternative reducing, alkylating agent reactions, and tryptic digestion buffers increase peptide and protein identification and reduce incubation times. The results indicate that a simultaneous and short, high temperature reduction and alkylation reaction using Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and chloroacetamide with a subsequent gel wash improve protein identification and sequence coverage, and diminish peptide side reactions. Additionally, use of 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid buffer allows a significant reduction in the digestion time improving trypsin performance and increasing the peptide recovery. The updates of the in-gel digestion protocol described here are efficient and offer flexibility to be incorporated in any proteomic laboratory.

### Keywords
Trypsin, Proteomics, In-gel digestion, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
FIISC
Manager

### Submitter
Juan Ramon Hernandez-Fernaud

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Ramon Hernandez Fernaud
Manager


