### Accession
PXD030626

### Title
Co-translational assembly counteracts promiscuous interactions

### Description
During the co-translational assembly of protein complexes, a fully synthesized subunit engages with the nascent chain of a newly synthesized interaction partner. Such events are thought to contribute to productive assembly, but their exact physiological relevance remains underexplored. Here, we examined structural motifs contained in nucleoporins for their potential to facilitate co-translational assembly. We experimentally tested candidate structural motifs and identified several previously unknown co-translational interactions. We demonstrate by selective ribosome profiling that domain invasion motifs of beta-propellers, coiled-coils, and short linear motifs act as co-translational assembly domains. Such motifs are often contained in proteins that are members of multiple complexes (moonlighters) and engage with closely related paralogs. Surprisingly, moonlighters and paralogs assembled co-translationally in only one but not all of the relevant assembly pathways. Our results highlight the regulatory complexity of assembly pathways. During the co-translational assembly of protein complexes, a fully synthesized subunit engages with the nascent chain of a newly synthesized interaction partner. Such events are thought to contribute to productive assembly, but their exact physiological relevance remains underexplored. Here, we examined structural motifs contained in nucleoporins for their potential to facilitate co-translational assembly. We experimentally tested candidate structural motifs and identified several previously unknown co-translational interactions. We demonstrate by selective ribosome profiling that domain invasion motifs of beta-propellers, coiled-coils, and short linear motifs act as co-translational assembly domains. Such motifs are often contained in proteins that are members of multiple complexes (moonlighters) and engage with closely related paralogs. Surprisingly, moonlighters and paralogs assembled co-translationally in only one but not all of the relevant assembly pathways. Our results highlight the regulatory complexity of assembly pathways.

### Sample Protocol
500 μL of each elution fraction was immediately supplemented with 20 mM TCEP and incubated at 30 min at 37°C. Next, the pull downs were subsequently alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) incubated in the dark for 20 min at room temperature and further processed by adding 12 % aqueous phosphoric acid to obtain a final concentration of 1.2 % of phosphoric acid. Pre-processed pull downs were mixed with S-trap binding buffer, transferred to S-trap ProtiFi plates (ProtiFi), and treated according to the manufacture’s protocol. Finally, the protein was converted into peptides using a 1:100 Trypsin : protein ratio by supplementing the corresponding amount of Trypsin in 125 μL of digestion buffer that was added to each condition. Trypsin digest was carried out overnight at 4°C. Before elution, 80 μL of digestion buffer was added to each well of the S-trap digestion plate and eluted in an OASIS elution plate (Waters). Next, 80 μL of 0.2 % of aqueous formic acid was added per well and elution was repeated. Finally, 80 μL of aqueous acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.2 % formic acid was applied and peptides were recovered. The eluted peptides were transferred and solvents were evaporated in a speed vac (Eppendorf). Dried peptides were resolved in 80 μL of HPLC water. 20 μL of these peptides were then subjected for peptide concentration assays (Thermo Scientifc). The remaining peptides were cleaned up using the OASIS desalting plates. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were loaded onto a C18-CoAnn trapping column (particle size 3 μm, L = 20 mm) and separated on a C18-CoAnn analytical column (particle size = 2 μm, ID = 75 μm, L = 50 cm, CoAnn Technologies, LLC, Richland, USA) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) at a temperature of 55°C. Trapping was carried out for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 μL/min using a loading buffer (100 % H2O with 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Peptides were separated by a gradient of water (buffer A: 100 % H2O and 0.1 % FA) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 80 % ACN, 20 % H2O, and 0.1 % FA) with a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient went from 4 % to 48 % buffer B in 90 min. All solvents were LC-MS grade and purchased from Riedel-de Häen/Honeywell (Seelze, Germany). Eluting peptides were analyzed in data-dependent acquisition mode on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to the nano-HPLC by a Nano Flex ESI source. MS1 survey scans were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1400 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 120k, automatic gain control (AGC) = 2e5, and maximum injection time: 50 ms). Sequence information was acquired by a “ddMS2 OT HCD” MS2 method with a fixed cycle time of 2 s for MS/MS scans. MS2 scans were generated from the most abundant precursors with a minimum intensity of 3e4 and charge states from two to five. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole using a 1.4 Da window and fragmented using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at 30 % normalized collision energy. For Orbitrap MS2, an AGC of 1e4 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms were used (resolution = 30k). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a mass tolerance of 10 parts per million (ppm). Each sample was measured in duplicate LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software (v1.6.6.0) with customized parameters for the Andromeda search engine. Spectra were matched to a Saccharomyces cerevisiae database downloaded from UniProtKB (April 2021), a contaminant and decoy database, with a minimum Tryptic peptide length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm, with a static modification (carboxyamidomethylation) for cysteine residues. Acetylation on the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine residues were included as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) below 1 % was applied at protein, peptide, and modification levels. The "match between runs" option was enabled and only proteins identified by at least one unique peptide were considered for further analysis. Abundance changes were calculated from median-centered peptide intensities. The mean of median-centered peptide intensities was normalized to the intensity of Nsp1 within the same biological replicate and a fold change was calculated. For Figure S7, the mean of peptide intensities were calculated and normalized to Nsp1. This dataset contains the second set of proteomics experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Co-translational assembly

### Affiliations
Proteomics, MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Proteomics, MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research


