### Accession
PXD025922

### Title
Protein profiling of Aortic-Valvular and Endocardial endothelial cells using label-free proteomics

### Description
The variations in the protein profile of aortic-valvular (AVE) and endocardial endothelial (EE) cells are currently unknown. The current study's objective is to identify differentially expressed proteins and associated pathways in both endothelial cells. We used endothelial cells isolated from the porcine aortic valve and endocardium for the profiling of proteins. Label-free proteomics was performed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Our proteomics analysis revealed that 29 proteins were highly expressed, and 25 proteins were less represented in the valve than endocardial endothelium. The first part of the study was already available in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (PXD009194).

### Sample Protocol
The pig (Sus scrofa domesticus) heart samples were collected from a local slaughterhouse for the current study. The ethical approval was obtained from the institutional animal ethics committee of Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology. The excised heart samples were harvested in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). An antibiotic-antimycotic cocktail (15240, Gibco-Life Technologies, USA) and 100 U/mL heparin (H3149, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) also added to the PBS. An enzymatic method with 0.2% collagenase type-2 (C6885, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was used to isolate endothelial cells from the endocardium and aortic valve (Smith, Radomski, et al. 1993, Jaleel, Aneesh Kumar, et al. 2019). The isolated cells were cultured in a 60 x 15 mm culture dish (353002, Falcon, USA). The MCDB 131 with 20% was used for the cell culture at 370 C and 5% CO2.  The cells were harvested after reaching the confluence, and pellets were stored at -800 C. The RapiGestTM SF surfactant (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was used to isolate proteins from the cell pellets. The bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) was used for the estimation of the protein concentration. In-solution trypsin digestion was performed in 100 µg proteins. The DL-Dithiothreitol (100mM) was used for the reduction of disulfide bonds in proteins. The alkylation was conducted with 200 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes.  The proteins were digested with trypsin (Sigma) by incubating overnight at 370 C. The 100 % formic acid (1µL) was used for the arresting of trypsin digestion. The digested peptides were centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 12 minutes, and the supernatants were used for the LC/MS/MS analysis. A nano ACQUITY UPLC System (Waters, Manchester, UK) chromatography system coupled to a Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (SYNAPT-G2, Waters) were used for the LC/MS/MS analysis. Each sample was analyzed three times (three technical replicates) MassLynx4.1 SCN781 software was used for the control and operation of both instruments. 3 µL of peptides were injected for the measurement.  A trap column (Symmetry® 180 μm × 20 mm C18 5 μm, Waters) used to remove the salts from the sample. 75 μm × 100 mm BEH C18 Column (Waters), with a particle size of 1.7 μm was employed for the peptide separation. The chromatography column was maintained at 400c. Mobile phase-A was water, and the mobile phase-B was acetonitrile; both contain 0.1% formic acid.  Gradient elution of mobile phase-B (1-40%) was employed for 55.5 min. Columns were washed with 80% mobile phase-B for 7.5 min. 1% mobile phase B was used for the re-equilibration of the column. The flow rate of 300 nL/ min was used throughout the run. The data were acquired in continuum format in elevated collision energy (MSE) mode with ion mobility. The resolving power of 18,000 FWHM in resolution mode was used for the acquisition of data. Data were collected for 0.9s with an interscan delay of 0.024 s. [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human (Sigma) was used for the lock mass acquisition every 30 seconds at a flow rate of 500 nL /minutes.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Non-linear Dynamics, UK) was used for the analysis of proteomics data. The Sus scrofa database downloaded from the NCBI was used for the annotation of peptides. A false discovery rate of 0.1% was used for the search. The detection of at least one unique peptide was used for the identification. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. A specificity of 1 missed cleavage was used for the trypsin digestion parameter during database search. Normalized intensity values obtained from 3 biological replicates samples were used for label-free quantification analysis. The student’s t-test was used for the differential expression analysis using Progenesis QI for Proteomics. A protein with a raw p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5 was considered significant. An adjusted p-value (q-value) < 0.25 was used to select significantly changed proteins since the number of differentially expressed proteins was considerably less in this study.

### Publication Abstract
The variations in the protein profile of aortic-valvular (AVE) and endocardial endothelial (EE) cells are currently unknown. The current study's objective is to identify differentially expressed proteins and associated pathways in both the endothelial cells. We used endothelial cells isolated from the porcine (<i>Sus scrofa</i>) aortic valve and endocardium for the profiling of proteins. Label-free proteomics was performed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Our proteomics analysis revealed that 29 proteins were highly expressed, and 25 proteins were less expressed in the valve than the endocardial endothelium. The cell surface markers, such as CD63, ICAM1, PECAM1, PROCR, and TFRC, were highly expressed in EE. In contrast, CD44 was highly expressed in AVE. The pathway analysis showed that metabolic process-related proteins and extracellular matrix-related proteins were enriched in valves. Differential enrichment of signaling pathways was observed in the endocardium. The hemostasis function-related proteins were increased in both endothelial cells. The proteins and pathways enriched in aortic-valvular and endocardial endothelial cells revealed the distinct phenotype of these two closely related cells.

### Keywords
Aortic-valvular (ave), Lc-ms/ms, Endocardial endothelial (ee) cells

### Affiliations
Scientist F Cardiovascular Diseases & Diabetes Biology Kerala ,Rajiv gandhi centre for Biotechnology,Kerala, India
Technician, Mass spectrometry and proteomics core facility, RGCB

### Submitter
MAHESH CHANDRAN V R

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Abdul Jaleel K.A
Scientist F Cardiovascular Diseases & Diabetes Biology Kerala ,Rajiv gandhi centre for Biotechnology,Kerala, India


