### Accession
PXD040974

### Title
Metabolic labelling and LC-MS/MS-based identification of IL-1α-induced secreted proteomes from epithelial cells in the presence or absence of serum

### Description
The unbiased identification of cytokine-induced, secreted proteins from cells cultured in serum-containing medium is challenging. Here, we describe an experimental and bioinformatics workflow to label IL-1α-regulated proteins in living cells with the methionine analogue L-homopropargylglycine (L-HPG), purify and identify them by means of a CLICK-chemistry based biotinylation step followed by nanoHPLC-MS/MS. A side-by-side comparison of enriched proteins and their ontologies to serum-free conditions demonstrates the sensitivity and specificity of this approach to study the inducible secreted proteomes of epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in DMEM PAN Biotech (#P04-03550) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) FBS, 100 U/ml Penicillin, 100 µg/ml Streptomycin and 2mM L-Glutamin.  After 48 h of cultivation, the medium was changed to DMEM w/o L-Methionine (Gibco 21013024) supplemented with 0 % or 1 % FBS. Cells were treated with L-HPG (25 µM) for 6 h and stimulated with IL-1 for 6 h.  In a chemical click-reaction biotin-azide was fused to metabolically L-HPG labeled proteins. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) in DDA-PASEF mode. Biotinylated proteins were separated using magnetic streptavidin beads.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data was processed using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The unbiased identification of cytokine-induced, secreted proteins from cells cultured in serum-containing medium is challenging. Here, we describe an experimental and bioinformatics workflow to label interleukin-1&#x3b1;-regulated proteins in living cells with the methionine analogue L-homopropargylglycine. We detail their purification and identification by means of CLICK-chemistry-based biotinylation followed by nanoHPLC-MS/MS. A side-by-side comparison of enriched proteins and their ontologies to serum-free conditions demonstrates the sensitivity and specificity of this approach to study the inducible secreted proteomes of epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Secretome, Hpg-labeling, Metabolic labeling, Il-1 alpha, Affinity proteomics

### Affiliations
Rudolf Buchheim Institute of Pharmacology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, D-35392, Germany
Rudolf-Buchheim-Institute of Pharmacology
Justus Liebig University Gießen

### Submitter
Axel Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Kracht
Rudolf Buchheim Institute of Pharmacology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, D-35392, Germany


