### Accession
PXD036561

### Title
Biomarker discovery for ectoparasite host resistance in cattle

### Description
This project aimed to discover the protein-based biomarkers for tick resistance in cattle using cattle skin samples. The cattle were phenotyped into two groups, tick-resistant and susceptible after artificial tick challenge. Mean tick scores were used to categorise cattle. The SWATH analysis was sued to measure the relative abundance of proteins in skin samples of the two groups at different time points.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen skin biopsies were randomly homogenised in lysis buffer comprised of T-PER™ Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific®, USA) and Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) (ThermoFisher Scientific®, USA). Briefly, each biopsy was sliced into thin pieces with surgical blade (No. 10) and homogenised in 1 mL of lysis buffer with zirconia (1mm and 2 mm) and steel (3 mm) (Miniature Bearings, Australia) beads using tissue lyser (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) in 2 mL screw cap tubes. The samples were homogenised for two cycles of two minutes each at 30 Hz/Sec, with incubation on ice for two minutes after each cycle, followed by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 1 hour at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and stored at -20°C for further use. Protein concentration skin extracts was quantified by Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific®, USA).  Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry in randomised blocks, for each sample (skin and serum), 100 µg of total protein was denatured (100 µL of 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)), reduced (5 mM DL-Dithiothreitol), and alkylated (25 mM final concentration of iodoacetamide) using Pierce concentrator 10K molecular weight cut-off columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific®, USA). Following alkylation, proteins were digested with 4 µg trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass-Spec Grade, Promega®) by overnight incubation at 37°C in thermomixer with 400 rpm. The digested peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore®, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For skin and serum samples, a separate pooled sample generated by taking 3 µL from each sample (before desalting), totalling approximately 108 µg peptides was subjected to fractionation using Pierce High pH Reversed-phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific®, USA). Peptides eluted in eight separate fractions of acetonitrile (300 µL for each 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5% 15%, 17.5%, 20% and 50%) in triethylamine (0.1%) were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were analysed randomly, and peptides were measured by LC-MS/MS experiment using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol with a Shimadzu® Prominence nanoLC system along with a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a Nanospray III interface (SCIEX®). Based on ZipTip binding capacity, approximately 2 µg of peptides were desalted on an Agilent C18 trap (pore size 300 Å, particle size 5 μm, 0.3 mm i.d. × 5 mm) at a flow rate of 30 µL/ min for 3 min, followed by separation on a Vydac EVEREST reverse-phased C18 HPLC column (pore size 300 Å, particle size 5 μm, 150 μm i.d. × 150 mm) at a flow rate of 1 µL/ min. Peptides were separated with buffer A (1 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid) with a gradient of 10-60% buffer B over 45  min. Gas and voltage were adjusted as required. MS-TOF scan across (350-1800 m/z) was performed for 0.5 sec for data-dependent acquisition (DDA), followed by DDA MS/MS with an automated selection of top 20 peptides with intensity greater than 100 cps, across 40-1800 m/z (0.05 sec per spectrum) using a collision energy of 40 ± 15 V. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) SWATH analyses, MS scans across 350-1800 m/z were performed (0.05 sec), followed by high sensitivity DIA mode using 26 m/z isolation windows for 0.1 sec, across 400-1250 m/z.  Collision energy values for SWATH samples were automatically assigned by Analyst software based on m/z mass windows (SCIEX®).

### Data Protocol
Proteins from DDA data were identified using ProteinPilot software (SCIEX®5.02), searching against all bovine proteins in UniProtKB (downloaded 11 May 2021; 46754 total entries), with settings as follows: sample type = identification, cysteine alkylation = iodoacetamide, instrument = TripleTOF5600, species = none, ID focus = biological modifications, digestion enzyme = trypsin, search effort = thorough ID. An ion library from proteins identified with ProteinPilot at 1% false discovery rate was used for analysis of SWATH data. The abundance of peptides in each sample was determined using PeakView 2.1 (SCIEX®), with settings: shared peptides = allowed; peptide confidence threshold = 99%; false discovery rate = 1%; peptides per protein = 6; transitions per peptide = 6; XIC extraction widow = 6 min; XIC width = 75 ppm. A python script (https://github.com/bschulzlab/reformatMS) was used to reformat the PeakView output, with a 1% peptide FDR cut-off to remove the ion measurements for low quality peptides from each sample and reformatting appropriate for use with MSstats. Differences in protein abundance were determined with a linear mixed model using MSstats (2.4) in R, with Benjamini and Hochberg corrections adjusting for multiple comparisons and a significance threshold of P < 10-5. Proteins and samples were both clustered with Cluster 3.0, applying a hierarchical, uncentered correlation and complete linkage. Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) was used to identify protein-protein interaction and characterisation for gene ontology (GO) terms and biological processes (BPs) using Uniprot accession identifiers (IDs) of significantly differentially abundant (DA) proteins as a target list . Bos taurus genome was used as background in the STRING analysis with the following basic settings: meaning of network edges as evidence; active interaction sources included were experiments, databases, co-expression, neighbourhood, gene expression and co-occurrence; high confidence (0.700) for the minimum required interaction score, and k-means clustering with the number of clusters set at 3. In addition, for serum samples, over-representation analysis of GO terms was also performed with clusterProfiler R package using filtered gene lists (P-value <0.05 and |log2FC| >0.3) from pre-exposure vs early (6h PFI) and prolonged exposure (105d PFI) datasets. Graphs were produced with dot plot and category network plot functions from this package. For skin samples, protein class GO terms enrichment was also performed with PANTHER classification system (Gene Ontology Phylogenetic Annotation Project, v 16.0. Available from http://www.pantherdb.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cattle, Swath, Lc-ms/ms, Skin, Dia

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, Centre for Animal Science
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Ali Raza

### Lab Head
Dr Ala Tabor
The University of Queensland, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, Centre for Animal Science


