### Accession
PXD043260

### Title
A conserved membrane curvature-generating protein is crucial for autophagosome formation in fission yeast

### Description
Organelles are shaped by curvature-generating proteins, which include the reticulons and REEPs that are involved in forming the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). A conserved REEP subfamily differs from the ER-shaping REEPs in abundance and membrane topology and has unidentified functions. Here, we show that Rop1, the single member of this family in the fission yeast Schizosacharomyces pombe, is crucial for the macroautophagy of organelles and cytosolic proteins. Rop1 is needed for the formation of phagophores, cup-like structures consisting of two closely apposed membrane sheets that encapsulate cargo. It is recruited at early stages to phagophores and is required for their maturation into autophagosomes. Rop1 function relies on its ability to generate high membrane curvature and on its colocalization with the autophagy component Atg2 that is thought to reside at the phagophore rim. We propose that Rop1 facilitates the formation and growth of the double-membrane structure of the autophagosome.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were then lysed by bead-beating and the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 30 s. The total protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein assay. The sample was reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. Approximately 100 µg of protein were transferred to a new tube for methanol-chloroform precipitation. The pellet was resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C. The streamline-TMT protocol was used hereafter.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the S. pombe UniProt reference Database (downloaded: August 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. The wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent. Each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance measurement.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reep1, Fission yeast, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Boston MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Rapoport
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Boston MA 02115, USA


