### Accession
PXD006274

### Title
Proteomics of Colwellia psychrerythraea grown at multiple subzero temperatures

### Description
The mechanisms that allow psychrophilic bacteria to remain metabolically active at subzero temperatures result from form and function of their proteins. We present first proteomic evidence of physiological changes of the marine psychrophile Colwellia psychrerythraea 34H (Cp34H) after exposure to subzero temperatures (-1, and -10°C in ice) through 8 weeks. Protein abundance was compared between different treatments to understand the effects of temperature and time, independently and jointly, within cells transitioning to, and being maintained in ice. Parallel [3H]-leucine and [3H]-thymidine incubations indicated active protein and DNA synthesis to -10°C. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified 1763 proteins across four experimental treatments. Proteins involved in osmolyte regulation and polymer secretion were found constitutively present across all treatments, suggesting that they are required for metabolic success below 0°C. Differentially abundant protein groups indicated a reallocation of resources from DNA binding to DNA repair and from motility to chemo-taxis and sensing. Changes to iron and nitrogen metabolism, cellular membrane structures, and protein synthesis and folding were also revealed. By elucidating vital strategies during life in ice, this study provides novel insight into the extensive molecular adaptations that occur in cold-adapted marine organisms to sustain cellular function in their habitat. Raw data available at http://www.chorusproject.org Public project ID number 682.

### Sample Protocol
Colwellia psychrerythraea strain 34H (ATCC No. BAA-681; GenBank Accession No. AF396670) used in this study was originally isolated from Arctic marine sediments (Huston et al., 2000). Cells were cultured from frozen glycerol stocks by incubating at -1∞C with daily inversion in half-strength Marine 2216 broth until early stationary growth phase (2 weeks or less). Prior to the initiation of the experiments, cells were harvested by centrifugation (2800◊g; 20 min; 4∞C). After washing with cold (-1∞C), 0.2µm filtered ASW {0.1M NaCl, 0.01M KCl, 0.06M MgCl2, 8mM MgSO47H20, 5mM TAPSO [3-(N- tris(hydroxymethyl) methylamino]-2-hydroxypro-pane-sulfonic acid], pH 7.5}, cells were resuspended in ASW (-1∞C) with 1.5g C ml-1 extracellular polysacharide substances to an OD600nm of 0.2 corresponding to an average (±standard deviation) cell count of 5.7E7 ± 1.1E7 cells ml-1. Triplicate 100µl of aliquots of cell suspensions were fixed in 2% formaldehyde, and stored at 4∞C for abundance analysis by epifluorescence microscopy as described by Junge and colleagues (2004b). For [3H]-leucine and [3H]-thymidine incubation experiments, 500µl of aliquots of the cell suspension were placed into 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes for immediate use.   Bacterial metabolic activity was measured using leucine ([3H]-leu) and thymidine ([3H]-thy) incorporation assays, following methodologies based on the analysis of bacterial activities in freshwater ice and saline ice. To determine rates of [3H]-leu incorporation and [3H]-thy incorporation in the prepared cell suspensions, time-course experiments were conducted at temperatures of -1, -5 and -10∞C and sampling occurred at 0, 1, 12 and 24 h, and 1, 2, 4 and 8 week time points. Triplicate negative (killed) controls were completed at each temperature by adding 100µl of 50% trichloroacetic acid (TCA; 4∞C) to control tubes prior to tracer addition. Methods described by Junge and colleagues (2006) were primarily followed, with the exception of modifications including: (i) samples were placed at their intended temperatures immediately after the addition of the radiolabel tracer, not flash frozen with LN2, (ii) three ethanol washes were performed during the processing stage and (iii) in addition to the [3H]-leu incorporation assay to measure metabolic activity based on protein synthesis, [3H]-thy incorporation was also measured to investigate rates of DNA synthesis.  Based on peptide concentrations, a total of 1µg of peptide digest in 10µl of 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid was sampled per LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were separated and introduced into the mass spectrometer (MS) by reverse-phase chromatography using a 25cm long, 75µm i.d., fused silica capillary column packed with C18 particles (Magic C18AQ, 100 ≈, 5) fitted with a 2cm long, 100µm i.d. precolumn (Magic C18AQ, 200 ≈, 5). Peptides were eluted using an acidified (formic acid, 0.1% v/v) water-acetonitrile gradient (5ñ35% acetonitrile in 90 min). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo Fisher QExactive. The top 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 acquisition from precursor ion scans of 400ñ1600 m z-1. Quality control peptide mixtures were analyzed every sixth injection to monitor chromatography and MS sensitivity. Skyline was used to determine that QC standards did not deviate >10% through all analyses (Maclean et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
All tandem MS results were searched and interpreted with comet (Eng et al., 2013). The protein database used for correlating spectra with protein identifications was generated by combining the latest release of C. psychrerythraea proteins on the National Center for Biotechnology Information website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/; April 2013) consisting of 4910 proteins, 50 common contaminants and the QC peptides. comet parameters included: reverse concatenated sequence database search, Trypsin enzyme specificity, cysteine modification of 57 Da (resulting from the iodoacetamide) and modifications on methionine of 15.999 Da (oxidation). Concatenated targetñdecoy databases searches were completed and minimum protein and peptide thresholds were set at P>0.95 on proteinprophet and peptideprophet (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Protein identifications from the whole-cell lysates were accepted by proteinprophet if the abovementioned thresholds were passed, two or more peptides were identified (peptideprophet), and at least one terminus was tryptic (Keller et al., 2002).

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms that allow psychrophilic bacteria to remain metabolically active at subzero temperatures result from form and function of their proteins. We present first proteomic evidence of physiological changes of the marine psychrophile Colwellia psychrerythraea 34H (Cp34H) after exposure to subzero temperatures (-1, and -10&#xb0;C in ice) through 8 weeks. Protein abundance was compared between different treatments to understand the effects of temperature and time, independently and jointly, within cells transitioning to, and being maintained in ice. Parallel [3H]-leucine and [3H]-thymidine incubations indicated active protein and DNA synthesis to -10&#xb0;C. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified 1763 proteins across four experimental treatments. Proteins involved in osmolyte regulation and polymer secretion were found constitutively present across all treatments, suggesting that they are required for metabolic success below 0&#xb0;C. Differentially abundant protein groups indicated a reallocation of resources from DNA binding to DNA repair and from motility to chemo-taxis and sensing. Changes to iron and nitrogen metabolism, cellular membrane structures, and protein synthesis and folding were also revealed. By elucidating vital strategies during life in ice, this study provides novel insight into the extensive molecular adaptations that occur in cold-adapted marine organisms to sustain cellular function in their habitat.

### Keywords
Adaptation physiological/genetics, Alteromonadaceae/metabolism, Movement, Alteromonadaceae/genetics, Bacterial proteins/metabolism, Proteomics, Dna repair, Cold temperature, Iron/metabolism, Colwellia pschrerythraea, Nitrogen/metabolism, Bacterial proteins/genetics

### Affiliations
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Brook Nunn

### Lab Head
Dr Brook L. Nunn
University of Washington, Department of Genome Sciences


