### Accession
PXD001454

### Title
Investigation of human TFIID subcomplexes 7TAF and 8TAF by cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
7TAF and 8TAF complexes have been cross-linked with the bifunctional reagent bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, BS3 that targets mostly lysines . Cross-linked complexes were separated from non-cross-linked species by SDS-PAGE and the product bands were digested in-gel. The cross-linked peptides were analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Seperation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm inner diameter, 8-μm opening, 250-mm length; New Objectives) with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 2% B at 500 nl/min flow rate and eluted at 300 nl/min flow rate in two steps: linear increase from 2% B to 40% B in 139 minutes; then increase from 40% to 95% B in 11 minutes. The eluted peptides were directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. Peptides were analyzed using a high/high strategy: both MS spectra and MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap. MS spectra were recorded at 100,000 resolution. The eight highest intensity peaks with a charge state of three or higher were selected in each cycle for iontrap fragmentation. The fragments were produced using CID with 35% normalized collision energy and detected by the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was set to 90s and repeat count was 1.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5)  at default parameters except for “top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Search was conducted against TAF complex sequences using Xi software (version 1.3.355). Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, BS3 (including BS3 modification); max. missed cleavages, 4; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; cross-linkable amino acids, N-terminus, lysine, serine, tyrosine and threonine; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH.

### Publication Abstract
General transcription factor TFIID is a cornerstone of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation in eukaryotic cells. How human TFIID-a megadalton-sized multiprotein complex composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs)-assembles into a functional transcription factor is poorly understood. Here we describe a heterotrimeric TFIID subcomplex consisting of the TAF2, TAF8 and TAF10 proteins, which assembles in the cytoplasm. Using native mass spectrometry, we define the interactions between the TAFs and uncover a central role for TAF8 in nucleating the complex. X-ray crystallography reveals a non-canonical arrangement of the TAF8-TAF10 histone fold domains. TAF2 binds to multiple motifs within the TAF8 C-terminal region, and these interactions dictate TAF2 incorporation into a core-TFIID complex that exists in the nucleus. Our results provide evidence for a stepwise assembly pathway of nuclear holo-TFIID, regulated by nuclear import of preformed cytoplasmic submodules.

### Keywords
7taf, Cross-link mass spectrometry (cl-ms), 8taf

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom. Institute of Bioanalytics, Department of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom. Institute of Bioanalytics, Department of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany


