### Accession
PXD000751

### Title
Proteomic analysis of castrate resistant prostate cancer cell lines

### Description
In this study the development of androgen independence in a cell model of disease was selected as a mirror of to the events at play in the development of Castrate Resistant Prostate Cancer in-vivo. LNCaP cells which are androgen dependent and androgen independent sublines; LNCaP-Abl and LNCaP-Abl-Hof were subject to extensive fractionation by 1-D SDS PAGE and accurate mass-high resolution mass spectrometry (Q Exactive) to identify proteins whose expression was changes significantly in response to androgen independent growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 1M triethlyammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), 0.01% SDS + Complete Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Protein was extracted by centrifugation @ 3000 X g @ 4oC with the supernatant retained for analysis. Protein was quantified as per the Bradford method (ref) and 25µg of each biological replicate was separated using commercially prepared Precision Plus 4-20% pre-cast gels (Thermo Scientific). Gels were stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon) for 10 minutes prior to excision of 10 gel slices from each sample lane with approximately equal distribution of protein per gel slice (visually estimated). Excised gel slices were added to an individual Eppendorf tubes and subject to in-gel trypsin digestion as per methods described by Shevchenko et al. Briefly, each lane was denatured with 10mM DTT, alykalated with 55mM IAA and de-stained with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile (1:1, vol/vol). Gel slices were then completely covered with trypsin buffer (13ng/µl in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate) and left on ice for 2 hours to allow impregnation of the gel bands with trypsin buffer and incubated @ 37 oC and 500rpm on a thermomixer for 18-24 hours. Peptide digests were extracted with 1:2 (vol/vol) 5% formic acid/acetonitrile, dried by Speedvac, re-suspended in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified using C18 resin pipette tips (Ziptip, Millipore). Purified samples were again dried in a speedvac and re-suspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Label free nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a Ultimate 3000 (nano-HPLC) chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1µg was injected onto a Biobasic Picotip Emitter (Unitech) (120 mm length, 75 μm inner diameter)  packed with Reprocil Pur C18-AQ (1.9 μm) reverse phase media (Dr.Maisch GmbH). Peptides were chromatographed from 100% aqueous buffer A (3% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid in MS grade water) increasing organic buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 20% MS grade water, 0.5% acetic acid) to 35% from 0-53.5 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 °C, and with a potential of 2000V applied to the frit. All data was acquired in automatic data dependent acquisition switching mode. Fullscan MS spectra (350-1600 Dalton) were acquired using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 with the 15 most intense ions selected for HCD fragmentation and detection using the Orbitrap (MS2 scans).

### Data Protocol
Label free LC-MS/MS analysis of all data described in was performed using Maxquant (V1.2.7.4), an open source software. Thermo .Raw files were directly imported for processing. Maxquant label free quantification algorithms were applied to automatically extract peptide isotopic patterns, align and normalise total peptide signals across the multiple samples. Protein identifications were generated by searching Maxquant’s in-built Andromeda search engine matched against a Uniprot Human database (Release 05-2012) and 248 frequently observed laboratory contaminants (provided as part of the Maxquant software solution). Search parameters consisted of enzyme: trypsin, allow up to two missed cleavages, species: Homo sapiens, fixed modification: carbimidomethylated cysteine, variable modification, oxidation methionine, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance window was set to 6ppm and the product mass tolerance was 20ppm. Peptide and protein FDR were set to 0.01%. The Label Free Quantification (LFQ) values were generated with a minimum of 2 peptides required per protein and with the maximum number of peptides compared across all samples.  Protein ratios were calculated as the median of all ratios of common peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Activin A (ActA)/follistatin (FST) signaling has been shown to be deregulated in different tumor types including lung adenocarcinoma (LADC). Here, we report that serum ActA protein levels are significantly elevated in LADC patients (n=64) as compared to controls (n=46, p=0.015). ActA levels also correlated with more advanced disease stage (p&lt;0.0001) and T (p=0.0035) and N (p=0.0002) factors. M1 patients had significantly higher ActA levels than M0 patients (p&lt;0.001). High serum ActA level was associated with poor overall survival (p&lt;0.0001) and was confirmed as an independent prognostic factor (p=0.004). Serum FST levels were increased only in female LADC patients (vs. female controls, p=0.031). Two out of five LADC cell lines secreted biologically active ActA, while FST was produced in all of them. Transcripts of both type I and II ActA receptors were detected in all five LADC cell lines. In conclusion, our study does not only suggest that measuring blood ActA levels in LADC patients might improve the prediction of prognosis, but also indicates that this parameter might be a novel non-invasive biomarker for identifying LADC patients with organ metastases.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, Cell lines, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
School of Medicine and Medical Science, Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin
Conway Institute

### Submitter
Brian Morrissey

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Pennington
School of Medicine and Medical Science, Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin


