### Accession
PXD001717

### Title
The abundant marine bacterium Pelagibacter simultaneously catabolizes dimethylsulfoniopropionate to the gases dimethyl sulfide and methanethiol

### Description
Marine phytoplankton produce ~109 tons of dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) per year, an estimated 10% of which is catabolized by bacteria through the DMSP cleavage  pathway to the climatically active gas dimethyl sulfide (DMS). SAR11 Alphaproteobacteria (order Pelagibacterales), the most abundant chemoorganotrophic bacteria in the oceans, have been shown to assimilate DMSP into biomass, thereby supplying this cell’s unusual requirement for reduced sulfur. Here we report that Pelagibacter HTCC1062 produces the gas methanethiol (MeSH) and that simultaneously a second DMSP catabolic pathway, mediated by a DMSP lyase, shunts as much as 59% of DMSP uptake to DMS production. We propose a model in which the allocation of DMSP between these pathways is kinetically controlled to release DMS when the supply of DMSP exceeds cellular sulfur demands for biosynthesis. These findings suggest that DMSP supply and demand relationships can significantly control rates of oceanic DMS production.

### Sample Protocol
HTCC1062 was grown in ASW amended with 100 μM NH4Cl, 10 μM KH2PO4, 0.1 μM FeCl3, 1 mM pyruvate, 500 μM glycine and excess vitamins. Triplicate Samples were amended with 1 μM DMSP, 1 μM methionine and samples with both 1 μM DMSP and 1 μM methionine are treated as positive controls. Cells were all harvested by centrifugation at the same time point in the exponential phase. Prior to harvesting, cultures were treated with chloramphenicol (0.01 g/L) and protease inhibitor cocktail Set II (0.1 mL/L). Cell pellets were immediately stored in - 80℃ prior to ITRAQ (isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation) analysis at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). Each cell pellet was brought up to 100 μL with 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and sonicated in a water bath with ice until the pellet went into solution. The samples were briefly spun and transferred to PCT MicroTube barocycler pulse tubes with 150 μL caps (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA). The MicroTubes were placed in a MicroTube cartridge and barocycled for 10 cycles (20 seconds at 35,000 psi back down to ambient pressure for 10 seconds). All of the material was removed from the MicroTubes and transferred to 1.5 mL micro-centrifuge tubes. A Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) (ThermoScientic, Rockford, IL) assay was used to determine protein concentration. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to each sample at a concentration of 5 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and incubated at 60℃ for 1 hour. The samples were then diluted 10-fold with 100 mM NH4HCO3, and tryptic digestion (Promega, Madison, WI) was performed at a 1:50 (w/w) ratio with the addition of 1 mM CaCl2 to stabilize the trypsin and reduce autolysis. The sample was incubated for 3 hours and cleaned via C-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) on a Gilson GX-274 ASPEC automated SPE system (Gilson Inc., Middleton, WI). The samples were dried to 50 μL and assayed with a Direct Detect IR Spectrometer (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) to determine the final peptide concentration. Each sample set of 3 along with the pooled sample was dried in a speed-vac until near dryness and brought up to 30 μL with 1M TEAB. Each sample was isobarically labeled using iTRAQ Multiplex (4-plex) Kits (ABsciex, Framingham, MA) according to the manufactures instructions. Briefly, 50 μL of isopropanol was added to each reagent (iTRAQ 114-117), vortexed and allowed to dissolve for 5 minutes with occasional vortexing. Reagents were then added to the samples, vortexed and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 100 μL of water to the sample with incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples within each set were then combined and dried in the speed vac to remove the organics. Each set was cleaned using Discovery C18 50 mg/1 mL solid phase extraction tubes as described above and once again assayed with BCA to determine the final peptide concentration. Samples were diluted to a volume of 900 μL with 10 mm ammonium formate buffer (pH 10.0), and resolved on a XBridge C18, 250x4.6 mm, 5 μM with 4.6x20 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA). Separations were performed at 0.5 mL/min using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) with mobile phases (A) 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0 and (B) 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.0/acetonitrile (10:90). The gradient was adjusted from at 100% A to 95% A over the first 10 min, 95% A to 65% A over minutes 10 to 70, 65% A to 30% A over minutes 70 to 85, maintained at 30% A over minutes 85 to 95, re-equilibrated with 100% A over minutes 95 to 105, and held at 100% A until minute 120. Fractions were collected every 1.25 minutes after the first 15 minutes (96 fractions). Every 12th fraction was then combined for a total of 12 samples (each with n=8 fractions pooled) for each of the 3 sets. All fractions were dried under vacuum and 20 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each fraction for storage at -20℃ until LC-MS/MS analysis. Each ITRAQ run generated 152,8902345 spectra, identifying 1196 out of 1324 proteins in HTCC1062. Of these, 112 showed significantly different expression between DMSP and methionine treatments (methionineDMSP-1 fold-change median = 0.913, 1st quartile=0.783, 3rd quartile=1.19)

### Data Protocol
MS/MS datasets were searched against predicted proteins from Ca. P. ubique HTCC1062 using MSGF+ (http://proteomics.ucsd.edu/Software/MSGFPlus.html) with the following search parameters: dynamic methionine oxidation; partial trypsin digest; 20 ppm tolerance. Reporter ion intensities were collected using MASIC21 and processed through the MAC (Multiple Analysis Chain) pipeline to aggregate, filter and generate cross-tabulated results for processing. Redundant peptide identifications had reporter ion intensities summed for a unique peptide result. Proteins were tested for significantly different expression between cultures grown on DMSP and those grown on methionine using a linear mixed-effects model below encompassing a fixed treatment effect and random effect for each peptide associated with the protein using the lme4 package in R

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sar11 dmsp itraq

### Affiliations
Plymouth Marine Laboratory
Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331

### Submitter
Ben Temperton

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Giovannoni
Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331


