### Accession
PXD020402

### Title
Proteomic comparison of photosynthetic reaction centre-light harvesting 1 complexes in wild-type, protein-W knockout and His-tagged protein-W strains of Rhodopseudomonas palustris.

### Description
Rhodopseudomonas palustris is a species of purple phototrophic bacterium. In these species, solar energy is captured by reaction centre-light harvesting 1 (RC-LH1) complexes which reside in membranes within the cells. The RC comprises three protein subunits: H, M, L and is encircled by a ring of LH1-α and LH1-β subunit pairs. Approximately 10% of these complexes in the wild-type (WT) strain include an additional subunit called protein-W. In this project, we have determined cryo-EM structures for RC-LH1 complexes both with and without protein-W. To enable the purification of RC-LH1-W with 100% occupancy of protein-W, strain expressing a C-terminally His-tagged W was engineered. For complexes lacking W, a knockout strain was used. Proteomic analysis was employed to validate these strains and establish that the WT and W-His expressed similar levels of W relative to RC-LH1.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a French press and cytoplasmic membranes isolated by centrifugation and solubilized in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 containing 2% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltopyranoside. 50 µg protein was diluted into 50 µL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8 containing 1% sodium laurate and sonicated for 60 s. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 37 C for 30 min and S-alkylated with 10 mM MMTS at RT for 10 min. Protein digestion was performed with (1:25 w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) for 3 h at 37 C. Laurate extraction was by the addition of 50 µL ethyl acetate and 10 µL 10% TFA with vortexing for 60 s. Phase separation was achieved by centrifugation at 15 700 RCF for 5 min. The peptide-containing lower phase was aspirated and desalted using a C18 spin column. After drying by vacuum centrifugation, the samples were dissolved in 0.5% TFA, 3% acetonitrile and 500 ng was analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 75 min at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a Rhodopseudomonas palustris proteome database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001426) using MaxQuant v.1.5.3.30, selecting default parameters but with ‘match between runs’ enabled. Comparative quantification of RC-LH1 and W was via the mass spectral ion intensities of tryptic peptides. Only peptides validated by product ion spectra in all analyses were utilized.

### Publication Abstract
The reaction-center light-harvesting complex 1 (RC-LH1) is the core photosynthetic component in purple phototrophic bacteria. We present two cryo-electron microscopy structures of RC-LH1 complexes from <i>Rhodopseudomonas palustris</i> A 2.65-&#xc5; resolution structure of the RC-LH1<sub>14</sub>-W complex consists of an open 14-subunit LH1 ring surrounding the RC interrupted by protein-W, whereas the complex without protein-W at 2.80-&#xc5; resolution comprises an RC completely encircled by a closed, 16-subunit LH1 ring. Comparison of these structures provides insights into quinone dynamics within RC-LH1 complexes, including a previously unidentified conformational change upon quinone binding at the RC Q<sub>B</sub> site, and the locations of accessory quinone binding sites that aid their delivery to the RC. The structurally unique protein-W prevents LH1 ring closure, creating a channel for accelerated quinone/quinol exchange.

### Keywords
Protein-w, Lh1-β, Lh1-α, Photosynthetic reaction centre-light harvesting 1 complex, Rhodopseudomonas palustris

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, UK.
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Neil Hunter
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, UK.


