### Accession
PXD021244

### Title
Adult mouse choroid plexus OTX2 Co-IP

### Description
To analyze OTX2 function in adult choroid plexus, we performed several OTX2 co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments with mass spectrometry analysis to identify potential protein partners. We previously discovered that OTX2 protein also accumulates non-cell autonomously in subventricular zone (SVZ) and rostral migratory stream (RMS) astrocytes and in visual cortex (VCx) parvalbumin cells. The identification of alternate protein partners in cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous contexts would suggest OTX2 takes on specific roles after transferring between cells. In order to test this hypothesis, and to reinforce choroid plexus analysis, we also performed OTX2 co-IP on lysates from adult mouse SVZ, RMS and VCx.

### Sample Protocol
ChP from LV and 4V from 3 months old mice were pooled and lysed with 1 ml lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM MgCl2, 1X protease/phosphatase inhibitor (Roche)) containing 1µl of benzonase (Roche). ChP were dissociated using 26G syringe and incubated 30 min on ice. Tubes were centrifuged at 21 000g for 10 min and supernatant was recovered and divided in two. Each half was incubated with 44 µg of either anti-OTX2 (ab21990, Abcam) or anti-IgG antibody (ab27478, Abcam) coupled magnetic-beads (10 mg/ml with 9.5 µg of antibody per mg of beads, Dynabeads Antibody Coupling Kit Life Tech) in lysis buffer at 4°C on rotating wheel overnight. Using magnetic separation, beads were washed 5 times in 1 mL of cold lysis buffer. Pelleted beads were eluted in 20 µl of laemmli buffer by heating 5 min at 95 °C, and then stored at -20 °C. For SVZ, RMS, and VCx, tissue from 10 mice were lysed by trituration (pipette and 26G syringe) in 10 µl lysis buffer II (20 mM Tris pH 8, 120 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1X protease/phosphatase inhibitor) per mg of tissue supplemented with 1 µl of benzonase / 1mL of lysis buffer II. Samples were processed as described above with 25 µl of antibody coupled-beads. Pelleted beads were eluted in 30 µl of laemmli buffer. Proteomics analysis were performed by the Protein Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (Institut Curie, Paris, France). Eluted samples in laemmli were processed and resulting peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex S.A.) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three experiments were performed for ChP proteomics and one for SVZ, RMS and VCx proteomics.

### Data Protocol
For identification, data were merged by condition replicate and searched against the Swiss-Prot “Mus Musculus” database using MascotTM (version 2.5.1). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.  Result files were further processed using myProMS software (version 3.9)  (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator (Spivak et al., 2009) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. All resulting proteins were reported in the "OTX2_MS_Data.xls" file.  Three criteria were used to obtain a list of potential OTX2 protein interactions in the four brain structures (Table 5): (i) unique proteins with 3 or more peptides identified exclusively in OTX2 compared to IgG co-IP samples (Unique protein, ≥ 3 peptides); (ii) proteins identified with 3 or more peptides in OTX2 co-IP samples and having a relative peptide difference greater than 50% compared to IgG co-IP (Selected protein,  ≥ 50% rel. ∆); and (iii) all small proteins (≤ 25 kDa) exclusive to OTX2 co-IP samples regardless of peptide number (Unique small protein, ≤ 25 kDa) given that they have fewer identifiable MS peptides. These lists were used for comparison between structures and ontology analysis. A list of 60 high-confidence protein partners of OTX2 in ChP was generated by filtering common proteins to all three ChP samples from the previously described selection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Choroid plexus, Mouse, Otx2, Homeoprotein

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


