### Accession
PXD014700

### Title
DNA binding proteome changes in response to loss of glycosylation in Burkholderia Cenocepacia

### Description
Comparsion of DNA interacting proteome of BC muants to assess chnages in transcriptional proteins. Four strain comparsion between WT vs delta pglL vs delta ogc vs delta pglL complemented AmrAB::S7-pglL-his. LFQ based quantification

### Sample Protocol
Freshly prepared whole cell pellets were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 20min while tumbling at RT temperature prior to isoltion of gDNA bound proteins. Excess formaldehyde was quenched with 2.5M glycine and cell lysed with gDNA cell lysis buffer. gDNA enrichment was performed according to the manufacturers protocol with the final DNA elution done by incubating the gDNA column with 2% SDS, 0.5M 2me and 300mM Tris pH 8.5 for 1 hour. Eluted proteins were cleaned up using acetone precipation overnight prior digestion. ~100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM DTT for one hour and then alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Lys-C was added at a ratio of 1:200 and samples allowed to digest for 4 hours. Each sample was then diluted with 100mM ABC and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna binding, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


