### Accession
PXD005973

### Title
Plasma Proteome profiles of stable CAD patients stratified according to total Apo CIII levels

### Description
Apolipoprotein C-III was recently acknowledged as a prognostic marker for cardiovascular risk. High levels of Apo-CIII strongly correlate with hypertriglyceridemia and are associated with atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease (CAD). Aim of the present research was to study the plasma proteome profiles of stable CAD patients characterized by different levels of total Apo-CIII. Two subgroups of CAD patients with divergent concentrations (under and upper the median concentration of the population distribution=10mg/dL) of total circulating Apo C-III were examined using a shotgun proteomic approach. 180 plasma proteins of CAD patients were quantified and the data were analyzed by bioinformatic tools and multivariate statistics. The fold change analysis and the Partial Least Square Discriminant Analysis showed a clear separation of the two groups. The dynamic processes that involve Apo C-III concentration in blood and its relation with all other plasma proteins were considered. Lipoproteins (Apo C-II and Apo E), retinol-binding protein 4 and vitronectin were up-regulated in patients with high Apo C-III, while alpha 1-antitrypsin was down-regulated. In this pilot study, the different expression of plasma proteins through the entire range of concentrations of Apo C-III was defined, suggesting possible new players involved in the APO C-III-associated process of arterial damage

### Sample Protocol
The plasma samples were processed using the Hybrid SPE(R)-Phospolipid, a RP-C4 cartridge for solid phase extraction (SPE). Plasma proteins were obtained as follows: the absorbed proteins were eluted with fur aliquots of 200 μL of acetonitrile at 5%, 10%, 20% and 30% (v/v) respectively. The eluted fractions were merged and 250 μL of Ambic was added (pH 8.5); then the digestion was accomplished with chymotrypsin at a concentration level of 1:20 (w/w) enzyme-protein ratio for 18 h at 27 °C. After digestion, the sample was evaporated for the subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. A stable-isotope-labeled peptide standard (DPEVRPTSAVAA, Val- 13C515N1 at V10, Cellmano Biotech Limited, Anhui, China) was spiked into the samples before the LC-MS/MS analysis and used for instrument quality control.  The digested plasma samples were analyzed on a micro-LC (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) interfaced to a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer system (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) equipped with a DuoSpray Ion Source and a CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The LC column was a Halo Fused C18 with a pre-column ProteCol C18G. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes, the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). The ion source parameters in electrospray positive mode were set as follows: curtain gas (N2) at 25 psig, nebulizer gas GAS1 at 25 psig, and GAS2 at 20 psig, ionspray floating voltage (ISFV) at 5000 V, source temperature at 450 °C and declustering potential at 25 V. For the quantification, the samples were subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25 Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors. These MS/MS experiments were performed in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 40 ms per 25-Da swath (36 swaths in total) for a total cycle time of 1.5408 s. The ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using the rolling collision energy. The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada). One data dependent analysis (DDA) acquisition and three DIA acquisitions were performed.

### Data Protocol
The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA, USA). The DIA files were converted to pseudo-MS/MS spectra with DIA-Umpire software and were searched as DDA files35, 36. Chymotrypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for both software. For Mascot, we used 2 missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 0.08 Da was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 10 ppm for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 2015.07.07, containing 42131 sequence entries) was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apo c-iii, Plasma proteomics, Cardiovascular disease, Apolipoproteins, Coronary artery disease

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
University of Eastern Piedmont


