### Accession
PXD042474

### Title
Phenylalanine-tRNA aminoacylation is compromised by ALS/FTD-associated C9orf72 C4G2 repeat RNA

### Description
The expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat mutation in the C9orf72 gene is the main genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Under one disease mechanism, sense and antisense transcripts of the repeat are predicted to bind various RNA-binding proteins, compromise their function and cause cytotoxicity. Focusing on cytoplasmic interaction of the CCCCGG antisense repeat RNA this study identifies phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase (FARS) subunit alpha (FARSA) as the main interactor. The aminoacylation of tRNAPhe by FARS is inhibited by antisense RNA, leading to decreased levels of charged tRNAPhe. Remarkably, this is associated with global reduction of phenylalanine incorporation in the proteome and significant decrease in expression of phenylalanine-rich proteins in cellular models and patient tissues. In conclusion, this research reveals functional inhibition of FARSA in the presence of antisense RNA repeats. Compromised aminoacylation of tRNA could lead to impairments in protein synthesis and further contribute to C9orf72 mutation-associated pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were denatured in 6M urea/ 2M thiourea and reduced by 10mM DTT at 37C for 1h. Then samples were alkylated using 50mM iodoacetamide for 1h in the dark at room temperature. After acetone precipitation over night at -20C, the protein pellets were resuspended in 100mM TEAB and digested using trypsin / lysC (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio = 25:1) at 37C overnight. The digestion was stopped by 1% TFA and peptides were purified using C18 cartridges on Bravo AssayMAP robot (Agilent). The cleaned peptides were dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) and separated by nano-flow HPLC (U3000 RSLCnano, Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 75um x 50cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS using top speed method with FAIMS Duo Pro (CV= -40V, -50V, -60V).

### Data Protocol
RAW data were searched against human protein database (UniProt/SwissProt Release 2022_01, 20376 protein entries) with FBS contamination database (249 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) algorithm and Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: trypsin as enzyme and 2 missed cleavage allowed; precursor mass tolerance is 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance is 0.8 Da; Carbamidomethylation on cysteine is set as static modification and oxidation on methionine as dynamic modification. Protein table was exported for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The expanded hexanucleotide GGGGCC repeat mutation in the C9orf72 gene is the main genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Under one disease mechanism, sense and antisense transcripts of the repeat are predicted to bind various RNA-binding proteins, compromise their function and cause cytotoxicity. Here we identify phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase (FARS) subunit alpha (FARSA) as the main interactor of the CCCCGG antisense repeat RNA in cytosol. The aminoacylation of tRNA<sup>Phe</sup> by FARS is inhibited by antisense RNA, leading to decreased levels of charged tRNA<sup>Phe</sup>. Remarkably, this is associated with global reduction of phenylalanine incorporation in the proteome and decrease in expression of phenylalanine-rich proteins in cellular models and patient tissues. In conclusion, this study reveals functional inhibition of FARSA in the presence of antisense RNA repeats. Compromised aminoacylation of tRNA could lead to impairments in protein synthesis and further contribute to C9orf72 mutation-associated pathology.

### Keywords
C9orf72 mutation, Antisense rna, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Phenylalanine-trna synthetase, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
King's College London
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London


