### Accession
PXD029427

### Title
Caldendrin regulates spine apparatus localization through myosin V-dependent ER-stabilization in dendritic spines

### Description
Excitatory synapses of principal hippocampal neurons are frequently located on dendritic spines. The dynamic strengthening or weakening of individual inputs results in a great structural and molecular diversity of dendritic spines. Active spines with large Ca2+-transients are frequently invaded by a single protrusion from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is dynamically transported into spines by the actin-based motor myosin V. An increase in synaptic strength often correlates with stable anchoring of the ER, followed by the formation of the spine apparatus organelle. Here we characterize the newly identified interaction of myosin V with the Ca2+-sensor caldendrin, a brain-specific homolog of the well-known myosin V interactor calmodulin. While calmodulin is an essential activator of myosin V motor function, we found that caldendrin acts as an inhibitor of processive myosin V movement. We propose that caldendrin transforms myosin into a stationary F actin tether, and show that in mouse and rat hippocampal neurons, caldendrin regulates spine apparatus localization to a subset of dendritic spines through a myosin V-dependent pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down samples were separated on a commercial Bolt Bis-Tris Plus Gel (Invitrogen) and analyzed at the Erasmus MC Proteomics Center, Rotterdam. Briefly, SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 1-mm slices using an automatic gel slicer. Per sample 8 to 9 slices were combined and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, TPCK treated), essentially as described by (Wilm et al, 1996). Nanoflow LCMS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a nanoACQUITY UPLC C18 column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm X 20 mm, Waters). Peptide separation was performed on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; 20 cm × 100 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1 % formic acid; B = 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) in 60 min and at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.4.1) for identification and relative quantification of peptides and proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Homo sapiens and Mus musculus Uniprot databases (release July 2016) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences and a contaminant database listing typical background proteins. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant’s default settings for Orbitrap and ion trap spectra. The maximum precursor ion charge state used for searching was 7 and the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Further modifications were Cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) as well as Methionine oxidation (variable). The minimum number of peptides for positive protein identification was set to 2. The minimum number of razor and unique peptides was set to 1. Only unique and razor non-modified, methionine oxidized and protein N-terminal acetylated peptides were used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Excitatory synapses of principal hippocampal neurons are frequently located on dendritic spines. The dynamic strengthening or weakening of individual inputs results in structural and molecular diversity of dendritic spines. Active spines with large calcium ion (Ca<sup>2+</sup> ) transients are frequently invaded by a single protrusion from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is dynamically transported into spines via the actin-based motor myosin V. An increase in synaptic strength correlates with stable anchoring of the ER, followed by the formation of an organelle referred to as the spine apparatus. Here, we show that myosin V binds the Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensor caldendrin, a brain-specific homolog of the well-known myosin V interactor calmodulin. While calmodulin is an essential activator of myosin V motor function, we found that caldendrin acts as an inhibitor of processive myosin V movement. In mouse and rat hippocampal neurons, caldendrin regulates spine apparatus localization to a subset of dendritic spines through a myosin V-dependent pathway. We propose that caldendrin transforms myosin into a stationary F-actin tether that enables the localization of ER tubules and formation of the spine apparatus in dendritic spines.

### Keywords
Dendritic spines, Myosin, V-dependent er-stabilization, Caldendrin, Spine apparatus

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Proteomics center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam


