### Accession
PXD038365

### Title
Intact Transition Epitope Mapping - Force differences between Original and Unusual Residues (ITEM-FOUR)

### Description
Human cardiac Troponin I epitope peptides were incubated with monoclonal anti-cardiac Troponin I antibody. Immune complexes were subjected to nano electrospray mass spectrometry in order to determine apparent binding energies and dissociation constants of immune complex dissociation reactions in the gas phase.

### Sample Protocol
Human cardiac Troponin I epitope peptides (1: ENREVGDWRKNIDAL, 2: ENQEVGDWRKNIDAL, 3: ENREVGDWHKNIDAL, 4: ENREVGDWLKNIDAL, 5: ENREVGDWCKNIDAL, 6: ENREVGGWRKNIDAL, 7: ENREVGDWPKNIDAL, 8: ENREVGDWPENIDAL; peptides&elephants, Hennigsdorf, Germany) were dissolved in 200 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH 6.7, to obtain a peptide concentration around 2 µg/µL. The monoclonal anti-cardiac Troponin I antibody [MF4] (product code ab38210; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was rebuffered to 200 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH 7, using centrifugal filters (Microcon with a cutoff of 50 K; Merck Millipore Ltd., Tullagreen, Carrigtwohill, Co. Cork, Ireland). Protein concentration was determined to be around 0.3 µg/µL using the QubitTM 2.0 Fluorometer (Carlsbad, CA, USA) assay. To obtain the immune complex with molar ratio of 2.2:1 (peptide to antibody) the antiTroponin I antibody solution (typically 4 µL) were mixed with the corresponding volume of the Troponin I peptide solution which previously had been diluted 1:100 with 200 mM ammonium acetate. The immune complex-containing mixture was incubated at room temperature for at least 1 h. For each ITEM measurement, 3 µL of antibody-peptide complex-containing solution were loaded into nanoESI capillaries using a microloader pipette tip (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Nano-ESI-MS ITEM measurements were performed using a Synapt G2S instrument (Waters MS-Technologies, Manchester, UK) with the following instrumental settings: source temperature, 50 °C; capillary voltage, 1.7-1.8 kV; sample cone voltage, 110 V; source off set voltage, 110 V; trap gas flow, 8.0 mL/min; cone gas flow, 100 L/h. All mass spectra were acquired in positive-ion mode applying a mass window of m/z 200-8000. The m/z axis was calibrated using 1 mg/mL sodium iodide dissolved in an isopropanol/water solution (50:50, v/v). The quadrupole analyzer was used to block transmission of lower molecular weight ions: M1 = 4000 with dwell time of 25% and ramp time of 25%; M2 = 5000 with dwell time of 25% and ramp time of 25%; M3 = 6000. The surviving antibody-peptide complexes were dissociated in the first collision cell (TRAP) by increasing the collision cell voltage difference in a stepwise manner. All file names of the ITEM measurements include the peptide number and the measurement number, e.g. ANTI_TROPO_PEP1_MEASUREMENT_1 is for the first ITEM measurement of peptide 1. Collision cell voltages were for peptide 1 measurement 1; peptide 2 measurement 1; peptide 4 measurement 1; peptide 6 measurements 1, and 2: min 0-0.5: 4 V, min 0.5-1.5: 8 V, min 1.5-2.5: 12 V, min 2.5-3.5: 16 V, min 3.5-4.5: 20 V, min 6-7: 30 V, min 8.5-9.5: 40 V, min 10.5-11.5: 50 V, min 11.5-12.5: 60 V, min 12.5-13.5: 70 V, min 13.5-14.5: 80 V.  Collision cell voltages were for peptide 1 measurements 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6; peptide 2 measurements 2, and 3; peptide 4 measurements 2, and 3; peptide 5 measurements 1, 2, and 3: min 0-1: 2 V, min 1-2: 4 V, min 2-3: 6 V, min 3-4: 8 V, min 4-5: 12 V, min 5-6: 16 V, min 6-7: 20 V, min 7-8: 30 V, min 8-9: 40 V, min 9-10: 50 V, min 10-11: 60 V, min 11-12: 70 V, min 12-13: 80 V. Collision cell voltages were for peptide 1 measurement 7; peptide 2 measurements 4, and 5; peptide 3 measurements 1, and 2; peptide 4 measurements 4, and 5; peptide 5 measurements 4, and 5; peptide 6 measurements 3, and 4; peptide 7 measurements 1, and 2; peptide 8 measurements 1 and 2: min 1-2: 2 V, min 2-3: 4 V, min 3-4: 6 V, min 4-5: 8 V, min 5-6: 12 V, min 6-7: 16 V, min 7-8: 20 V, min 8-9: 30 V, min 9-10: 40 V, min 10-11: 50 V, min 11-12: 60 V, min 12-13: 70 V, min 13-14: 80 V. Data were acquired and processed with MassLynx software version 4.1 (Waters MS-Technologies, Manchester, UK). The Savitzky-Golay method was used for smoothing in 10 cycles with a window of 20. The intensities of the ion signals were obtained from the mass spectra at all applied collision cell voltage differences and ion intensities of each molecular species were plotted against their respective m/z values and fitted to a Gaussian curve using Origin version 8.1 (OriginLab Corp., Northampton, MA, USA). The heights of the Gaussian curves were determined for each molecular species and used to calculate normalized intensities.   Peptide identification was performed with Mascot MS/MS ion search and an in-house database including all peptide variances. The search parameters were 60 ppm peptide tolerance and 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance. The following spectra parts were used to generate the search spectra: MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_1: min 3-6; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_2: min 2-3; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_3: min 0.25-2.3; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_4: min 1-4.5; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_5: min 0-3.5; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_6: min 0.25-3.25; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_7: min 0.25-3.25; MSMS_TROPONIN_I_PEPTIDE_8: min 0.5-1.75.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody-based point-of-care diagnostics have become indispensable for modern medicine. In-depth analysis of antibody recognition mechanisms is the key to tailoring the accuracy and precision of test results, which themselves are crucial for targeted and personalized therapy. A rapid and robust method is desired by which binding strengths between antigens and antibodies of concern can be fine-mapped with amino acid residue resolution to examine the assumedly serious effects of single amino acid polymorphisms on insufficiencies of antibody-based detection capabilities of, e.g., life-threatening conditions such as myocardial infarction. The experimental ITEM-FOUR approach makes use of modern mass spectrometry instrumentation to investigate intact immune complexes in the gas phase. ITEM-FOUR together with molecular dynamics simulations, enables the determination of the influences of individually exchanged amino acid residues within a defined epitope on an immune complex's binding strength. Wild-type and mutated epitope peptides were ranked according to their experimentally determined dissociation enthalpies relative to each other, thereby revealing which single amino acid polymorphism caused weakened, impaired, and even abolished antibody binding. Investigating a diagnostically relevant human cardiac Troponin I epitope for which seven nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms are known to exist in the human population tackles a medically relevant but hitherto unsolved problem of current antibody-based point-of-care diagnostics.

### Keywords
Troponin i, Offline nanoesi-ms, Item-four

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Germany
University Medical Center Rostock

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Germany


