### Accession
PXD032782

### Title
CSF proteomics of the APPPS1 Alzheimer mouse model with life long BACE inhibition

### Description
The earliest defining event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer´s disease (AD) is the intracerebral deposition of Abeta, which starts at least 20 years before the onset of dementia. The link between Abeta and downstream neurodegeneration leading to dementia remains unclear, a critical gap in knowledge at a time when clinical trials are increasingly shifting to pre-symptomatic disease stages. Consequently, the design of preventive treatment strategies based on biomarkers remains an important challenge. Here, we have analyzed CSF samples from 21.5-month-old APPPS1 and WT mice, with and without BACE inhibition from 1.5 to 21.5 months, using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantification of proteins. Life-long BACE inhibition showed a partial rescue of several CSF protein markers for neurodegeneration such as NEFL and inflammation such as Trem2 or Cst7.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples from 21.5-month-old APPPS1 and WT mice, with and without BACE inhibition from 1.5 to 21.5 months, were analyzed using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantification of proteins. Aliquots containing 5 µL CSF were digested with LysC and trypsin as previously described (Pigoni et al., 2016). Afterwards, peptides of each sample were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by mass spectrometry. The samples were analyzed on a nanoElute LC coupled online to a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer equipped with a column toaster (Bruker, Germany). A volume of 6 µL was injected onto a 30‐cm self‐packed C18 column (75 μm ID) with 1.9 μm ReproSil‐Pur 120 C18‐AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). A binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid was applied at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a column temperature of 50°C for peptide separation: 2% B 0 min; 5% B 3.5 min; 24% B 48 min; 35% B 59 min; 60% 64 min; and 85% B 65 min. A data-independent acquisition (DIA) parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) method was used covering the m/z range from 350 to 1275 m/z with two rows of 22 m/z windows using a ramp time of 166 ms. Six steps were applied for each tims separation.

### Data Protocol
The DIA PASEF raw data were analyzed with the software DIA-NN Version 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2019). First, a spectral library was generated in DIA-NN using 3 samples per experimental group (total: 12 samples) using a library-free search against a canonical protein FASTA including one sequence per gene from UniProt (download: 2021-04-09; 21998 entries). Two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as static modification, whereas acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionines were defined as variable modifications. The spectral library for murine CSF contained 5949 protein groups and 37183 precursors. Afterwards, a library-based analysis was performed with all samples. Protein LFQ was performed on MS2 level on the basis of at least one peptide per protein. Cross-sample normalization was disabled to account for the general protein abundance increase in APPPS1 compared to WT mouse CSF. For statistical evaluation, the protein LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and two-sided Student’s t-tests were used to assess group differences in each experiment. At least three quantification values per group were required for relative quantification. To account for multiple hypotheses, a permutation-based FDR threshold (p=0.05; s0=0.1) was calculated using the software Perseus (Version 1.6.14) (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Brain A&#x3b2; deposition is a key early event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer&#xb4;s disease (AD), but the long presymptomatic phase and poor correlation between A&#x3b2; deposition and clinical symptoms remain puzzling. To elucidate the dependency of downstream pathologies on A&#x3b2;, we analyzed the trajectories of cerebral A&#x3b2; accumulation, A&#x3b2; seeding activity, and neurofilament light chain (NfL) in the CSF (a biomarker of neurodegeneration) in A&#x3b2;-precursor protein transgenic mice. We find that A&#x3b2; deposition increases linearly until it reaches an apparent plateau at a late age, while A&#x3b2; seeding activity increases more rapidly and reaches a plateau earlier, coinciding with the onset of a robust increase of CSF NfL. Short-term inhibition of A&#x3b2; generation in amyloid-laden mice reduced A&#x3b2; deposition and associated glial changes, but failed to reduce A&#x3b2; seeding activity, and CSF NfL continued to increase although at a slower pace. When short-term or long-term inhibition of A&#x3b2; generation was started at pre-amyloid stages, CSF NfL did not increase despite some A&#x3b2; deposition, microglial activation, and robust brain A&#x3b2; seeding activity. A dissociation of A&#x3b2; load and CSF NfL trajectories&#xa0;was also found in familial AD, consistent with the view that A&#x3b2; aggregation is not kinetically coupled to neurotoxicity. Rather, neurodegeneration starts when A&#x3b2; seeding activity is saturated and before A&#x3b2; deposition reaches critical (half-maximal) levels, a phenomenon reminiscent of the two pathogenic phases in prion disease.

### Keywords
Appps1, Alzheimer disease, Csf, Cerebrospinal fluid, Bace

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


