### Accession
PXD022709

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics of SARS-CoV-2 and IAV treated APCs

### Description
The clinical course of SARS-CoV-2 infection is highly variable with a subset of patients developing severe COVID-19 and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). COVID-19 induced lung injury and respiratory failure appears to be driven by dysregulated immune responses, yet the exact mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we analyzed monocytes isolated from healthy donors treated with SARS-CoV-2, influenza A (Panama strain) or TLR7/8 agonist R848. Notably, overnight exposure to SARS-CoV-2, but not influenza A virus, induced a profibrotic signature, characterized by high expression of known fibrogenic factors like TGFB1, SPP1 and LGMN, and showed highly significant similarity with profibrotic macrophage populations identified in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). In conclusion, SARS-CoV-2 triggers profibrotic macrophage responses, and ARDS-associated lung fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics were prepared using a strategy adapted from Mertins et al. Lysates were cleared via centrifugation (20,000g, 15min, 4°C) and protein content in the supernatant was measured via BCA assay. Samples were diluted to the same protein concentration with lysis buffer (8M urea, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 and 3) and subsequently reduced and alkylated via incubation with 5mM DTT and 10mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Samples were diluted to 2M Urea with 50Mm Tris pH 8.0, then pre-treated with LysC at 1:50 (w/w) ratio for 2 hours at room temperature, then trypsin was added at 1:50 (w/w) ratio and samples were digested overnight at room temperature. Digests were acidified with formic acid (FA) and centrifuged (20,000g, 15min) to remove the precipitated urea. Approximately 30μg of protein digest were desalted using STop-And-Go Extraction tips. Desalted digests were dried and resuspended in 50mM HEPES pH 8.0. Peptide concentration was evaluated with BCA assay, and equal amounts of peptides were brought to the same concentration using 50mM HEPES pH 8.0. Prior to TMT labeling, we randomly assigned a TMTpro channel per experiment as follows: CoV2 1hr rep A->126; R848 1hr rep B->127N; IAV 1hr rep A->127C; CoV2 3hr rep A->128N; mock 1hr rep A->128C; CoV2 18hr rep A->129N; IAV 1hr rep B->129C; CoV2 18hr rep B->130N; R848 1hr rep A->130C; IAV 18hr rep B->131N; CoV2 3hr rep B->131C; IAV 18hr rep A->132N; IAV 3hr rep A->132C; CoV2 1hr rep B->133N; mock 1hr rep B->133C; IAV 3hr rep B->134N. Samples were then labeled using TMTpro reagents (Lot number UL297970)  with a 1:10 peptide weight to TMT reagents weight ratio and approx. 17% ACN concentration, for 1 hour at room temperature, and the reactions were quenched by addition of 1M Tris pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 5mM. All the reactions were combined with equivalent peptides amounts and desalted via SepPak (Waters) tC18 column. The labeled peptides were dried and resuspended in High pH buffer A (5mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN) prior to offline High pH Reverse phase fractionation by HPLC on an Agilent 1290 Infinity II. The separation was performed on a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 (130Å, 3.5µm; 2.1mm x 250mm) column on a multistep gradient from 0 to 60% High pH buffer B (5mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN) 96 minutes long and collected in 96 fractions (1 fraction/min). The fractions were then manually pooled into 29 fractions as follows: the first 12 fractions were pulled together, while every other x fraction was pulled with x+28 and x+56. Of each pulled fraction approximately 1µg of peptide was subjected to mass spectrometric (MS) analysis for total proteome measurement. The remaining amounts were further pooled into 5 fractions and used as input for a phosphopeptide enrichment via immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), which was performed by the Bravo Automated Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent) with AssayMAP Fe(III)-NTA cartridges. The flow-through of the first IMAC enrichment was further pooled into 2 fraction and subjected to a second IMAC enrichment with the same system. ll mass spectrometry samples were online-fractionated on a EASY-nLC 1200 and acquired on a Q-Exactive HFx on a profile-centroid mode. Peptides were separated on a fused silica, 25cm long column packed in-house with C18-AQ 1.9µm beads kept to a temperature of 45℃. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA and 3% ACN in water, while mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA and 90% ACN. After quilibritrating the column with 5µl mobile phase A, peptides were separated with a 250µl/min flow on a 110min gradient: mobile phase B increased from 4% to 30% in the first 88 minutes, followed by an increase to 60% in the following 10 minutes, to then reach 90% in one minute, which was held for 5 minutes. For total proteome analysis, the MS was operated in data dependent acquisition, with MS1 scans from 350 to 1500 m/z acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (measured at 200m/z), maximum injection time (IT) of 10ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 x 106. The 20 most intense precursor ion peaks with charges from +2 to +6 were selected for fragmentation, unless present in the dynamic exclusion list (30s). Precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, fragmented in an HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 30% and analyzed in the detector with a resolution of 45,000 m/z (measured at 200 m/z), AGC target value of 105, maximum IT of 86 ms. For phosphoproteome analysis, the MS was operated using the same parameters with the exception of MS2 maximum IT that was set to 240ms.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant (Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016) v1.6.10.43, where TMTpro was manually included as a fixed modification and quantitation method. Correction factors for each TMT channel were added to account for channel spillage and minimum reporter precursor intensity fraction was set to 0.5. The MS scans were searched against human, influenza A and SARS-CoV-2 uniprot databases (Jan 2020, Apr 2020 and Mar 2020 respectively) using the Andromeda search engine. FDR was calculated based on searches on a pseudo-reverse database and set to 0.05. The search included as fixed modifications carbamidomethylation of cysteine and as variable modifications methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation. Trypsin/P was set as protease for in-silico digestion. Total proteome and IMAC-enriched phosphopeptides samples were analyzed in the same MaxQuant run in separate parameter groups with the same settings, except for the IMAC-enriched samples also Phospho (STY) was added as variable modification. Contaminants, hits in the reverse database, only identified by modified site and identified by less than two peptides of which one unique were removed from the ProteinGroups result table. Phosphosites were filtered by hits in the reverse database, potential contaminants and sites with localization probability lower than 50%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Phosphoproteomics, Apc, Tmt, Pbmc, Iav

### Affiliations
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine - MDC
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, Germany

### Submitter
Tommaso Mari

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics, Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine, Germany


### SDRF

