### Accession
PXD010334

### Title
Functional cross-talk between allosteric effects of activating and inhibiting ligands underlies PKM2 regulation.

### Description
Allosteric regulation is central to the role of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) in cancer metabolism. Multiple activating and inhibitory allosteric ligands regulate PKM2 activity by controlling the equilibrium between high activity tetramers and low activity dimers and monomers. However, how allosteric inputs from simultaneous binding of different ligands are integrated to regulate PKM2 activity remains elusive. Here, we show that, [PKM2 activation and tetramerisation can be uncoupled as] in the presence of the allosteric inhibitor phenylalanine (Phe), saturating amounts of the activator fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-bP) can induce PKM2 tetramerisation, but fail to maximally increase enzymatic activity. We use a new computational framework to identify residues that mediate FBP-induced allostery and show that, while mutation of A327 and C358 do not abrogate the ability of F-1,6-BP to increase PKM2 activity, it prevents Phe from interfering with it. Our findings demonstrate a role for residues involved in FBP allostery in enabling the integration of allosteric input from Phe and reveal an allosteric cross-talk that underlies the co-ordinate regulation of PKM2 activity by distinct allosteric ligands. The absolute amount of the isoforms of PKM (PKM1/2) were quantified in the cell lines of interested to inform the described model.

### Sample Protocol
Method  Trypsin digestion   Cell extracts containing 50 µg of total protein were precipitated by adding six volumes of ice-cold acetone (precooled to -20 °C). The samples were allowed to precipitate overnight at -20 °C and centrifuged at 8000 g, for 10 min at 4C, to collect the pellet. The supernatant was carefully decanted and the residual acetone was evaporated at ambient temperature. The pellet was dissolved in 50 mM TEAB, reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, the proteins were digested with 1 µg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion each sample was spiked with a mixture of five heavy labelled standards. For MS analysis, 1 µg of peptides were loaded onto 50-cm Easy Spray C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   LC MS/MS Analysis  Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using a Dionex U3000 system (SRD3400 degasser, WPS-3000TPL-RS autosampler, 3500RS nano pump) coupled to a QExactive electrospray ionisation hybrid quadruole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reverse phase chromatography was performed with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Mobile phase A was 5 % DMSO in 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase B was 5 % DMSO, 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. The digested samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2 - 35 %) in 90 minutes, the total run time including column conditioning was 120 minutes. The nanoLC was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer using an EasySpray nano source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray conditions were: spray voltage +2.1 kV, capillary temperature 250 C and S-lens RF level of 55. For the PRM (parallel reaction monitoring) experiments, the QExactive was operated in data independent mode. A full scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution (AGC target 3 × 106, 50 ms maximum injection time, m/z 300−1800). This was followed by ten PRM scans triggered by an inclusion list (17,500 resolution, AGC target 2 × 105, 55 msec maximum injection time). Ion activation/dissociation was performed using HCD at normalised collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Peptides to be targeted in the PRM-MS analysis were selected previously by analysing trypsin digested cell extracts from the four cell lines of interest. Peptides providing a good signal and identification score representing the two PKM isoforms (PKM1/2) were selected for the analysis. The corresponding heavy isotope-labelled standards were synthesised in-house. The PRM method was developed for the QExactive using Skyline 4.1.0.18169. The heavy labelled peptide standards were used to create the precursor (inclusion) list.  When measuring the abundance of PKM1/2 in the cell extracts signal extraction was performed on + 2 precursor ions for both heavy and light forms of the peptides. A peptide was considered identified if at least four overlapping transitions were detected. Quantitation was performed using MS2 XICs where the top three transitions were summed and used for quantitation. Data processing was performed with Skyline which was used to generate peak areas for both light and heavy peptides. Extracted ion chromatograms were visually inspected and peak boundaries were corrected and potential interferences removed. The data was subsequently exported in Excel to calculate absolute quantities of the “native” peptides and to determine reproducibility (CV %) of the measurements. (See supplementary table).

### Publication Abstract
Several enzymes can simultaneously interact with multiple intracellular metabolites, however, how the allosteric effects of distinct ligands are integrated to coordinately control enzymatic activity remains poorly understood. We addressed this question using, as a model system, the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2). We show that the PKM2 activator fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) alone promotes tetramerisation and increases PKM2 activity, but addition of the inhibitor L-phenylalanine (Phe) prevents maximal activation of FBP-bound PKM2 tetramers. We developed a method, AlloHubMat, that uses eigenvalue decomposition of mutual information derived from molecular dynamics trajectories to identify residues that mediate FBP-induced allostery. Experimental mutagenesis of these residues identified PKM2 variants in which activation by FBP remains intact but cannot be attenuated by Phe. Our findings reveal residues involved in FBP-induced allostery that enable the integration of allosteric input from Phe and provide a paradigm for the coordinate regulation of enzymatic activity by simultaneous allosteric inputs.

### Keywords
Qexactive, Pkm2, Prm, Quantitation, Srm

### Affiliations
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Vesela Encheva

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


