### Accession
PXD028043

### Title
Mytilus galloprovincialis gills exposed to Vibrio splendidus waterborne infection

### Description
Mussels (Mytilus galloprovincialis) were exposed during 24 hours to a waterborne infection with 10E8 CFU/ml Vibrio splendidus (reference strain LGP32) in the tank water. Five biological replicates were used for each infected and control conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Gill samples were extracted homogenized with several ultrasonication cycles in lysis buffer composed of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4% CHAPS. Then samples were centrifuged (14,000 g, 60 min, 4°C), and the supernatants were collected in 50-µl aliquots and frozen at -80°C. Protein quantification was performed following the Bradford method in microplates. BSA standards and samples were analysed in triplicate, and the absorbance was read at 595 nm in a BIO-RAD iMarkTM Microplate Reader. After quantification, samples were diluted to an equal concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. To perform protein precipitation, 600 µl of prechilled acetone (-20°C) was added to 100 µl of each sample. Samples were incubated for 2 h at -20°C to ensure precipitation. Then, samples were centrifuged (8,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was dried for a maximum of 10 minutes before adding 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate). A brief bath sonication was performed to resuspend the pellet. Then, 5 μL of TCEP (Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution) was added, and samples were incubated under soft shaking conditions (300 rpm) for 1 h at 55°C. To alkylate the samples, 5 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide (diluted in 100 mM TEAB) was added, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and under dark conditions. Finally, 10 μL of trypsin (0.1 μg μL-1 in 100 mM TEAB) was added, and the samples were incubated at 37°C overnight with soft shaking at 300 rpm. Labelling of peptides was performed using the TMT 10plex™ Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer instructions. Each of the 10 TMT tags was used for each of the 10 samples: 5 control (C1-C5) and 5 infected (I1-I5) samples (126 label: C1; 127N label: C2; 127C label: C3; 128N label: C4; 128C label: C5; 129N label: I1; 129C label: I2; 130N label: I3; 130C label: I4; 131 label: I5).  The ten already labelled samples were combined in the same tube at equal concentrations, for which 10.3 μL was added from each sample, and then the final volume was raised to 300 μL with TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) 0, 1%. The mix consisting of 300 μL with an estimated peptide amount of 30 µg was submitted to peptide fractionation using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the kit protocol. After conditioning and washing the column, a 300-μL sample mix was applied to the column. Elution solutions consisted of a series of 8 solutions with increasing acetonitrile concentrations from 12.5% to 50% supplemented with 0.1% triethylamine. Therefore, 8 fractions or elutions were obtained. Samples were analysed with LC–MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a customized protein database generated from the six-frame translation of the 162,167 contig sequences from the mussel gill transcriptome performed under the same bacterial bath infection stimulus (Saco et al., 2020). MS/MS spectra were searched against this database using PEAKS Studio v8.0 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). A contaminant database (CRAPome) was included, as well as a decoy sequence database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) in the peptide identification, which was set to 1% FDR for PSMs (Peptide-Spectrum Matches). Trypsin was indicated to be the enzyme for protein cleavage, and only one missed cleavage was allowed. For peptide identification, the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10plex were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification. For protein identification, the number of matched peptide sequences was set to ≥ 2, the number of unique peptides to ≥ 1 and the protein identification PEAKS score to ≥ 20. For protein quantification, only unique peptides were considered. The spectrum filter for the reporter ions was set to FDR 1% and quality ≥ 10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Immune response, Mussel, Gills, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research (IIM-CSIC)
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain

### Submitter
Amaro Saco

### Lab Head
Dr Angel P. Diz
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain


