### Accession
PXD010851

### Title
17β-Estradiol Delivered in Eye Drops: A Proteomics Study Focusing on the Rat Retina

### Description
Five ovariectomized (OVX) Brown Norway rats (Charles Rivers Laboratories, Wilmington, DE, USA) weighing 200-250 g received 10 µL of 17β-estradiol (E2) eye drops once daily in both eyes for three weeks [20]. The eye drops contained 0.1% (w/v) E2 in saline vehicle containing 20% (w/v) 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin. Five OVX control rats received 10 µL of this vehicle as eye drops for the same dosing regimen and duration. After 24 h of the last treatment, the animals were euthanized by CO2 overexposure, and their eyes were immediately enucleated followed by the isolation of the retina. The tissue samples were rinsed with saline and, then, blotted dry for preparation to label-free shotgun proteomic analyses. All procedures involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of North Texas Health Science Center before the initiation of the studies (approval number: 2018-0028). Directions to sample names CF1: Control (female) retina sample #1 CF2: Control (female) retina sample #2 CF3: Control (female) retina sample #3 CF4: Control (female) retina sample #4 CF5: Control (female) retina sample #5  EF1: E2-treated (female) retina sample #1 EF2: E2-treated (female) retina sample #2 EF3: E2-treated (female) retina sample #3 EF4: E2-treated (female) retina sample #4 EF5: E2-treated (female) retina sample #5

### Sample Protocol
Each isolated retina was prepared first by incubating in 200 µL 8 M aqueous urea solution for 30 min to dissolve proteins, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1400g [23]. The supernatant was collected and protein content was measured using a commercial dye-binding method (microBCA; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), and an aliquot containing 300 µg protein was reduced with dithiothreitol (1 mM at 65 °C for 30 min), carbamidomethylated (5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature and in the dark for 30 min). After 4-fold dilution of 40 µL reduced and alkylated sample (containing 100 µg protein) with aqueous 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and the addition of sequencing-grade trypsin (2 µg), digestion was performed at 37 °C. Then, the enzymatic reaction was quenched by acidification (1 µL of glacial acetic acid). The solution was desalted by solid-phase extraction (using 1-mL SupelcleanTM LC-18 SPE tube, MilliporeSigma), and the extract was dried under vacuum (VacufugeTM, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) into a 1.5-mL centrifuge tube. The digested samples were analyzed using a hybrid ion trap–Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos Orbitrap Pro) coupled to an EASY nLC-1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system fitted with a 15 cm x 75 μm i.d. EasySpray column packed with 3-µm PepMap C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Gradient elution was used: solvent A and solvent B were water and acetonitrile, respectively, and each contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples (100 µg protein) were reconstituted in 100 µL of solvent containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, and 5 µL were injected during a 20-min column equilibration at 5%B, while maintaining constant column pressure at 600 bar. The peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using the following gradient: (1) 5 min isocratic at 5% B; (2) linear program to 40% B over 90 min and then (3) isocratic at 40% B for 5 min; (4) to 90% B over 5 min; (6) isocratic at 90% B for 5 min; and (6) resetting to 5% B in 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion nanoelectrospray (nanoESI) mode with source voltage of 2.0 kV and ion-transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Full-scan mass spectra (MS) were acquired at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and up to 20 MS-dependent tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using collisionally-induced dissociation (CID) of multiply-charged ions (z  2). Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. Two technical replicates were run for each sample.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt protein sequence database (species: Rattus norvegicus, 29938 entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.2; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) run from Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Parent ion tolerance of 25 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da, and one missed cleavage were used as search filters. Fixed and variable modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine, respectively. Search results were validated to meet strong criteria of protein identifications using the Peptide Prophet and Protein Prophet algorithms requiring >95% and >99% probabilities, respectively, and at least two identified unique peptides for each protein using the Scaffold software (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc.; Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
To facilitate the development of broad-spectrum retina neuroprotectants that can be delivered through topical dosage forms, this proteomics study focused on analyzing target engagements through the identification of functional protein networks impacted after delivery of 17&#x3b2;-estradiol in eye drops. Specifically, the retinae of ovariectomized Brown Norway rats treated with daily eye drops of 17&#x3b2;-estradiol for three weeks were compared to those of vehicle-treated ovariectomized control animals. We searched the acquired raw data against a composite protein sequence database by using Mascot, as well as employed label-free quantification to detect changes in protein abundances. Our investigation using rigorous validation criteria revealed 331 estrogen-regulated proteins in the rat retina (158 were up-regulated, while 173 were down-regulated by 17&#x3b2;-estradiol delivered in eye drops). Comprehensive pathway analyses indicate that these proteins are relevant overall to nervous system development and function, tissue development, organ development, as well as visual system development and function. We also present 18 protein networks with associated canonical pathways showing the effects of treatments for the detailed analyses of target engagements regarding potential application of estrogens as topically delivered broad-spectrum retina neuroprotectants. Profound impact on crystallins is discussed as one of the plausible neuroprotective mechanisms.

### Keywords
Datadependent acquisition, Rat, Retina, Label-free, Estradiol

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA
Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Prokai
Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA


