### Accession
PXD004815

### Title
Proteomics study of a human thyrotoxicosis mode

### Description
In this study we experimentally induced thyrotoxicosis in healthy volunteers to explore the effects of thyroxine excess on the plasma proteome. 16 healthy male subjects were sampled at baseline, 4 and 8 weeks under 250 µg/d thyroxine p.o., as well as 4 and 8 weeks after stopping the application.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion of six highly abundant proteins in plasma was performed using multi-affinity chromatography (MARS6, Agilent). After precipitation of proteins of the non-bound fraction with trichloroacetic acid (TCA, final concentration 15%), the pellet was re-suspended in 100 µl 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea (UT). Individual protein samples (4 µg) were reduced with 2.5 mM dithiothreitol (60 °C, 1h), subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (37 °C, 30 min) and proteolytical cleaved with trypsin using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37 °C. Prior to MS analysis, desalted peptides were subjected to reverse phase chromatography. Mass spectral data were recorded on-line on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) which was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode. MS/MS fragmentation was performed by collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The recorded LC-MS/MS raw data were processed using the Refiner MS software version 7.6.6 (GeneData, Basel, Switzerland) with an adapted workflow with the following steps: (i) chemical noise removal, (ii) retention time alignment across all samples, (iii) feature extraction and isotope group clustering. Data was searched against a human Swissprot/Uniprot database (rel. 2012/08) limited to human entries with a precursor ion tolerance set to 10 ppm (0.6 Da for fragment ions) using an in-house MASCOT server (rel. 2.3). The carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification, methionine oxidation was considered as dynamic modification. Peptides identified with rank = 1 and an ion score ≥ 20 and identified as unique in the data set were used for relative quantitation on the level of summed peptide intensities per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human; plasma; lc-ms/ms; thyrotoxicosis

### Affiliations
Dept. of Functional Genomics
Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


