### Accession
PXD012781

### Title
IP-MS of LSD1 and ER in treated Breast cancer cells

### Description
These proteomic data were produced in order to assess the effect of drug 3324, a pan-lysine demethylase inhibitor, on the estrogen receptor (ER) and Lysine Demethylase1 (LSD1)protein interaction networks.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture MCF7 and BT474 cells (purchased from ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; EuroClone), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich), antimicrobials (100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 250 ng/mL amphotericin-B) and 2mM L-glutamine (Euroclone). LNCaP, C4-2 and C4-2b cells were maintained in RPMI (Gibco) + 10% FBS, in standard recommended conditions. Ex vivo primary cells, isolated by tissue processing of patient biopsies, were grown in DMEM/F12 + 10% FBS. Potential contamination by mycoplasma was monitored and avoided by using MycoAlertTM Assay Control Set (Lonza) and BM-Cyclin (Roche). Co-Immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) Co-IP of endogenously expressed protein was performed using whole cell lysate (800 μg) in Co-IP buffer (10mM TRIS PH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10mM Sodium Molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Cell lysis was obtained with sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode). For IP, Protein A/G Plus Agarose (sc-2003; Santa Cruz,) was coated with appropriate antibodies and mixed gently for 2 h at 4°C. A fraction of the resulting complexes (in triplicates) was washed 3 times with Wash1 (10mM TRIS PH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10mM Sodium Molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), and 3 times with Wash2 (10mM TRIS PH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10mM Sodium Molybdate, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1X Roche Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), then denatured and eluted in Bromophenol Blue 2X as control for IP. The remaining IP complexes were digested with trypsin and eluted. Empore C18-packed stage tips were employed to remove any trace of salts. Briefly: 3 C18 disks were stacked on top of each other and transferred to a pipette tip. Tips were conditioned with Methanol and 80% Acetonitrile – 0.5% acetic acid in LCMS-grade H2O (buffer B), and equilibrated with 0.5% acetic acid in LCMS-grade water (buffer A). Samples were loaded and washed with buffer A, then eluted with buffer B. Peptides were then dried kept at -80C until use. Possible remainders of detergents out of the immunoprecipitation protocol were removed by SP3 protocol. Briefly, dry peptides out of C18 clean-up were incubated with a 2uL of a 50:50 mixture of SeraMag-A and SeraMag-B (Sigma-Aldrich) beads and 200uL of acetonitrile. Beads were then washed once more with pure acetonitrile and then eluted by incubation with 2% DMSO in LCMS-grade H2O. Peptides were then dried and re-suspended in a solution containing 0.1% formic acid in LCMS-grade H2O.  High resolution Mass Spectrometry Digested peptides derived from immunoprecipitation experiments were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass specrometer (MS) coupled to a Proxeon EASY nano-liquid chromatography (nLC) 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). A tenth of the total digested peptide mixture volume (corresponding to ~1ug) was injected into a reverse phase EasySpray analytical column (ID 75 µm × 25 cm C18 2 µm 100 Å particle size). Gradient was run using LCMS-grade water with 0.1% formic acid (FA; solvent A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (solvent B) for 110 mins. Gradient was run as follows: 5 mins 5% solvent B, 90 mins 5% to 30% solvent B, 5 mins 30% to 95% solvent B, 10 mins 95% solvent B. Eluting peptides were subjected to a 1.8kV spray voltage. High resolution scan was acquired at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z). The 15 most intense ions were fracgmented using high-energy induced collision dissociation and fragment spectra were collected at 17,500 resolution. Precursor ions with charge 1 and >6 and with intensities lower than 1.7xE4 were excluded from triggering fragmentation. Ion accumulation time was set to 100 and 60 msec for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Automatic gain control was set to 1xE6 for both MS and MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis RAW files were analyzed by MaxQuant (PMID: 19029910) v1.6.0.16. All options were left to default settings except from the feature “Match between runs”, which was enabled with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
The efficacy and side effects of endocrine therapy in breast cancer (BC) depend largely on estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) expression, the specific drug administered, and treatment scheduling. Although the benefits of endocrine therapy outweigh any adverse effects in the initial stages of BC, later- or advanced-stage tumors acquire resistance to treatments. The mechanisms underlying tumor resistance to therapy are still not well understood, posing a major challenge for BC patient care. Epigenetic regulation and miRNA expression may be involved in the switch from a treatment-sensitive to a treatment-resistant state and could provide a valid therapeutic strategy for ER&#x3b1; negative BC. Here, a hybrid lysine-specific histone demethylase inhibitor, MC3324, displaying selective estrogen receptor down-regulator-like activities in BC, was used to highlight the interplay between epigenetic and ER&#x3b1; signaling. MC3324 anticancer action is mediated by microRNA (miRNA) expression regulation, indicating an innovative function for this molecule. Integrated analysis suggests a crosstalk between estrogen signaling, ER&#x3b1; interactors, miRNAs, and their putative targets. Specifically, miR-181a-5p expression is regulated by MC3324 and has an impact on cellular levels of ER&#x3b1;. A comparison of breast tumor versus healthy mammary tissues confirmed the important role of miR-181a-5p in ER&#x3b1; regulation and points to its putative predictive function in BC therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Estrogen receptor, Lysisne deaminase, Pulldown, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Università degli studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli.
Lund University

### Submitter
Tommaso De Marchi

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Altucci
Università degli studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli.


