### Accession
PXD044665

### Title
Combining FAIMS based Glycoproteomic and DIA Proteomic of reveals widespread proteome alteration in response to changes in N. gonorrhoeae glycosylation.

### Description
Protein glycosylation is increasingly recognized as a common protein modification across bacterial species. Within members of the Neisseria genus O-linked protein glycosylation plays important roles in virulence and antigenic variation yet our understanding of the substrates of glycosylation are limited. Recently it was identified that even closely related Neisserial species can possess O-oligosaccharyltransferases, pglOs, that possess varying glycosylation specificities suggesting that distinct targeting activities may impact both the glycoprotome as well as the proteome of Neisserial species. Within this work we explore this concept using of Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) fractionation and Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) to allow the characterization of differences in the glycoproteomes and proteomes within N. gonorrhoeae strains expressing differing pglO alleles. We demonstrate the utility of FAIMS to expand the known glycoproteome of N. gonorrhoeae and enable comparative glycoproteomics of a recently reported panel of N. gonorrhoeae strains expressing different pglO allelic chimeras (15 pglO enzymes) with unique substrate targeting activities. Combining glycoproteomic insights with DIA proteomics we demonstrate that alterations within pglO alleles have widespread impacts on the proteome of N. gonorrhoeae yet lead to minimal effects on the abundance of glycoproteins. Additionally, while DIA analysis can allow occupancy to be inferred by the absence or presence of peptides known to be modified, we observe a poor correlation between DIA measurements of non-modified versions of glycopeptides and glycoproteomic analysis. Combined this work expands our understanding of the N. gonorrhoeae glycoproteome and supports that the expression of different pglO alleles appears to drive proteomic changes independent of the glycoproteins targeted for glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen cells were resuspended in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes with shaking (2000 rpm; Eppendorf ThermoMixer ®). Protein concentrations were quantified using a BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 1mg of protein precipitated by mixing with 4x volume of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -20°C. Protein samples were then pelleted at 0°C, 4000g, 10 minutes and the acetone discarded. Precipitated proteome samples were prepared using S-trap columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly samples were resuspended in 5% SDS by boiling and then protein amounts quantified using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 μg of each sample were then reduced with 10mM DTT at 95°C for 10 minutes, allowed to cool to room temperature then alkylated with 40mM of chloroacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% mixed with seven volumes of 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 before being applied to S-trap mini columns. Samples were washed four times with 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 to remove SDS then trypsin/lys-c (1:100, Promega, USA) in 100mM TEAB pH8.5 spun through the S-trap columns. Samples were digested for overnight at 37°C then collected from the S-traps by washing with 100mM TEAB pH8.5 followed by 0.2% FA followed by 0.2% FA/50% ACN. Peptide washes were pooled, dried and then resuspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% ACN) before being cleaned up with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as previously described (64, 65). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% Acn) and conditioned with Buffer A* prior to use. Resuspended samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.  Purified peptide samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B to 28% B over 126 minutes, then from 28% B to 40% B over 9 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 3 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 2 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes and held at 2% B for another 3 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a FAIMS data-dependent mode with individual analytical runs collected at FAIMS CVs -20, -30, -40, -50, -60, -70 and -80 as previously described (66). For each FAIMS CV a single Orbitrap MS scan (350-2000 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an AGC of maximum of 4*105 ions and a resolution of 120k) was acquired every 3 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE 30%, maximal injection time of 80 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1.25*105 ions and a resolution of 30k). HCD scans containing the oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545, 366.1396, 229.1189 or 211.1082 m/z) triggered three additional product-dependent MS/MS scans (67) of potential glycopeptides; a Orbitrap EThcD scan (NCE 15%, maximal injection time of 300 ms, AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions with a resolution of 30k and using the extended mass range setting to improve the detection of high mass glycopeptide fragment ions (68) ; a ion trap CID scan (NCE 35%, maximal injection time of 40 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 5*104 ions) and a stepped collision energy HCD scan (using NCE 35% with 5% Stepping, maximal injection time of 300 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
FAIMS experiments were searched with FragPipe version 19 using the a modified “glyco-O-HCD” workflow allowing the variable modification of oxidation of Methionine and N-terminal acetylation as well as a fixed modification of alkylated Cystines in addition to the trisaccharide diNAcBac-Gal-Gal (masses of 552.2167 Da) as variable modifications on Serine residues (masses of 552.2167 respectively). Resulting “psm.tsv” combined using R with the best identification for each scan event retained and only glycopeptides with a MSfragger Hyperscore >20 used for further analysis. To ensure high data quality assigned glycopeptides were manually assessed and the HCD and EThcD spectra assigned to the best scoring unique glycopeptide annotated with the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator 85 (http://www.interactivepeptidespectralannotator.com/PeptideAnnotator.html).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Post-translational modifications, Proteomics, Glycosylation, Faims, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


