### Accession
PXD019523

### Title
Peptidomes of MHC Class I Allotypes Illustrate the Peptide binding Plasticity Leading by Micropolymorphism

### Description
The current study provides an opportunity to identify specific MHC I motifs in vitro.The combination of random peptide library,LC-MS/MS and De Novo Sequencing can be an important complement to the identification of MHC I motif.

### Sample Protocol
Random peptide library was synthesized for renaturing the specific MHC class I molecules in vitro. The refolded complexes were concentrated and purified with a Superdex 200 16/60 column in Tris buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 50 mM NaCl), followed by Resource Q anion-exchange chromatography (GE Healthcare) in Tris buffers (Buffer A: 20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 5 mM NaCl; Buffer B:20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 500 mM NaCl). The peptide-containing fractions were eluted by acidification with 10% acetic acid and placed in 65℃ for 15mins. Next, the peptides were concentrated by a 3-kDa filter and desalted using C18 tips. In brief, the desalting tips were firstly revitalized by 200μl methanol and then equilibrated with 200μl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Secondly, the peptides need to be washed twice with 200μl of 0.1% (v/v) TFA and eluted with 200μl of a solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 75% (v/v) acetonitrile. The desalted peptides were performed at the EasyNano LC 1000 system (San Jose, California, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to be separated. The peptide components were loaded into a trap column (5-μm pore size, 150-μm i.d. ×3-cm length, 100Å) and separated by a custom-made C18 column (3-μm pore size, 75-μm i.d. 315-cm length, 100Å) with a flow rate of 450μl/min.A 60-min linear gradient was applied as follows: 3% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile [v/v] / 97% A (0.1% formic acid in H2O [v/v]) to 6% B in 8 min, 6% B to 22% B in 37 min, 22% B to 35% B in 8 min, 35% B to 100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 5 min. The acquisition of MS data was using a Q Exactive HF (Bremen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode. The top 20 precursors by intensity from mass range m/z 300 to 1800 were sequentially fragmented with higher energy collisional dissociation, normalized collision energy 27. The dynamic exclusion time was 20s. Automatic gain control for MS1 and MS2 was set to 3e6 and 1e, and the resolution for MS1 and MS2 was set to 120 and 30K.

### Data Protocol
Based on the MS/MS information, De Novo Sequencing of the Peaks Studio resolved peptides from each spectrum (FDR=1%) as previous report. The parameters were set as follows: the enzyme was set to no-specific, the variable modifications were adjusted Oxidation (M)/Deamidated(N,Q), peptide mass tolerance was about ± 10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The micropolymorphism of major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) can greatly alter the plasticity of peptide presentation, but elucidating the underlying mechanism remains a challenge. Here we investigated the impact of the micropolymorphism on peptide presentation of swine MHC-I (termed swine leukocyte antigen class I, SLA-I) molecules <i>via</i> immunopeptidomes that were determined by our newly developed random peptide library combined with the mass spectrometry (MS) <i>de novo</i> sequencing method (termed RPLD-MS) and the corresponding crystal structures. The immunopeptidomes of SLA-1*04:01, SLA-1*13:01, and their mutants showed that mutations of residues 156 and 99 could expand and narrow the ranges of peptides presented by SLA-I molecules, respectively. R156A mutation of SLA-1*04:01 altered the charge properties and enlarged the volume size of pocket D, which eliminated the harsh restriction to accommodate the third (P3) anchor residue of the peptide and expanded the peptide binding scope. Compared with 99<sup>Tyr</sup> of SLA-1*0401, 99<sup>Phe</sup> of SLA-1*13:01 could not form a conservative hydrogen bond with the backbone of the P3 residues, leading to fewer changes in the pocket properties but a significant decrease in quantitative of immunopeptidomes. This absent force could be compensated by the salt bridge formed by P1-E and 170<sup>Arg</sup>. These data illustrate two distinguishing manners that show how micropolymorphism alters the peptide-binding plasticity of SLA-I alleles, verifying the sensitivity and accuracy of the RPLD-MS method for determining the peptide binding characteristics of MHC-I <i>in vitro</i> and helping to more accurately predict and identify MHC-I restricted epitopes.

### Keywords
Mhc class i，random peptide library，lc-ms/ms，de novo sequencing

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Xiaohui Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Nianzhi Zhang
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.


