### Accession
PXD019723

### Title
Pull down of Rab10 interactors in Raw264.7 cells

### Description
The goal of this project is to identify Rab10 interactors (in presence of GTP/GDP) in Raw264.7 macrophage cells.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation Raw264.7 cells transfected with pCDNA3.1-Flag-Rab10 are lysed with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10mM MgCl2, 0.05% Triton-100, 1x PhosSTOP and Protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche) followed by ultracentrifugation at 150, 000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant was collected and mixed with anti-Flag resin (M8823, sigma) for 12 hours in 4C in presence of GTP or GDP. The beads were washed 5 times with lysis buffer and eluted with lysis buffer supplemented with 100µg/ml 3X FLAG® Peptide (F4799, sigma). The eluted lysates are analyzed using SDS-PAGE or mass spectrometer.  Mass spectrometry Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiolthreitol for 30 min at 80C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Next, they were supplemented with a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and 1084 µL of S-Trap (Protifi) binding buffer (90% MeOH/100mM TEAB). Proteins were trapped on the S-Trap, digested using 20 ng/µl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 1 hr at 47C, and eluted using 50 mM TEAB, followed by 0.2% FA, and lastly using 50% ACN/0.2% FA. All samples were then lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 12 µL 1%TFA/2% acetonitrile containing 12.5 fmol/µL yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH_YEAST).  Quantitative LC/MS/MS was performed on 4 µL of each sample, using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp) coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos high resolution accurate mass tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Briefly, the sample was first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20 mm × 180 µm trapping column (5 μl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed using a 1.8 µm Acquity HSS T3 C18 75 µm × 250 mm column (Waters Corp.) with a 90-min linear gradient of 5 to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute (nL/min) with a column temperature of 55C. Data collection on the Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was performed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of acquisition with a r=120,000 (@ m/z 200) full MS scan from m/z 375 – 1500 with a target AGC value of 2e5 ions. MS/MS scans were acquired at Rapid scan rate (Ion Trap) with an AGC target of 5e3 ions and a max injection time of 100 ms. The total cycle time for MS and MS/MS scans was 2 sec. A 20s dynamic exclusion was employed to increase depth of coverage. The total analysis cycle time for each sample injection was approximately 2 hours.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis protocol The MS/MS data was searched against the SwissProt M. musculus database (downloaded in Apr 2017) and an equal number of reversed-sequence “decoys” for false discovery rate determination. Mascot Distiller and Mascot Server (v 2.5, Matrix Sciences) were utilized to produce fragment ion spectra and to perform the database searches. Database search parameters included fixed modification on Cys (carbamidomethyl) and variable modifications on Meth (oxidation) and Asn and Gln (deamidation).

### Publication Abstract
Genetic variation in LRRK2 associates with the susceptibility to Parkinson's disease, Crohn's disease, and mycobacteria infection. High expression of LRRK2 and its substrate Rab10 occurs in phagocytic cells in the immune system. In mouse and human primary macrophages, dendritic cells, and microglia-like cells, we find that Rab10 specifically regulates a specialized form of endocytosis known as macropinocytosis, without affecting phagocytosis or clathrin-mediated endocytosis. LRRK2 phosphorylates cytoplasmic PI(3,4,5)P3-positive GTP-Rab10, before EEA1 and Rab5 recruitment to early macropinosomes occurs. Macropinosome cargo in macrophages includes CCR5, CD11b, and MHCII, and LRRK2-phosphorylation of Rab10 potently blocks EHBP1L1-mediated recycling tubules and cargo turnover. EHBP1L1 overexpression competitively inhibits LRRK2-phosphorylation of Rab10, mimicking the effects of LRRK2 kinase inhibition in promoting cargo recycling. Both Rab10 knockdown and LRRK2 kinase inhibition potently suppress the maturation of macropinosome-derived CCR5-loaded signaling endosomes that are critical for CCL5-induced immunological responses that include Akt activation and chemotaxis. These data support a novel signaling axis in the endolysosomal system whereby LRRK2-mediated Rab10 phosphorylation stalls vesicle fast recycling to promote PI3K-Akt immunological responses.

### Keywords
Lcms, Apms

### Affiliations
Duke University

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyong Liu
Duke University


