### Accession
PXD011433

### Title
Proteome analysis of CD4+T cells leading to the proposition of a novel mechanism to interpret the impact of bisphenol A on immunity

### Description
Environmental estrogens, such as bisphenol A (BPA) that is normally used in the manufacture of food and beverage containers, pose increasingly worrisome hazards to human and wildlife health. The adverse effects of BPA are multifaceted; while close attention has been paid to their effect on the immune response system, especially the possible etiology of asthma in children and adults. The underlined mechanism of how BPA influences the biological pathways to alter the normal immune response system is unknown. Here, we report to use various proteomics and biological experiments to identify BPA-targeting proteins and protein pathways in human cell lines and mouse CD4+T cells. The outcomes of these experiments revealed that the cellular respiration, phagosome maturation and especially the Sirtuin signaling pathways are among the top canonic or KEGG pathways perturbed by BPA.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale The purpose of this study was to identify a potentially novel mechanism of BPA’s impact on the development of allergic asthma through proteomics. Since T-cell activation is critical to initiation and maintenance of airway inflammation in patients with asthma, we were interested in studying the proteome of CD4+T cells that were isolated from the spleens of BPA exposed mice.  Animals without BPA exposure were used as controls and three pairs of animals (three were BPA-exposed and three weren’t; all were female) were involved in this study.  Label-free quantification (LFQ) by mass spectrometry was performed for each pair of animals. Protein pathways were analyzed by IPA and STRING based on the LFQ data to identify consensus pathways perturbed by BPA in three animals. In addition, IPA was used to identify upstream regulators that are either activated or inhibited by BPA. Proteomics study of human Caco-2 cells in vitro treated with BPA was performed by TMT-10 labeling (eight labels was used). From these in-vitro experiments, a protein pathway matching the in vivo (CD4+T cells) pathway was identified and a BPA-targeting protein, ZDHHC1, was identified with great interest.  Up-regulation of ZDHHC by BPA was validated by Western-blot (WB) in Caco-2 cells and in both human CD4+T cells (in vitro) and mouse CD4+T cells.  The mechanism for upregulation of ZDHHC1 by BPA and its correlation with immunity in allergic asthma was proposed. Three biological repeats (animals) and three technical repeats (three LC-MS/MS runs) were performed for in vivo study;  four biological repeats (two within one set of TMT10 labeled samples and two separated TMT10 experiments) and six technical repeats (TMT10-N and TMT10-C were used to label one sample and three LC-MS/MS runs) were performed for Caco-2 proteomics study.  The significance of identifying proteins was calculated by p-values (LFQ) with PEAKS or q-values (TMT10) with Thermo Discoveror 2.0. The R program was used to graphically display proteomic data and calculate correlation co-efficiencies between experiment.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified through the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo) using Sequest HT (employing the Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database, release date 7/2015, containing 45,391 entries or mouse Swiss-Prot Homo database). The Sequest search parameters were: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT10 modification of peptide N terminus and lysine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications; trypsin was the protease selected and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for the precursor ions was 10 ppm, and for the MS/MS, 0.1 Da. Only peptides with a minimum length of four amino acids were considered, and peptides were filtered for a maximum false discovery rate of 1%. At least one unique peptide with posterior error probability of less than 0.05 was accepted for quantification using the TMT reporter ions, and proteins were grouped. LFQ analysis was carried out using the PEAKS 8.5 software. The criteria for searching proteins were the same as for the TMT proteomic data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bisphenol a, Immune response, Proteomics, Histone modification, Sting signaling

### Affiliations
UTMB
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kangling Zhang
UTMB


