### Accession
PXD021973

### Title
Xylem sap shotgun proteomics from Mn-excess tomato plants

### Description
The aim of this work was to study the effects of Mn excess on the protein profile of the xylem sap of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), with the aim of elucidating plant response mechanisms to these nutritional stresses. Tomato was chosen as a model plant because the tomato genome has been published and this plant species has adequate root pressure and turgid stems that permit xylem sap sampling in sufficient amounts by de-topping. The high- throughput shotgun analysis has permitted to identify and quantitate a large number of low abundance proteins in the tomato xylem sap.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the collected fluid were precipitated immediately by adding five volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol, containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol. The pellet was solubilized in a sample rehydration buffer containing 8 M urea, 2% (w/v) CHAPS, 50 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF and 0.2% (v/v) IPG buffer pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Protein concentration in the samples was quantified immediately with the Bradford method using BSA as standard. 5 µg of total proteins were subjected to 1-DE to remove non-protein compounds. Proteins were in gel digested with trypsin, and peptides were subsequently extracted. Peptide solutions were concentrated in a trap column (Lcolumn Micro 0.3 x 5 mm; CERI, Japan) using an ADVANCE UHPLC system (Michrom Bioresources, Aubum, CA, U.S.A.). Elution was carried out with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN and concentrated peptides were separated in a Magic C18 AQ nano column (0.1 x 150 mm; Michrom Bioresources) using a linear gradient of ACN (from 5 to 45%) and a flow rate of 500 nL min-1. Peptide ionization was carried out with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV using an ADVANCE spray source (Michrom Bioresources). Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) equipped with Xcalibur software (v. 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using the full peptide list with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, U.K.) and ITAG3.2 database (35,768 sequences; 11,956,401 residues). Search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance ± 5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ± 0.6 Da, one allowed missed cleavage, allowed fixed modification carbamidomethylation (Cys), and variable modification oxidation (Met) and peptide charges were set to +1, +2 and +3. Positive protein identification was assigned with at least two unique top-ranking peptides with scores above the threshold level (p ≤ 0.05). Protein information was exported from Mascot .xml format and imported to Progenesis software (v. 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.), which then associate peptide and protein information.

### Publication Abstract
Metal toxicity is a common problem in crop species worldwide. Some metals are naturally toxic, whereas others such as manganese (Mn) are essential micro-nutrients for plant growth but can become toxic when in excess. Changes in the composition of the xylem sap, which is the main pathway for ion transport within the plant, is therefore vital to understanding the plant's response(s) to metal toxicity. In this study we have assessed the effects of exposure of tomato roots to excess Mn on the protein profile of the xylem sap, using a shotgun proteomics approach. Plants were grown in nutrient solution using 4.6 and 300 &#xb5;M MnCl<sub>2</sub> as control and excess Mn treatments, respectively. This approach yielded 668 proteins reliably identified and quantified. Excess Mn caused statistically significant (at <i>p</i> &#x2264; 0.05) and biologically relevant changes in relative abundance (&#x2265;2-fold increases or &#x2265;50% decreases) in 322 proteins, with 82% of them predicted to be secretory using three different prediction tools, with more decreasing than increasing (181 and 82, respectively), suggesting that this metal stress causes an overall deactivation of metabolic pathways. Processes most affected by excess Mn were in the oxido-reductase, polysaccharide and protein metabolism classes. Excess Mn induced changes in hydrolases and peroxidases involved in cell wall degradation and lignin formation, respectively, consistent with the existence of alterations in the cell wall. Protein turnover was also affected, as indicated by the decrease in proteolytic enzymes and protein synthesis-related proteins. Excess Mn modified the redox environment of the xylem sap, with changes in the abundance of oxido-reductase and defense protein classes indicating a stress scenario. Finally, results indicate that excess Mn decreased the amounts of proteins associated with several signaling pathways, including fasciclin-like arabinogalactan-proteins and lipids, as well as proteases, which may be involved in the release of signaling peptides and protein maturation. The comparison of the proteins changing in abundance in xylem sap and roots indicate the existence of tissue-specific and systemic responses to excess Mn. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021973.

### Keywords
Mn excess, Proteome, Xylem sap, Shotgun proteomics, Tomato

### Affiliations
Plant Stress Physiology Group Plant Nutrition Department Aula Dei Experimental Station-CSIC,  P.O. 13034 50080 Zaragoza Spain
Experimental Station Aula Dei-CSIC

### Submitter
Laura Ceballos-Laita

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Abadia
Plant Stress Physiology Group Plant Nutrition Department Aula Dei Experimental Station-CSIC,  P.O. 13034 50080 Zaragoza Spain


