### Accession
PXD031728

### Title
Interspecies isobaric labeling-based proteomics reveals protein changes in the ovary of Aedes aegypti co-infected with ZIKV and Wolbachia

### Description
Zika is a vector-borne disease caused by an arbovirus (ZIKV) and overwhelmingly transmitted by Ae. aegypti. This disease is linked to adverse fetal outcomes, mostly microcephaly in newborns, and other clinical aspects such as acute febrile illness and neurologic complications, for example Guillain-Barré syndrome. One of the actual most promising strategies to mitigate arbovirus transmission involves releasing Ae. aegypti mosquitoes carrying the maternally inherited endosymbiont bacteria Wolbachia pipientis. The presence of Wolbachia is associated with a reduced susceptibility to arboviruses and a fitness cost in mosquito life-history traits as fecundity and fertility. However, the mechanisms by which Wolbachia influences metabolic pathways leading to differences in egg production remains poorly known. In order to investigate the impact of co-infections on the reproductive tract of the mosquito, we applied a quantitative proteomic strategy based on an isobaric labeling to investigate the influence of Wolbachia wMel and ZIKV infection in Ae. aegypti ovaries. For what we know, this is the most complete proteome of Ae. aegypti ovaries reported so far, with a total of 3913 proteins identified. We were able to quantify a total of 1044 Wolbachia proteins in complex sample tissue of Ae. aegypti ovary employing mass spectrometry-based quantitative methods. Furthermore, we describe and discuss proteins and pathways altered in Ae. aegypti during ZIKV infections, Wolbachia infections, co-infection Wolbachia/ZIKV, and compared with no infection, focusing on immune and reproductive aspects of Ae. aegypti.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 100 μg of proteins from each condition was processed. Reduction and alkylation steps were performed using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT -GE Healthcare) and 40mM iodoacetamide solution (GE Healthcare), respectively. Samples were diluted 10x with 50 mM HEPES buffer, reducing the concentration of urea/thiourea, and incubated with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:50 (w/w, enzyme/protein) ratio at 37º C for 18 hours. The resulting peptides were desalted with a C-18 macro spin column (Harvard Apparatus) and then vacuum dried. Peptides labeling process, with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) 4-plex (ABSciex), was performed as described in Murillo et al. (2017), mixing the tag solutions with sample peptides at room temperature for one hour. Each condition was labeled as follows i) Tag 114 corresponds to sample W (Wolbachia infected); ii) Tag 115 to sample A (none infection); iii) Tag 116 to sample WZ (Wolbachia and ZIKV co-infection); and iv) Tag 117 to sample Z (ZIKV infection). After the labeling step, samples were combined and vacuum dried for off-line fractionation by HILIC (Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The dried samples were resuspended in acetonitrile (ACN) 90% / trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% and injected into Shimadzu UFLC chromatography using a TSKGel Amide-80 column (15 cm x 2 mm i.d. x 3 μm - Supelco), which was equilibrated using ACN 85%/TFA 0. 1% (phase A). The peptides were eluted in TFA 0.1% (phase B) and each 8 fractions were collected and combined according to the separation and intensity of the peaks. The pools of fractions were dried in a speed vac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). LC-MS/MS analysis of samples was performed in a Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Ionization was performed in an electrospray source with the acquisition of spectra in positive polarity by data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, spray voltage of 2.5 kV, and temperature of 200ºC in the heated capillary. The acquisition was set as follows: full scan or MS1 in the range of 375 - 1800 m/z, resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200), fragmentation of the 10 most intense ions in the HCD collision cell, with standardized collision energy (NCE) of 30, resolution of 17,000 in the acquisition of MS/MS spectra, the first mass of 110 m/z, isolation window of 2.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The spectra obtained after the LC-MS/MS analyzes were processed in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Scientific), with the Sequest HT search engine against the Ae. aegypti (genome version/assembly ID: INSDC: GCA_002204515.1), ZIKV and Wolbachia provided by VectorBase (Giraldo-Calderón et al., 2014), ViPR (Pickett et al., 2012), and UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2015). 2019), respectively. For the search, the following parameters were used: tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da, tryptic cleavage specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites allowed, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys), variable modification of iTRAQ 4-plex (Tyr, Lys and peptide N-terminus), phosphate (Ser, Thr, and Tyr) and oxidation (Met). Peptides with high confidence were selected, and only identifications with q values equal to or less than 0.01 FDR were considered. Target Decoy PSM obtained these values.

### Publication Abstract
Zika is a vector-borne disease caused by an arbovirus (ZIKV) and overwhelmingly transmitted by <i>Ae. aegypti</i>. This disease is linked to adverse fetal outcomes, mostly microcephaly in newborns, and other clinical aspects such as acute febrile illness and neurologic complications, for example, Guillain-Barr&#xe9; syndrome. One of the most promising strategies to mitigate arbovirus transmission involves releasing <i>Ae. aegypti</i> mosquitoes carrying the maternally inherited endosymbiont bacteria <i>Wolbachia pipientis</i>. The presence of <i>Wolbachia</i> is associated with a reduced susceptibility to arboviruses and a fitness cost in mosquito life-history traits such as fecundity and fertility. However, the mechanisms by which <i>Wolbachia</i> influences metabolic pathways leading to differences in egg production remains poorly known. To investigate the impact of coinfections on the reproductive tract of the mosquito, we applied an isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomic strategy to investigate the influence of <i>Wolbachia w</i>Mel and ZIKV infection in <i>Ae. aegypti</i> ovaries. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most complete proteome of <i>Ae. aegypti</i> ovaries reported so far, with a total of 3913 proteins identified, were also able to quantify 1044 <i>Wolbachia</i> proteins in complex sample tissue of <i>Ae. aegypti</i> ovary. Furthermore, from a total of 480 mosquito proteins modulated in our study, we discuss proteins and pathways altered in <i>Ae. aegypti</i> during ZIKV infections, <i>Wolbachia</i> infections, coinfection <i>Wolbachia</i>/ZIKV, and compared with no infection, focusing on immune and reproductive aspects of <i>Ae. aegypti</i>. The modified aspects mainly were related to the immune priming enhancement by <i>Wolbachia</i> presence and the modulation of the Juvenile Hormone pathway caused by both microorganism's infection.

### Keywords
Proteome; quantitative; aedes aegypti; wolbachia; zika virus; juvenile hormone; immune defense.

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

### Submitter
Michele Martins

### Lab Head
Dr Magno Junqueira
Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.


