### Accession
PXD016560

### Title
Proteomic Signature of Nucleus Pulposus of Human Intervertebral Disc

### Description
Intervertebral Disc (IVD) degeneration leading to Low back pain (LBP) is the most common musculoskeletal disorder. Lack of knowledge on the intricate homeostatic mechanisms necessitates proteomic characterisation of a normal human IVD to understand the biological process and unravel the pathomechanisms of degenerative disc disease (DDD). In this study, we employed proteomic approach coupled with tandem mass-spectrometry to derive the comprehensive list of proteins expressed in true biologically normal control discs. This would serve as the basis for identifying the interacting molecules participating in significant biological processes and pathways disrupted during aging and degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Lumbar spine segments were harvested under sterile operating conditions from brain dead voluntary organ patients and processed for the extraction of total proteins. RIPA and 2%SDS buffers were used to extract hydrophilic and hydrophobic proteins from the disc tissue. The extracted total proteins were quantified and purified using organic solvents for the removal of interfering salts and detergents. The purified protein samples were then pre-fractionated on 10% SDS-PAGE.  Followingly, the protein bands were excised, chopped and digested using trypsin enzyme at a concentration of 600ng/fraction for converting into smaller units called peptides. Each of the three fractions were pooled, dried and resuspended in appropriate volume of 0.1% formic acid with 5% acetonitrile. Around 1000fm of tryptic peptide from each fraction were loaded to nano-LC and subjected to tandem mass acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Each of the raw data files acquired from Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo, USA) were searched with Proteome Discoverer version 2.0 against human database using Mascot and SequestHT search engines with peptide tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da in SequestHT and 0.80 Da in Mascot, allowing two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation were considered as fixed modification whereas Methionine Oxidation and Lysine propionamide modifications were considered as variable modifications. Gene ontology classification, significant pathways association and functional annotation were performed using bio-informatic tools such as Cluster profiler, DAVID, String, Cytoscape, PANTHER databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esi-lc-ms/ms, Human, Np, Ivd

### Affiliations
Research Scientist, 
Ganga Orthopedic Research and Education Foundation, 
187, Mettupalayam Road, 
Kavundampalayam, 
Coimbatore- 641030,
Tamil Nadu, India

Research Scientist, Ganga Orthopaedic Research and Education Foundation, 187, Mettupalayam road, Kavundampalayam, Coimbatore-641030 Tamil Nadu, India.

### Submitter
Chitraa Tangavel

### Lab Head
Dr Chitraa Tangavel
Research Scientist, Ganga Orthopaedic Research and Education Foundation, 187, Mettupalayam road, Kavundampalayam, Coimbatore-641030 Tamil Nadu, India.


