### Accession
PXD002432

### Title
Reproductive aging drives protein accumulation in the uterus and limits lifespan in C. elegans

### Description
We identify changes in the C. elegans proteome that occur with increased age. We find that secreted proteins and proteins specifically expressed in adult animals tend to increase in abundance with age. A subset of these proteins is solely expressed in the extracellular space of the adult uterus. These uterine protiens are rapidly turned over in yound adult animals, but are removed much more slowly in old worms. The dataset presented here describes the quantification of protein abundance in young and old adult worms as measured by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates from three pairs of young and old biological replicates were precipitated by the addition of saturated trichloroacetic acid to 15% final concentration. The resulting protein pellet was washed five times with ice cold excess acetone. Proteins were resuspended in 8M urea, 100mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris, pH 8.2 in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Complete, EDTA-free, #04693159001). Proteins were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to 5mM final concentration and incubation at 50°C for 30min. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to 14mM final concentration and incubation at room temperature for 1hr in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by increasing the final concentration of DTT to 10mM. After diluting the samples to 1M urea, proteins were proteolytically digested with 5ng/ml trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega, #V5111). Enzymatic digestion was quenched by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.1% final concentration, pH < 2. The resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, # WAT023590). Peptides were dried down and resuspended in 1M HEPES, pH 7.5. Peptides were chemically labeled by reductive dimethylation of lysine residues and N-termini as previously described . Peptides derived from young worm lysates were light-labeled (+28Da) by reaction with 4% d0-formaldehyde and 600mM sodium cyanoborohidride for 10 minutes at room temperature. Peptides derived from old worm lysates were heavy-labeled (+34Da) by reaction with 4% formaldehyde- d2 and 600mM sodium cyanoborodeuteride for 10 minutes at room temperature. Each reaction was repeated and then quenched by the addition of 10% formic acid to pH 3. Quenching was aided by bath sonication for 1 hour. Light- and heavy-labeled pairs were mixed one-to-one and subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns. Light- and heavy-labeled peptide mixtures were then chromatographically fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography on an Agilent 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography instrument (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded on to a Polysulfoethyl A column (Poly LC Inc., #209SE502) in buffer A (7mM KH2PO4, 30% Acetonitrile, pH 2.65) and eluted with a gradient of 0-25% buffer B (7mM KH2PO4, 350mM KCl, 30% Acetonitrile, pH 2.65) for 29 minutes, 25-100% buffer B for 5 minutes, and 100% buffer B for 5 minutes. Twelve fractions were collected and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns. Peptides from each fraction were analyzed on an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1100 high performance liquid chromatography pump (Agilent Technologies) and a MicroAS autosampler (Thermo Scientific). Approximately 10% of each fraction was loaded on to a 17cm fused silica microcapillary column (100um inner diameter) with an in-house pulled tip (~5um inner diameter) packed with C18 reversed-phase resin (Magic C18AQ, Michrom Bioresources). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer’s nanospray ionization source via a two-step gradient of 7-25% buffer B (2.5% water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) in buffer A (2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) over 60 minutes followed by a second phase of 25-45% buffer B over 20 minutes. The mass spectrometer collected 10 ion-trap MS/MS spectra per data-dependent cycle.

### Data Protocol
Raw data acquired by the mass spectrometer were converted to the mzXML format, and MS and MS/MS data were extracted using in-house software. Spectra were analyzed using the Sequest (version 27, revision 12) algorithm and the Uniprot C. elegans protein sequence database using the target-decoy strategy. Search parameters included tryptic cleavage, two missed cleavages allowed, peptide mass tolerance of 50ppm, static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146Da), differential oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99491Da), static demethylation of lysine residues and N-termini (+28.03230Da), and differential modification of lysine residues and N-termini (+6.037660Da). Peptide-spectrum matches were determined with an estimated false discovery rate <1% and quantification of light- and heavy-labeled peptides was performed by the Vista quantitative analysis tool.

### Publication Abstract
Aging in Caenorhabditis elegans is characterized by widespread physiological and molecular changes, but the mechanisms that determine the rate at which these changes occur are not well understood. In this study, we identify a novel link between reproductive aging and somatic aging in C. elegans. By measuring global age-related changes in the proteome, we identify a previously uncharacterized group of secreted proteins in the adult uterus that dramatically increase in abundance with age. This accumulation is blunted in animals with an extended reproductive period and accelerated in sterile animals lacking a germline. Uterine proteins are not removed in old post-reproductive animals or in young vulvaless worms, indicating that egg-laying is necessary for their rapid removal in wild-type young animals. Together, these results suggest that age-induced infertility contributes to extracellular protein accumulation in the uterus with age. Finally, we show that knocking down multiple age-increased proteins simultaneously extends lifespan. These results provide a mechanistic example of how the cessation of reproduction contributes to detrimental changes in the soma, and demonstrate how the timing of reproductive decline can influence the rate of aging.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Proteomics, Aging, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University Department of Chemical and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Izumi Hinkson

### Lab Head
Dr Josh Elias
Stanford University Department of Chemical and Systems Biology


