### Accession
PXD009555

### Title
Major metabolic pathway alterations in the rat myocardium during development of Type 2 diabetes mellitus, part 2

### Description
The understanding of protein alterations in the diabetic heart is of vital importance because of increased risk of cardiovascular co-morbidities. The study aims at elucidating metabolic pathways in the diabetic rat heart during development of Type 2 diabetes mellitus using MS based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Zucker diabetic fatty rats homozygous for mutation in the Leptin receptor (ZDF fa/fa) and heterozygous lean controls (ZDF fa/+) were fed Purina 5008 diet for 6, 12, and 24 weeks, corresponding to pre-diabetes, onset of T2DM, and late T2DM, respectively. Rats were euthanized and heart excised. Rat heart tissue was homogenized, reduced, alkylated, in-gel digested and peptides purified using C18-spin columns (Pierce) before analysis by LC-MS/MS (LTQ XL, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into MaxQuant and searched against the rattus norvegicus sequence database (UniProt-28-9-2016-7964 sequences). Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as dynamic and static modifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Congestive heart failure and poor clinical outcome after myocardial infarction are known complications in patients with type-2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Protein alterations may be involved in the mechanisms underlying these disarrays in the diabetic heart. Here we map proteins involved in intracellular metabolic pathways in the Zucker diabetic fatty rat heart as T2DM develops using MS based proteomics. The prediabetic state only induced minor pathway changes, whereas onset and late T2DM caused pronounced perturbations. Two actin-associated proteins, ARPC2 and TPM3, were up-regulated at the prediabetic state indicating increased actin dynamics. All differentially regulated proteins involved in fatty acid metabolism, both peroxisomal and mitochondrial, were up-regulated at late T2DM, whereas enzymes of branched chain amino acid degradation were all down-regulated. At both onset and late T2DM, two members of the serine protease inhibitor superfamily, SERPINA3K and SERPINA3L, were down-regulated. Furthermore, we found alterations in proteins involved in clearance of advanced glycation end-products and lipotoxicity, DCXR and CBR1, at both onset and late T2DM. These proteins deserve elucidation with regard to their role in T2DM pathogenesis and their respective role in the deterioration of the diabetic heart. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD009538, PXD009554, and PXD009555.

### Keywords
Heart, Proteomics, Rattus, Lc-ms/ms, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Anders Edhager

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark


