### Accession
PXD009529

### Title
Global profiling and functional characterization of post-translational modifications of the fission yeast RNA exosome

### Description
The RNA exosome is a multi-subunit complex essential for processing and degradation of many classes of RNA. Although many of the functions of the RNA exosome are well established, how the activity of this complex is regulated remains poorly understood. Here we report a comprehensive proteomic analysis of the RNA exosome complex from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and identified 39 post-translational modifications (PTMs), including phosphorylation, methylation, and acetylation. Interestingly, most of the modifications were identified in Dis3 and Rrp6, the catalytic subunits of the RNA exosome, as well as in the exosome-associated RNA helicase, Mtr4. Functional characterization of residues found to be modified in distinct exosome subunits revealed specific substitutions that affected cell growth and RNA exosome functions. Notably, phosphomimetic substitutions of phosphorylation sites Ser-809 and Tyr-814 in S. pombe Dis3 resulted in striking loss-of-function phenotype in vivo. Biochemical analysis of the Ser-809 and Tyr-814 phosphomimetic versions of Dis3 revealed proper assembly in vivo, but a marked decrease in degradation capacity in vitro. Given that Ser-809 and Tyr-814 are positioned in the vicinity of the catalytic centre of Dis3, our data suggest that site-specific phosphorylation of the RNA exosome represents a mechanism to control its activity in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. Following trypsin digestion, peptides were sorted using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. Approximately 2µg (10µL) of peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected with a flow of 4 µL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3mmid x 5mm, Dionex Corporation). Peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 µm x 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) over 240 minutes with a flow of 200 nL/min using a gradient of 5–35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). Through an EasySpray source, the HPLC system was combined to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 2.0kV and the column temperature was set to 40°C. With a resolution of 70000 after the accumulation of 1000000 ions, full scan MS overall spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap. After 50000 ions accumulated, fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (resolution of 17500, normalised energy 35%) of the 10 strongest peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap occurred. Top filling times were 250ms for the whole scans and 60ms for the MS/MS scans. We enabled precursor ion charge state screening and rejected all unassigned charge states as well as singly, seven and eight charged species. We limited to a maximum of 500 entries the dynamic exclusion list with a maximum retention length of 40s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. To improve mass accuracy, the lock mass option was enabled. The Xcalibur software was used to acquire data (Mathieu et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis and bioinformatics. The MaxQuant software package version 1.5.1.2 was used to process, search, and quantify the data collected as described previously (Boisvert et al., 2010), employing the S. pombe Uniprot proteome with 5142 protein annotations (Proteome ID: UP000002485). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were trypsin or chymotrypsin; variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; variable modifications were Phospho (STY), Methyl (KR), Dimethyl (KR), Acetyl (K) and GlyGly (K). Variable modifications were analysed independently and sequentially from one another. For precursor ions, 7 ppm was used as mass tolerance and for fragment ions, 20 ppm was used as tolerance threshold. To obtain candid identifications with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%, every protein was considered based on the criterion that the amount of forward hits in the database was minimally 100-fold higher than the amount of reverse database hits. Each protein had a minimum of two peptides quantified. Isoforms and protein indistinguishable based on their identified peptides were grouped and organised in a single line with various accession numbers.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA exosome is a conserved multi-subunit complex essential for processing and degradation of several types of RNAs. Although many of the functions of the RNA exosome are well established, whether the activity of this complex is regulated remains unclear. Here we performed a proteomic analysis of the RNA exosome complex purified from Schizosaccharomyces pombe and identified 39 post-translational modifications (PTMs), including phosphorylation, methylation, and acetylation sites. Interestingly, most of the modifications were identified in Dis3, a catalytic subunit of the RNA exosome, as well as in the exosome-associated RNA helicase, Mtr4. Functional analysis of selected PTM sites using modification-deficient and -mimetic versions of exosome subunits revealed substitutions that affected cell growth and exosome functions. Notably, our results suggest that site-specific phosphorylation in the catalytic center of Dis3 and in the helical bundle domain of Mtr4 control their activity. Our findings support a view in which post-translational modifications fine-tune exosome activity and add a layer of regulation to RNA degradation.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Fission yeast, Rna exosome, Gene expression regulation

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
RNA Group, Department of Biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qc, Canada

### Submitter
Caroline Telekawa

### Lab Head
Dr François Bachand
RNA Group, Department of Biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qc, Canada


