### Accession
PXD023094

### Title
Three-in-one simultaneous extraction of proteins, metabolites and lipids for multi-omics

### Description
Elucidation of complex molecular networks requires integrative analysis of molecular features and changes at different levels of information flow and regulation. Accordingly, high throughput functional genomics tools such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and lipidomics have emerged to provide system-wide investigations. Unfortunately, analysis of different types of biomolecules requires specific sample extraction procedures in combination with specific analytical instrumentation. The most efficient extraction protocols often only cover a restricted type of biomolecules due to their different physicochemical properties. Therefore, several sets/aliquots of samples are needed for extracting different molecules. Here we adapted a bi-phasic fractionation method to extract proteins, metabolites and lipids from the same sample (3-in-1) for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) multi-omics. To demonstrate utility of the improved method, we used bacteria-primed Arabidopsis leaves to generate multi-omics datasets from the same sample. In total, we were able to analyze 1849 proteins, 1967 metabolites and 424 lipid species in single samples. The molecules cover a wide range of biological and molecular processes. Our results have shown the clear advantages of the multi-omics method, including sample conservation, high reproducibility and tight correlation between different types of biomolecules.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and omics data analysis. Untargeted metabolomic, lipidomic, and proteomic methods were run on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A Vanquish™ UHPLC was used for lipids and metabolites, and an Easy-nLC was used for peptides. An Accucore C18 (100 x 2.1 mm, 2 μm) column and an Acclaim C30 (2.1 x 250 mm, 3 μm) were used for metabolites and lipids, respectively. The column chamber temperature was 55 oC, and the pump flow rate was 0.45 ml/min. For metabolomics, solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA and 99.9% acetonitrile) were used. The LC gradient is set to 0 min: 1% of solvent B, 5 min: 1% of B, 6 min: 40% of B, 7.5 min: 98% of B, 8.5min: 98% of B, 9 min: 0.1% of B, 10min stop run. To enhance identification, an Acquire X MSn data acquisition strategy was used which employs replicate injections for exhaustive sample interrogation and increases the number of compounds in the sample with distinguishable fragmentation spectra for identification. Electrospray ionization spray voltage for positive ions was 3500 and for negative ions was 2500.  Sheath gas was set to 50, auxiliary gas was set at 1 and sweep gas was set to 1. The ion transfer tube temperature was set at 325°C and the vaporizer temperature was set at 350 °C. Full MS1 used the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000, scan range (m/z) of 55-550, maximum injection time (MIT) of 50, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2e5, 1 microscan, and RF lens set to 50. For lipidomics, solution A consisted of 0.1% FA, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 60% acetonitrile. Solution B consisted of 0.1% FA, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 90:10 acetonitrile: isopropyl alcohol. The LC gradient is set to 0 min: 32% of solvent B (i.e., 68% of solvent A), 1.5 min: 45% of B, 5 min: 52% of B, 8 min: 58% of B, 11 min: 66% of B, 14 min: 70% of B, 18 min: 75% of B, 21 min: 97% of B, 26 min: 32% of B, 32 min stop run. Full MS1 used the Orbitrap ion trap mass analyzer with a resolution of 70,000, 1 microscan, AGC target set to 1e6, and a scan range from 200 to 2000 m/z for positive and negative polarity. The dd-MS² scan used 1 microscan, resolution of 35,000, AGC target 5e5, MIT of 46 ms, and loop count of 3. The column used for peptides was the Acclaim PepMap™ 100 pre-column (75 um X 2 cm, nanoViper C18, 3 µm, 100A) combined with an Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC (75 um X 25 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 µm, 100A) analytical column. The LC runs a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA, 99,9% Acetonitrile) from 1% to 30% for 90 minutes at 250 nL/min. The solvent A was 0.1% FA. The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Eluted peptides were detected in the Orbitrap MS at a 120,000 resolution with a scan range of 350-1800 m/z. Most abundant ions bearing 2-7 charges were selected for MS/MS analysis. AGC for the full MS scan was set as 2e5 with MIT as 50 ms, and AGC Target of 1e4 and MIT of 35 ms were set for the MS/MS scan. The normalized collision energy was 35, and ions were detected with an IonTrap detector. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds was applied to prevent repeated sequencing of the most abundant peptides.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4, Compound Discover™ 3.0, and Lipid Search 4.1™ software (Thermo Scientific, Breme, Germany) were used for proteomics, metabolomics and lipidomics data analyses, respectively (Figure 1). Briefly, for proteomic data analysis, MS/MS spectra were searched against Arabidopsis TAIR10 database with 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 Da tolerance for MS2, two missed cleavage sites, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021), and dynamic modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.996). Peptide confidence level was set at 1% false discovery rate with at least two unique peptides. Relative protein abundance in treated and mock samples was measured using label-free quantification in the Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4. For metabolomics data, metabolite identification included predicting compositions, searching mzCloud spectra database, and assigning compound annotations by searching ChemSpider, Pathway mapping to KEGG and Metabolika pathways was used for functional analysis. The metabolites were scored by applying mzLogic and the best score was kept. Peak areas were normalized by the positive and negative mode internal standards (lidocaine and camphorsulfonic acid, respectively) (Geng et al., 2017). For lipidomics data, raw files from three replicates of mock and treated were uploaded to Lipid Search 4.1™ for annotation of lipids found in all the samples. A mass list was generated for uploading to Compound Discover™ 3.0 Software. This mass list was used for metabolite identification along with predicted compositions, mzCloud database searching, and compound annotations. Peak areas were normalized by median-based normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Elucidation of complex molecular networks requires integrative analysis of molecular features and changes at different levels of information flow and regulation. Accordingly, high throughput functional genomics tools such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and lipidomics have emerged to provide system-wide investigations. Unfortunately, analysis of different types of biomolecules requires specific sample extraction procedures in combination with specific analytical instrumentation. The most efficient extraction protocols often only cover a restricted type of biomolecules due to their different physicochemical properties. Therefore, several sets/aliquots of samples are needed for extracting different molecules. Here we adapted a biphasic fractionation method to extract proteins, metabolites, and lipids from the same sample (3-in-1) for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) multi-omics. To demonstrate utility of the improved method, we used bacteria-primed <i>Arabidopsis</i> leaves to generate multi-omics datasets from the same sample. In total, we were able to analyze 1849 proteins, 1967 metabolites, and 424 lipid species in single samples. The molecules cover a wide range of biological and molecular processes, and allow quantitative analyses of different molecules and pathways. Our results have shown the clear advantages of the multi-omics method, including sample conservation, high reproducibility, and tight correlation between different types of biomolecules.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Systemic acquired resistance, Metabolomics, Proteomics, Lipidomics, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Biology Department University of Florida

### Submitter
Lisa David

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
Biology Department University of Florida


