### Accession
PXD010118

### Title
Signaling Mechanisms in Initiation of Lithium-Induced Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus

### Description
Lithium treatment is commonly used to treat bipolar disorder. However, this treatment disrupts kidney fuctionality. We used microdissected cortical collecting ducts to study proteomics and ultimately discover what changes occur in protein expression after 72-hr lithium treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were microdissected from a rat kidney after 72 hours of lithium treatment. Samples were lysed with a sodium deoxycholate buffer, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C. ZipTips were used to extract peptides, and a SpeedVac was used to dry samples. LC-MS/MS was carried out in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano LC system an EASY-Spray ion source. Peptides were applied on a peptide nanotrap at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were fractionated with a reverse-phase EASY-Spray PepMap column (C18, 75 μm × 50 cm) using a linear gradient of 4 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The time of the gradient was 120 min, with a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) [PMID:19029910] and were searched against UniProt rat reference proteomes (Proteome ID:UP000002494) [UniProt-PMID:27899622], including integrated contaminant database. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were configured as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl (C) was configured as fixed modification. Trypsin/P was selected as an enzyme in specific digestion mode with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Match between runs option was enabled to help increase peptide identification rate. False discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein levels were controlled at 1 percent. Other parameters were kept as default. Protein quantification was performed using MaxLFQ algorithm with minimum ratio count of two. For quantitative analyses, only proteins with quantifiable LFQ intensities in all six samples were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Lithium salts, used for treating bipolar disorder, frequently induce nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) thereby limiting therapeutic success. NDI is associated with loss of expression of the gene coding for the molecular water channel, aquaporin-2, in the renal collecting duct (CD). Here, we use systems biology methods in a well-established rat model of lithium-induced NDI to identify signaling pathways activated at the onset of polyuria. Using single-tubule RNA-Seq, full transcriptomes were determined in microdissected cortical collecting ducts (CCDs) of rats after 72 hours without or with initiation of lithium chloride administration. Transcriptome-wide changes in mRNA abundances were mapped to gene sets associated with curated canonical signaling pathways, showing evidence for activation of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling with induction of genes coding for multiple chemokines and most components of the Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I antigen-presenting complex. Administration of anti-inflammatory doses of dexamethasone to lithium chloride-treated rats countered the loss of aquaporin-2. RNA-Seq also confirmed prior evidence of a shift from quiescence into the cell cycle with arrest. Time course studies demonstrated an early (12 hour) increase in multiple immediate early response genes including several transcription factors. Protein mass spectrometry in microdissected CCDs provided corroborative evidence and identified decreased abundance of several anti-oxidant proteins. Thus, in the context of prior observations, our study can be best explained by a model in which lithium increases ERK activation leading to induction of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling and an inflammatory-like response that represses Aqp2 transcription.

### Keywords
Cortical collecting duct, Lithium, Proteome, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center NHLBI, NIH, DHHS, USA

### Submitter
Gabirelle Gilmer

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, Systems Biology Center NHLBI, NIH, DHHS, USA


