### Accession
PXD021831

### Title
A comprehensive landscape of 60S ribosome biogenesis factors

### Description
We used quantitative proteomics and crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to analyse a comprehensive set of purified pre-60S ribosomal particles, obtaining a detailed timeline of RBF engagement during 60S ribosome biogenesis as well as particle-specific crosslink networks for all analysed particles. Our data provide an important resource for all future structural and biochemical studies of 60S ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosome assembly intermediates were purified from S. cerevisiae BY4741 cells by tandem affinity purification (TAP). Each pulldown was performed in biological triplicates (i.e. pulldowns from independently grown yeast cultures). A wild type S. cerevisiae BY4741 strain without any TAP-tagged protein served as control for unspecific binding. 12 L YPD medium (2 % (w/v) peptone, 1% (w/v) yeast extract, 2 % (w/v) glucose, 0.002 % (w/v) adenine) were inoculated from 300 ml over-night culture with an OD600 of 0.1 and grown at 30 °C and 130 rpm to OD600 = 0.8 – 1.0. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4300 x g and 4 °C for 12 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in 80 ml cold lysis buffer (LB-P, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % (v/v) NP-40, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, pefabloc 1:100, aprotinin/leupeptin 1:1000) and centrifuged at 4000 x g and 4 °C for 5 min. Washed cell pellets were resuspended in 20 ml LB-P and dripped into liquid nitrogen. Frozen droplets of cell suspension were stored at -80 °C until milling in a pre-cooled Retsch® ball mill MM400 at 30 Hz for 2x 60 s. 150 ml ice cold LB-P was added to the frozen cell powder which was thawed on a rolling mixer at 4 °C. Cell debris was separated from the lysate by centrifugation at 30000 x g and 4 °C for 20 min. The lysate was incubated with 1.2 ml equilibrated IgG sepharose beads at 4 °C for 3 h. IgG beads were washed 3x with LB-P and 1x with LB-DTT (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % (v/v) NP-40, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM DTT). IgG beads were loaded onto a 5 mL Polyprep® column using 3x 10 mL LB-DTT. The column was closed and IgG beads were incubated in 4.5 mL LB-DTT with 175 µl TEV protease (produced in-house, 1.5 µg/µL in 10 % glycerol) at 4 °C over-night on a rolling incubator. IgG eluate was incubated with 1 mL equilibrated calmodulin affinity resin in 15 mL LB-CaCl2 (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.02 % (v/v) NP-40, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM CaCl2) at a final CaCl2 concentration of 2 mM on a rolling mixer at 4 °C for 3 h. Calmodulin beads were loaded onto a 5 mL Polyprep® column using 2x 20 mL LB-CaCl2 and washed with 1x 10 mL LB-CaCl2. The column was closed and calmodulin beads were incubated with 550 µL LB-EGTA (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.01 % (v/v) NP-40, 5 % (v/v) glycerol, 5 mM EGTA) for 20 min at 4 °C on a rolling incubator. The eluate was collected and the elution was repeated 3x with 450 µL LB-EGTA. Eluates 1 – 4 were concentrated using an Amicon® Ultra 10 K 0.5 mL filter and the buffer was exchanged to a final volume of ca. 100 µl crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.3, 5 mM MgCl2). Chemical crosslinking and subsequent analysis was carried out essentially as described previously (Leitner et al., 2014). In short, the isotopically labeled crosslinking reagent disuccinimidyl suberate d0/d12 was dissolved in N,N-Dimethylformamide and purified ribosome assembly intermediates were incubated with DSS-H12/D12 at a final concentration of 1.5 mM for 30 min at 30 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer. The reaction was subsequently quenched with ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 50 mM for 10 min at 30 °C and 650 rpm. Crosslinked samples were stored at -20 °C over- night. Crosslinked samples were dried, resuspended in 100 µl 8M Urea, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system. Crosslinked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography using an ÄKTAmicro chromatography system (GE Healthcare) equipped with a SuperdexTM Peptide 3.2/30 column (column volume = 2.4 ml). Fractions were collected in 100 µl units and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For each crosslinked sample three fractions were measured in technical duplicates. The elution fractions 1.0-1.1, 1.1-1.2 and 1.2-1.3 ml containing the largest peptides were pooled and the two elution fractions 1.3-1.4 ml and 1.4-1.5 ml were also analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Absorption levels at 215 nm of each fraction were used to normalize peptide amounts prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over an 80 min gradient (5 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for 4 min, 5 % - 35 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 75 min, 35 % - 80 % acetonitrile in 1 min). Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 400 - 1500 m/z, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense precursor ions (intensity ≥ 5.0e3) with charge states 3 - 8 and monoisotopic peak determination set to ‘peptide’ were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by CID at 35 % collision energy in a data dependent mode. The duration for dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. MS/MS spectra were analyzed in the Iontrap at a rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins: Proteins were identified based on their non-crosslinked peptides and quantified in a label-free approach by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0.) using standard settings and the match between runs option (Hein et al., 2015). For the downstream analysis of the non-crosslinked proteomic data the Perseus platform (version 1.6.5.0.) was used (Tyanova et al., 2016b). After log2(x) transformation of the LFQ values, proteins were considered to be reproducibly identified, if an LFQ value could be determined in all 3 biological replicates in at least one of the technical replicates of at least one purified pre-ribosomal particle. Missing LFQ values were imputed for the total matrix from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8). In order to test for the variance of the determined LFQ values in the 3 biological replicates of each pre-ribosomal particle, an ANOVA significance test with the parameter s0 = 0 in combination with a permutation-based FDR estimation (FDR = 0.05) was applied. For the permutation-based FDR estimation, technical replicates were indicated and randomized together. Data was normalized by Z-scoring (rows).  Identification of crosslinked peptides: MS raw files were converted to centroid files and searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode (Leitner et al., 2014). Crosslinks were exported as .tsv files from xQuest with the filter settings deltaS = 95 and a max. ppm range from -5 to 5, containing all (non-unique) identifications. Subsequent filtering and analysis of xQuest results was done with python / pandas and jupyter notebook. Crosslinks were filtered with a novel mi-filter resulting in a low FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, Ribosome biogenesis factors (rbfs), Crosslinking coupled to mass spectrometry (xl-ms), Ribosome assembly factors (afs), Mi-filter, False discovery rate (fdr)

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitaetsstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz
Universität Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitaetsstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz


