### Accession
PXD012957

### Title
Grb2 interactome data with and without EGF stimulation

### Description
Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 or Grb2 is an adaptor protein involved in signal transduction. It is widely expressed and integral to several cellular functions, including cell proliferation. We designed this study to capture interacting partners of Grb2 in absence and presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF). HEK 293 cells, expressing tagged Grb2, were cultured with SILAC labels in presence and absence of EGF. Grb2 interactome was enriched by immunoprecipitation and subjected to mass spectrometry. This data will help in understanding the regulatory effect of EGF stimulation on Grb2 protein and its interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Stable Grb2 cell line was cultured in light and heavy labelled SILAC media. Light labelled cells were Grb2 expressing cells without any mitogenic stimulation and heavy labelled were EGF stimulated Grb2 expressing cells. Equal numbers of cells were pooled, lysed and subjected to affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS). Four biological replicates were there.

### Data Protocol
Wiff files generated from AB SCIEX 5600 TRIPLE TOF Mass Spectrometer were submitted to protein pilot software, which resulted in 16 group files. The search parameters for database search were as followed- 2 missed cleavages allowed; with cys alkylation as Methyl methanethiosulphonate (MMTS), the “Search Effort” parameter “Thorough ID”, which gives us a broad search of various protein modifications. The following parameters were used for identification and quantification of differentially expressed proteins - Auto Bias correction for heavy to light ratio; Threshold of 1% accepted Global False discovery rate from fit (G-FDR-fit) proteins; Minimum protein confidence threshold cut off of 95% and At least one peptide with 95% confidence for the relative expression.

### Publication Abstract
Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2) is an adaptor protein involved in the signal transduction pathways. This dataset enlists proteins which interact with Grb2 in the presence and absence of a mitogenic stimulus. Grb2 expressing HEK293&#xa0;cells were cultured in light and heavy labeled SILAC media. Normal lysine and arginine were incorporated as light labels while 8 and 10 Da heavier labels of respective isotopes were used for heavy labeling. While light labeled cells were used to enrich basal Grb2 interactome, the heavy labeled cells were stimulated in presence of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to investigate the altered Grb2 interactome dynamics. Equal number of EGF stimulated and non-stimulated cells was pooled, lysed and subjected to affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS). The variety of Grb2 protein partners changed as a consequence of EGF stimulation. Additionally, SILAC labeling helped in quantitative estimation of altered association of a few interactors with the bait protein. Data are available via PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD012957 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD012957).

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Interactome, Egf, Silac, Grb2

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery Research Center Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster Faridabad-121001. Haryana. India
THSTI, Faridabad

### Submitter
Ajay Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ajay Kumar
Drug Discovery Research Center Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster Faridabad-121001. Haryana. India


