### Accession
PXD008267

### Title
Proteomic profiling of human iPSC-derived pancreatic endocrine cells for the identification of clinical biomarkers

### Description
Great progresses have been made for generating in vitro pluripotent stem cell pancreatic β-like cells. However, the maturation stage of the cells still requires in vivo maturation to recreate the environmental niche. A deeper understanding of the factors promoting maturation of the cells is of great interest for clinical applications. We performed label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of samples from a longitudinal study of differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem cells towards glucose-responsive insulin producing cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. For each condition, an amount of 80 μg of proteins was prepared in 100 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer pH 8.5 (TEAB) to a final volume of 100 μl. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 1 h at 55 °C. Alkylation was performed with 17 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. To remove lipids and salts, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Briefly, methanol (400 μl), then chloroform (100 μl) and H2O (300 μl) were added sequentially. Mixtures were centrifuged at 13’000 rpm (~ 18’500 × g) for 5 min at 4 °C. Upper and lower phases were discarded. The white precipitates were additionally washed with methanol (300 μl) prior to be dried for 5 min. Pellets were then suspended in 100 μl of 100 mM TEAB and proteins were digested with trypsin (addition of 10 μl of trypsin (Promega) at 0.25 μg/μl in 100 mM TEAB) at 37 °C overnight. Samples were cleaned up using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) and finally dried and stored at –20 °C before further reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC MS/MS) analysis. RP-LC MS/MS. The samples were dissolved in 200 µl H2O/CH3CN/ formic acid (FA) 96.9/3/0.1 for RP-LC MS/MS analysis. RP-LC MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µl of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 330 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 320 min and 80% of CH3CN after 330 min at a flow rate of 220 nl/min. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1×106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1500. For MS/MS with collision-induced dissociation (i.e., CID) at 30% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1×104 (isolation width of 2 m/z), and a maximum injection time of 150 ms in the LTQ. A maximum of 20 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis. Protein identification was performed using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.4.0) as search engine against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2013/07/24 release; 20’267 entries). Variable amino acid modifications were deamidated asparagine/glutamine and oxidation methionine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of 2 potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.3.1 (Proteome Software) to be further searched with X! Tandem (version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1). Both peptide and protein FDRs were fixed at 1% maximum, with a 2 peptide criterion to report protein identification. Spectral counting was used as quantification technique.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta-cell; diabetes mellitus; differentiation; human; mass spectrometry; maturation;  proteomics; pluripotent; spectral counting; stem cells; therapy

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Stem Cells, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Marine Kraus
Stem Cells, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


