### Accession
PXD023107

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of both fresh and vitrified porcine GV oocytes during in vitro maturation

### Description
In this study, we used tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative approach to acquire proteomic profiles of porcine GV and MII oocytes and MII oocytes vitrified at the GV stage.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were performed, and approximately1,500 oocytes were used for each sample. For protein extraction, these samples were lysed on ice in 8 M urea containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail through a high intensity ultrasonic processor, and then centrifugated at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to obtain the supernatant. Protein concentration was measured by a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Moreover, protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 15 min, and diluted to ensure the urea concentration was less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at 1:50 mass ratio (trypsin: protein) at 37 °C overnight for the first digestion and continuously at 1:100 mass ratio (trypsin: protein) for 4 h to complete a post-digestion. After digestion, peptides were desalted on a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA), vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB. For TMT labeling, one unit of TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was reconstituted in acetonitrile to mix with peptides at room temperature for 2 h. Finally, the labeled peptide mixtures were desalted and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Firstly, tryptic peptides were separated at a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions using high pH reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length; Agilent, Santa Clara, USA), followed by combining into 9 fractions and vacuum-drying. After dissolving in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), these peptides were directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) to elute with gradient solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile). The linear gradient settings were as following: 7%–16% over 50 min, 16%–30% in 35 min, 30%–80% in 2 min and 80% for the last 3 min, which was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization at 2.0 kV voltage and then detected with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled online to the UPLC system. Precursor and fragment ion spectra were acquired in the high-resolution Orbitrap with 350–1550 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 and 100 m/z a resolution of 30,000, respectively. A data dependent scanning mode was used to acquire mass fragmentation date. Each full mass spectrometry (MS) scan was followed by 20 MS/MS scans (30.0 s dynamic exclusion) corresponding from the ten most abundant precursor ions of full MS for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 32% normalized collision energy (NCE). In addition, automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4, and maximum injection time (max IT) was 70 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were processed using Maxquant search engine (v1.5.2.8) against the Sus scrofa UniProt proteome database (40,708 sequences). Moreover, we added a reverse decoy database to reduce the false positive identification results. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum peptide length was specified as 7 amino acids, with a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 5 ppm. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. The false discovery rate for each peptides was adjusted to < 1%. Student’s t-test was used to analyze statistical significances between two samples, and p-value < 0.05 and fold change of ≥ 1.20 or ≤ 0.83 were set as the threshold for differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ivm, Vitrification, Tmt, Oocytes, Pig

### Affiliations
Yunnan Animal Science and Veterinary Institute
Yunnan Animal Science and Veterinary Institute, Kunming, China.

### Submitter
Guoquan Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Guoquan Wu
Yunnan Animal Science and Veterinary Institute, Kunming, China.


