### Accession
PXD036353

### Title
Ribosomes lacking bS21 gain function to regulate protein synthesis in Flavobacterium johnsoniae

### Description
Ribosomes of Bacteroidia (formerly Bacteroidetes) fail to recognize Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequences even though they harbor the anti-SD (ASD) of 16S rRNA. This is due to sequestration of the 3’ tail of 16S rRNA in a pocket formed by bS21, bS18, and bS6 on the 30S platform, which functionally occludes the ASD. Interestingly, in many Flavobacteriales, the gene encoding bS21, rpsU, contains an extended SD sequence. In this work, we present genetic and biochemical evidence that bS21 synthesis in Flavobacterium johnsoniae is autoregulated via a subpopulation of ribosomes that specifically lack bS21. Mutation or depletion of bS21 in the cell specifically increases translation of reporters with strong SD sequences, such as rpsU’-gfp. Purified ribosomes lacking bS21 (or its C-terminal region) exhibit higher rates of initiation on rpsU mRNA and lower rates of initiation on other (SD-less) mRNAs than control ribosomes. The mechanism of autoregulation depends on extensive pairing between mRNA and 16S rRNA, and exceptionally strong SD sequences, with predicted pairing free energies of < –13 kcal/mol, are characteristic of rpsU across the Bacteroidia. To our knowledge, this is the first example of biochemically-verified specialized ribosomes with a clear regulatory purpose.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were solubilized in 2% SDS, 100mM tris pH 8 and reduced and alkylated (PMID12724530) prior to running shortly onto 10% SDS PAGE resolving gel. The entire lanes were excised and digested with trypsin (Promega), omitting the reduction and alkylation in-gel (PMID: 8779443). Resulting peptides were cleaned on C-18 STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) Tips (PMID 12498253) using 40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid as elution buffer

### Data Protocol
analyzed on a quadrupole–time of flight mass spectrometer (Impact II; Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an Easy nano LC 1200 HPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) using 25cm x 75μm 1.6μm C18 Aurora Series Gen2 analytical column (Ion Opticks, Australia) heated to 50°C by in-house built column heater. Standard 90min peptide was done with the instrument set to acquire the same as PMID28096346.  Acquired data was searched on MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 (PMID: 19029910) using Flavobacterium johnsoniae protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot (Uniprot.org), NCBI (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), specific applicable mutant sequences, and the built-in common contaminant sequences (total: 10,368 sequences, downloaded July 16, 2021). The search setting was set with variable modifications of methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-terminus, and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Label-free quantitation, match-between-runs, and iBAQ modes were enabled and the protein and peptide false discovery rate were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes of Bacteroidia (formerly Bacteroidetes) fail to recognize Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequences even though they harbor the anti-SD (ASD) of 16S rRNA. Inhibition of SD-ASD pairing is due to sequestration of the 3' tail of 16S rRNA in a pocket formed by bS21, bS18, and bS6 on the 30S platform. Interestingly, in many Flavobacteriales, the gene encoding bS21, rpsU, contains an extended SD sequence. In this work, we present genetic and biochemical evidence that bS21 synthesis in Flavobacterium johnsoniae is autoregulated via a subpopulation of ribosomes that specifically lack bS21. Mutation or depletion of bS21 in the cell increases translation of reporters with strong SD sequences, such as rpsU'-gfp, but has no effect on other reporters. Purified ribosomes lacking bS21 (or its C-terminal region) exhibit higher rates of initiation on rpsU mRNA and lower rates of initiation on other (SD-less) mRNAs than control ribosomes. The mechanism of autoregulation depends on extensive pairing between mRNA and 16S rRNA, and exceptionally strong SD sequences, with predicted pairing free energies of &lt; -13 kcal/mol, are characteristic of rpsU across the Bacteroidota. This work uncovers a clear example of specialized ribosomes in bacteria.

### Keywords
Flavobacterium johnsoniae, Lcmsms, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, USA
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Kurt Fredrick
Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, USA


