### Accession
PXD032205

### Title
Phosphoproteomic dysregulation in Huntington’s disease mice is rescued by environmental enrichment

### Description
Huntington’s disease is a fatal autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by neuronal cell loss, primarily in the striatum, cortex, and hippocampus, causing motor, cognitive, and psychiatric impairments. Unfortunately, no treatments are yet available to modify the progression of the disease. Recent evidence from Huntington’s disease mouse models suggests that protein phosphorylation (catalysed by kinases and hydrolysed by phosphatases) might be dysregulated, making this major posttranslational modification a potential area of interest to find novel therapeutic targets. Furthermore, environmental enrichment (EE), used to model an active lifestyle in preclinical models, has been shown to alleviate Huntington’s disease-related motor and cognitive symptoms. However, the molecular mechanisms leading to these therapeutic effects are still largely unknown.  In this study, we applied a phosphoproteomics approach combined with proteomic analyses on brain samples from pre-motor symptomatic R6/1 Huntington’s disease male mice (HD mice) and their wild-type (WT) littermates, after being housed either in EE conditions, or in standard housing (SH) conditions from 4 to 8 weeks of age (n=6 per group). We hypothesised that protein phosphorylation dysregulations occur prior to motor onset in this mouse model, in two highly affected brain regions, the striatum and hippocampus. Furthermore, we hypothesised that these phosphoproteome alterations are rescued by EE.  When comparing 8-week-old HD mice and WT mice in SH conditions, our analysis revealed 229 differentially phosphorylated peptides in the striatum, compared to only 15 differentially phosphorylated peptides in the hippocampus (statistical thresholds FDR0.05, FC1.5). At the same disease stage, minor differences were found in protein expression, with 24 and 22 proteins dysregulated in the striatum and hippocampus, respectively. Notably, we found no differences in striatal protein phosphorylation and protein expression when comparing HD mice and their WT littermates in EE conditions. In the hippocampus, only four peptides were differentially phosphorylated between the two genotypes under EE conditions, and 22 proteins were differentially expressed.   Together, our data indicates that protein phosphorylation dysregulations occur in the striatum of HD mice, prior to motor symptoms, and that the kinases and phosphatases leading to these changes in protein phosphorylation might be viable drug targets to consider for this disorder. Furthermore, we show that an early environmental intervention was able to rescue the changes observed in protein expression and phosphorylation in the striatum of HD mice and might underlie the beneficial effects of EE, thus identifying novel therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Striatum and hippocampus samples from 8-week-old male mice (n=6 per group) were used for protein extraction with a RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche). Protein concentration in each sample was determined from a BCA assay. We precipitated 500µg of proteins overnight at -20°C, using 5x volume ice cold acetone. The following day, the pellet was solubilized in 8M Urea in 50mM TEAB and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. The samples were then treated with 10mM TCEP and 55mM IAA. Thereafter, the samples were diluted to 1M urea with 25mM TEAB and digested overnight at 37°C with Trypsin/LysC (1:50 protein:enzyme). The next day, the samples were acidified to 1% (v/v) formic acid. We used Oasis HLB 60mg cartridges for solid-phase extraction. The cartridges were first washed with 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA, followed by another washing with 0.1% TFA. The samples were then loaded onto the cartridges and washed with 0.1% TFA. The proteins were eluted with 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA. A final BCA assay was performed to allow equal loading across all samples. Twenty µg of protein from each sample were kept for the proteomics experiment and resuspended in a buffer containing 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA. The remaining samples were then freeze-dried until phospho-enrichment.  All samples were prepared in 2 separate batches, with the 4 groups in each batch and were randomized before LC-MS/MS analysis.   For the phosphopeptide enrichment, TiO beads (6:1 TiO:peptides) were washed with 50% ACN, 5% TFA (Washing Buffer) and incubated for 10 minutes with 2M Lactic acid in 5% TFA, 50% ACN (Loading Buffer). The TiO beads in loading buffer were added to the peptides samples and incubated for 1 hour.  Subsequently, the phosphopeptides were washed and eluted with 1% ammonia followed by elution with 30% ACN. The samples were then acidified with 1ul of formic acid per 10ul eluent and freeze-dried. The phosphopeptides were resuspended in a buffer containing 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA just before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by nanoESI-LC-MS/MS using a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected (concentration of 1µg on column, for the proteomics and phosphoproteomics) to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 3% B, (ii) 6-95 min, 3-22% B (iii) 95-105min 22-40% B (iv) 105-110min, 40-80% B (v) 110-115min, 80-80% B (vi) 115-117min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. All spectra were acquired in positive ionization mode with full scan MS acquired from m/z 300-1600 in the FT mode at a mass resolving power of 120 000, after accumulating to an AGC target value of 3.0e6, with a maximum accumulation time of 25 ms. The RunStart EASY-IC lock internal lockmass was used. Data-dependent HCD MS/MS of charge states > 1 was performed using a 3 s scan method, at a normalized AGC target of 100%, automatic injection, a normalized collision energy of 30%, and spectra acquired at a resolving power of 15000. Dynamic exclusion was used for 20s.  Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant proteomics software package (version 2.0.1.0)  with the Andromeda search engine for protein and peptide identification. The results were searched against a Mus Musculus database (SwissProt, Taxonomy ID 10090, downloaded April 2021) and using the default search parameters. Trypsin was selected as the cleavage enzyme, cysteine carbamidomethyl was selected as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. The match between run option was selected. Protein and peptides groups were set to a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01. Each raw file was considered as one experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease is a fatal autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by neuronal cell dysfunction and loss, primarily in the striatum, cortex and hippocampus, causing motor, cognitive and psychiatric impairments. Unfortunately, no treatments are yet available to modify the progression of the disease. Recent evidence from Huntington's disease mouse models suggests that protein phosphorylation (catalysed by kinases and hydrolysed by phosphatases) might be dysregulated, making this major post-translational modification a potential area of interest to find novel therapeutic targets. Furthermore, environmental enrichment, used to model an active lifestyle in preclinical models, has been shown to alleviate Huntington's disease-related motor and cognitive symptoms. However, the molecular mechanisms leading to these therapeutic effects are still largely unknown. In this study, we applied a phosphoproteomics approach combined with proteomic analyses on brain samples from pre-motor symptomatic R6/1 Huntington's disease male mice and their wild-type littermates, after being housed either in environmental enrichment conditions, or in standard housing conditions from 4 to 8 weeks of age (<i>n</i> = 6 per group). We hypothesized that protein phosphorylation dysregulations occur prior to motor onset in this mouse model, in two highly affected brain regions, the striatum and hippocampus. Furthermore, we hypothesized that these phosphoproteome alterations are rescued by environmental enrichment. When comparing 8-week-old Huntington's disease mice and wild-type mice in standard housing conditions, our analysis revealed 229 differentially phosphorylated peptides in the striatum, compared with only 15 differentially phosphorylated peptides in the hippocampus (statistical thresholds fold discovery rate 0.05, fold change 1.5). At the same disease stage, minor differences were found in protein levels, with 24 and 22 proteins dysregulated in the striatum and hippocampus, respectively. Notably, we found no differences in striatal protein phosphorylation and protein expression when comparing Huntington's disease mice and their wild-type littermates in environmentally enriched conditions. In the hippocampus, only four peptides were differentially phosphorylated between the two genotypes under environmentally enriched conditions, and 22 proteins were differentially expressed. Together, our data indicates that protein phosphorylation dysregulations occur in the striatum of Huntington's disease mice, prior to motor symptoms, and that the kinases and phosphatases leading to these changes in protein phosphorylation might be viable drug targets to consider for this disorder. Furthermore, we show that an early environmental intervention was able to rescue the changes observed in protein expression and phosphorylation in the striatum of Huntington's disease mice and might underlie the beneficial effects of environmental enrichment, thus identifying novel therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Striatum, Phosphoproteomics, Environmental enrichment, Transgenic mice, Huntington’s disease, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne, Florey Institute
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Isaline Mees

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Renoir
University of Melbourne, Florey Institute


