### Accession
PXD010330

### Title
Pathogen and non-pathogen Spotted Fever Group Rickettsia trigger differential proteome signatures in macrophages

### Description
We have previously reported that Rickettsia conorii and Rickettsia montanensis have distinct intracellular fates within THP-1 macrophages, suggesting that the ability to proliferate within macrophages may be a distinguishable factor between pathogenic and non-pathogenic Spotted fever group (SFG) members. To start unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying the capacity (or not) of SFG Rickettsia to establish their replicative niche in macrophages, we have herein profiled the host proteomic alterations resulted by the infection of THP-1 macrophages with R. conorii and R. montanensis using a high throughput quantitative proteomics approach (SWATH-MS). Our results revealed that these two members of SFG Rickettsia with distinct pathogenicity attributes for humans, trigger differential proteomic signatures in macrophage-like cells. Although infection by both rickettsial species resulted in a lower abundance of enzymes of glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway, the pathogenic R. conorii specifically induced the accumulation of several enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid -oxidation and glutaminolysis, as well as of several inner and outer membrane mitochondrial transporters. These results suggest a profound metabolic rewriting of macrophages by R. conorii towards a metabolic signature of an M2-like (anti-inflammatory) activation program. Moreover, our results revealed that several subunits forming the proteasome and immunoproteasome are found in lower abundance upon infection with both rickettsial species, which may help bacteria to escape immune surveillance. Remarkably, R. conorii-infection specifically induced the accumulation of several host proteins implicated in protein processing and quality control in ER, suggesting that this pathogenic Rickettsia may be able to compensate the accumulation of misfolded proteins by increasing the ER protein folding capacity and subsequently restore host cell homeostasis. This work reveals novel aspects of macrophage-Rickettsia interactions, expanding our knowledge of how pathogenic rickettsiae explore host cells to their advantage.

### Sample Protocol
PMA-differentiated THP-1 cells monolayers at a cell confluency of 2 x 105 cells per well, in 24 well plates (3 wells per condition) were infected with R. conorii, R. montanensis at a MOI of 10 or maintained uninfected. Plates were centrifuged at 300 x g for 5 min at RT to induce contact between rickettsiae and host cells, and incubated at 34 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h. At this point, culture medium was removed, cells were washed 1x with PBS and total protein was extracted using 100 µL of protein extraction buffer per well (25 mM Tris/HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 and Pierce protease inhibitors tablet, pH 7.0). Samples were passed 10 times through Insulin Syringe with 28-gauge needle and denatured using 6x Laemmli buffer during 10 min at 95 °C. Total protein content was quantified with 2D Quant kit and kept at -20˚C until further processing. After thawing, 10 µg of each replicate from each experimental condition were pooled together, creating three pooled samples (R. conorii, R. montanensis and uninfected pool). At this point, the same amount of a recombinant protein (malE-GFP) was added to each replicate and pooled samples to serve as internal standard. All the samples were boiled for 5 min and acrylamide was added as an alkylating agent. The volume corresponding to 40 µg of each replicate sample as well as pooled samples was loaded into a precast gel (4-20% Mini-Protean® TGX™ Gel, Bio-Rad), and the SDS-PAGE was partially run for 15 minutes at 110 V. After SDS-PAGE, proteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. The lanes were sliced into 3 fractions with the help of a scalpel. The gel pieces were destained using a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 30% ACN followed by a washing step with. The gel pieces were dehydrated and to each gel band 75 µL of trypsin (0.01 µg/µL solution in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added and left for 15 min at 4°C. After this period, 75 µL of buffer were added and in-gel digestion was performed overnight at RT in the dark. After digestion, the excess solution from gel pieces was collected to a low binding microcentrifuge tube and peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential addition of three solutions of increasing percentage of acetonitrile (30%, 50%, and 98%) in 1% FA. The peptides from each fraction of each sample were pooled together for SWATH analysis; the peptides from the pooled samples were kept separated in the three fractions of the digestion procedure. After digestion, all samples were subjected to solid phase extraction with C18 sorbent (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies) prior to LC-MS/MS. The Triple TOF™ 5600 System (Sciex) was operated in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each fraction of the pooled samples; followed by SWATH (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisition of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra) acquisition of each sample. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm, 120Å, Eksigent) at 5 µL/min with a 45 min gradient from 2% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA, and the peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, Sciex). Information dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments were performed by analysing each fraction of the pooled samples. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 counts per second (cps) – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 cps were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, Sciex). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. The SWATH setup was essentially as in Gillet et al, with the same chromatographic conditions used for SWATH and IDA acquisitions. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analysed, in order to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 60 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 200 ms survey scan (350-1250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.25 s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable CES according with the window.

### Data Protocol
Specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0.1, Sciex), with the following search parameters: Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (release of March 2017) and malE-GFP; acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and the gel based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot™ software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR (Sennels et al., 2009; Tang et al., 2008).  Data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.2, Sciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the ProteinPilot™ software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches. Peptide’s retention time was adjusted by using the malE-GFP peptides. In SWATH™ Acquisition data, peptides are confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups, which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Up to 5 target fragment ions were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al (Lambert et al., 2013). Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least one pair of technical replicates were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4 minutes. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein (Collins et al., 2013) and normalized to the total intensity at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
We have previously reported that <i>Rickettsia conorii</i> and <i>Rickettsia montanensis</i> have distinct intracellular fates within THP-1 macrophages, suggesting that the ability to proliferate within macrophages may be a distinguishable factor between pathogenic and non-pathogenic Spotted fever group (SFG) members. To start unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying the capacity (or not) of SFG <i>Rickettsia</i> to establish their replicative niche in macrophages, we have herein used quantitative proteomics by SWATH-MS to profile the alterations resulted by the challenge of THP-1 macrophages with <i>R. conorii</i> and <i>R. montanensis</i>. We show that the pathogenic, <i>R. conorii</i>, and the non-pathogenic, <i>R. montanensis</i>, member of SFG <i>Rickettsia</i> trigger differential proteomic signatures in macrophage-like cells upon infection. <i>R. conorii</i> specifically induced the accumulation of several enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid <b>&#x3b2;</b>-oxidation, and glutaminolysis, as well as of several inner and outer membrane mitochondrial transporters. These results suggest a profound metabolic rewriting of macrophages by <i>R. conorii</i> toward a metabolic signature of an M2-like, anti-inflammatory activation program. Moreover, several subunits forming the proteasome and immunoproteasome are found in lower abundance upon infection with both rickettsial species, which may help bacteria to escape immune surveillance. <i>R. conorii</i>-infection specifically induced the accumulation of several host proteins implicated in protein processing and quality control in ER, suggesting that this pathogenic <i>Rickettsia</i> may be able to increase the ER protein folding capacity. This work reveals novel aspects of macrophage-<i>Rickettsia</i> interactions, expanding our knowledge of how pathogenic rickettsiae explore host cells to their advantage.

### Keywords
Infection, Spotted fever group rickettsia, Er quality control, Rickettsia montanensis, Protein processing pathways, Metabolic reprogramming, Macrophages, Swath-ms, Rickettsia conorii, Host-pathogen interactions, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology


