### Accession
PXD002154

### Title
Recessive mutations in POLR1C cause a leukodystrophy by impairing biogenesis of RNA polymerase III

### Description
A small proportion of 4H (Hypomyelination, Hypodontia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism) or RNA polymerase III (POLR3)-related leukodystrophy cases are negative for mutations in the previously identified causative genes POLR3A and POLR3B. Here, we report eight of these cases carrying recessive mutations in POLR1C, a gene encoding a shared POLR1 and POLR3 subunit, also mutated in some Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) cases. Using shotgun proteomics and ChIP-sequencing we demonstrate that leukodystrophy causative mutations, but not TCS mutations, in POLR1C impair assembly and nuclear import of POLR3, but not POLR1, leading to decreased binding to POLR3 target genes. This study is the first to show that distinct mutations in a gene coding for a shared subunit of two RNA polymerases lead to selective modification of the enzymes' availability leading to two different clinical conditions and to shed some light on the pathophysiological mechanism of one of the most common hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, POLR3-related leukodystrophy.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of cell lines stably expressing FLAG-tagged POLR1C subunits (wild-type and mutated) and affinity purification from the soluble fraction were performed using standard procedures. The eluates were digested with trypsin and the resulting tryptic peptides were purified and identified by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a microcapillary reversed-phase high pressure liquid chromatography coupled LTQ-Orbitrap (ThermoElectron) quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer with a nanospray interface, as recently described.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching and protein spectral count quantification was performed with Mascot (version 2.3.02). The NCBI_Human protein sequence database was downloaded on February 20, 2014. Known protein contaminants such as keratins, which are not expressed in HeLa cells, were excluded from the dataset. Undistinguishable protein isoforms were considered as a single protein. For each LC-MS/MS analysis, protein spectral counts were normalized by the spectral count of the FLAG-POLR1C in order to allow the comparison of different purifications. To simulate the background noise of the LC-MS/MS analysis of a given sample, spectral counts reported as 0 by Mascot were replaced by randomly generated spectral count values that are normally distributed with a mean and standard deviation equal to those of the lowest 20% spectral count values from the LC-MS/MS analysis. Each replicate LC-MS/MS analysis of the affinity purifications of the FLAG-POLR1C mutants (MUT) (N32I, N74S, and R279Q) was paired with a LC-MS/MS analysis of the wild type (WT) FLAG-POLR1C that was performed at the same time. The set of high-confidence interactors of POLR1C for a given mutant analysis was identified by comparing the spectral counts of the interactors obtained from the purifications of the paired WT POLR1C and the MUT POLR1C to those of the proteins purified with an empty vector (EV) of the FLAG tag (non-specific interaction). A protein is labeled as a high-confidence interactor if it was identified and quantified in all three replicates of WT POLR1C or MUT POLR1C and that the ratio of the average spectral counts across the three replicates (WT/EV or MUT/EV) was greater than 5. These stringent criteria allow us to eliminate the vast majority of non-specific interactors of POLR1C for the analysis of the interactions of each mutant. For each high-confidence interacting protein, a two-tailed one-sample t-test was performed on the spectral count ratios (MUT/WT). The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. To maximize the specificity of our approach, a protein is deemed to show a level of differential interaction with POLR1C that is statistically significant when its adjusted p-value is < 0.05 and that its average spectral count fold-change (MUT/WT) is < 0.6 ̅ or > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
A small proportion of 4H (Hypomyelination, Hypodontia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism) or RNA polymerase III (POLR3)-related leukodystrophy cases are negative for mutations in the previously identified causative genes POLR3A and POLR3B. Here we report eight of these cases carrying recessive mutations in POLR1C, a gene encoding a shared POLR1 and POLR3 subunit, also mutated in some Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) cases. Using shotgun proteomics and ChIP sequencing, we demonstrate that leukodystrophy-causative mutations, but not TCS mutations, in POLR1C impair assembly and nuclear import of POLR3, but not POLR1, leading to decreased binding to POLR3 target genes. This study is the first to show that distinct mutations in a gene coding for a shared subunit of two RNA polymerases lead to selective modification of the enzymes' availability leading to two different clinical conditions and to shed some light on the pathophysiological mechanism of one of the most common hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, POLR3-related leukodystrophy.

### Keywords
Human, Leukodystrophy, Polr1c, Rna polymerase iii

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Translational Proteomics, IRCM, Canada

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Translational Proteomics, IRCM, Canada


