### Accession
PXD018783

### Title
Characterization of I-Ab MHCII immunopeptidome eluted from control and obese (Ob/Ob) mice (2)

### Description
In Dendritic cells (DC), the MHC II eluted immunopeptidome reflects the antigenic composition of the microenvironment. Proteins are transported and processed into peptides in endosomal MHC II compartments through autophagy or phagocytosis; extracellular peptides can also directly bind MHC II proteins at the cell surface. Altogether, these mechanisms allow DC to sample both the intra and extracellular environment. With an increase in mass spectrometry sensitivity and accuracy, we can now finally tackle important questions on the nature and plasticity of the MHC-II immunopeptidome in health and disease. Presented epitopes, neoepitopes, and PTM-modified epitopes can be quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed to provide a comprehensive picture of DC role in immunosurveillance. To determine whether the redox metabolic conditions induce an altered spectrum of presented peptides, we eluted immunoaffinity-purified I-Ab from conventional dendritic cells isolated from control B6 or obese Ob/Ob mice, and analyzed MHC-II-associated peptides by LC/MS/MS using combined data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) approaches. We analyzed the DIA data by employing a reference spectral library consisting of all peptides identified by database matching in the pool of spectra from combined DDA dataset, thus allowing a direct label-free quantitation of relative abundances between the two sample categories. The quantitative analysis of the I-Ab-eluted immunopeptidomes pinpoint important differences in peptide presentation and epitope selection in obese mice.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse Dendritic Cells: Ob/Ob mice and C57Bl6 controls were injected subcutaneously with 40x106 B16-FLt3-L-producing melanoma cells. Twelve to 14 days after injection spleens were harvested and DCs were purified by density-gradient centrifugation using 30% Bovine Albumin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The preparation routinely contains 70 to 80% CD11c+ DC,with no significant differences observed in the numbers of cells isolated from control or Ob/Ob mice.  MHC II complexes from DCs of control and obese Ob/Ob mice (I-Ab) were isolated using immunoaffinity chromatography. Bound complexes were acid-eluted, and MHC-peptide concentration measured by ELISA. Peptides were eluted using 30% acetonitrile in 0.1%TFA. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 25 µl 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and separated on a nano-ACQUITY (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) UPLC with technical triplicate injections. In brief, a 3.0 µl injection was loaded in 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at 4.0 µl/min for 4.0 min onto a 100 µm I.D. fused-silica precolumn packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom, Auburn, CA) and eluted using a gradient at 300 nL/min onto a 75 µm I.D. analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3 µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ particles to a gravity-pulled tip. The solvents were A) water (0.1% formic acid); and B) acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient was developed from 5% solvent A to 35% solvent B in 90 min. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction into a Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300–1750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z-200), and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) selected the top 10 most abundant precursor ions in each scan for tandem mass spectrometry by HCD fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da, collision energy of 27, and a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned with protein ID using Peaks 8.5/X/X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the mouse (Mus musculus) Swiss-Prot database (March 2017; 91,343 entries). The following search parameters were applied for LFQ analysis of mouse peptidome: no enzyme digestion; the parent mass tolerance 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia are often observed in individuals with type II diabetes (T2D) and related mouse models. One dysmetabolic biochemical consequence is the non-enzymatic reaction between sugars, lipids, and proteins, favoring protein glycation, glycoxidation, and lipoxidation. Here, we identified oxidative alterations in key components of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule antigen processing and presentation machinery in&#xa0;vivo under conditions of hyperglycemia-induced metabolic stress. These modifications were linked to epitope-specific changes in endosomal processing efficiency, MHC class II-peptide binding, and DM editing activity. Moreover, we observed some quantitative and qualitative changes in the MHC class II immunopeptidome of Ob/Ob mice on a high-fat diet compared with controls, including changes in the presentation of an apolipoprotein B100 peptide associated previously with T2D and metabolic syndrome-related clinical complications. These findings highlight a link between glycation reactions and altered MHC class II antigen presentation that may contribute to T2D complications.

### Keywords
Mouse i-ab mhcii peptidome; lc/ms/ms dda on qe mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Radiation Oncology Department; Weill Cornell Medicine, NY, 10065
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio MD PhD; contact: Cristina C Clement PhD
Radiation Oncology Department; Weill Cornell Medicine, NY, 10065


