### Accession
PXD017654

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Hypsizygus marmoreus

### Description
Hypsizygus marmoreus is one of the most popular industrialized cultivation mushrooms in East Asia. H. marmoreus is the third wildly cultivated industrialized cultivated mushroom in China now behind only Flammulina velutipes and Pleurotus eryngii. H. marmoreus is a low-temperature fruiting mushroom. The mycelia grow vegetatively at 23 °C to 25 °C and transform into fruiting process at 13 °C to 17 °C. The fruiting process of H. marmoreus is sensitive to temperature, and high temperature can lead to the death of mycelia and malformation of the fruiting body. Therefore, thermotolerance is important for H. marmoreus during both vegetative growth and fruiting-body formation. Previous studies on H. marmoreus have mainly focused on cultivation, nutrition and bioactive compounds extracted, but little is known about thermotolerance. The aim of this project is to elucidate the thermotolerance mechanism of Hypsizygus marmoreus.

### Sample Protocol
H. marmoreus (white var.) strain G12 mycelia were divided randomly into three groups: Con group , HS group, and RHS group. Mycelia in Con group were cultured at 24-25 °C for 16 days. Mycelia in HS group were cultured at 24-25 °C for 15 days and then the plates were transferred to 37 °C for 24 hours. Mycelia in RHS group were cultured at 24-25 °C for 11 days, and then the plates were transferred to 37 °C for 24 hours. Mycelia (0.2 g) from three samples were suspended with 1 mL extraction buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.6) and lysed with QIAGEN TissueLyser II at 150 Hz for 60 seconds. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The protein concentration was measured with microBCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, USA) before adding DTT. Enzymolysis was performed with FASP methods. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed using an Nano-LC system coupled with Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (ThermalFisher). The MS instrument was operated in date-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap (120 K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 100,000. Different chromatographic gradient lengths from 60 to 240 min were tested for peptide separation. All gradient started at 5% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid) and went up to 32% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation were performed by Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.4, Matrix Science). The date were searched against the H. marmoreus proteome database (proteome ID UP000076154) from Uniprot. Protein identification was supported by at least 2 unique peptides, and the false discovery rate was lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lable-free, Hypsizygus marmoreus, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Hao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Yu
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China


