### Accession
PXD015496

### Title
Membrane modulation of super-secreting “midiBacillus” expressing the major Staphylococcus aureus antigen – a mass-spectrometry based absolute quantification approach.

### Description
Bacillus subtilis is a Gram-positive bacterium considered as a “cell-factory” for industrial enzymes and biopharmaceuticals. Given the commercial advantage of this organism, researchers have been working towards the improvement of this organism as a producer of secreted proteins. Nonetheless, there is the need to obtain more knowledge regarding the absolute composition of the gram positive cell membrane in order to increase the secretion capability of B. subtilis and gain insight into potential bottlenecks in protein production and/or secretion. However, membrane proteins are one of the most challenging classes of proteins, mainly due to their high hydrophobicity and low abundance compared to their soluble counterparts.  To this regard, we established a method for global characterization of absolute protein abundances within the membrane of B. subtilis and verified the effects of large scale protein export on a super-secreting strain. We did shotgun proteomics on three different fractions (extracellular, cytosol and membrane) and spiked in UPS2 proteins in each of these to calculate absolute protein abundances. The absolute values obtained from the shotgun experiment were validated by targeted proteomics. Furthermore, we performed western blot analysis on the three subcellular fractions using antibodies against proteins localized in these three different compartments in order to visually validate the enrichment of membrane proteins in the corresponding fraction.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Protein Preparation. For all proteomics analysis, bacteria were grown in LB medium. Exponentially growing cells (optical density at 600 nm [OD600] of 0.9) were induced with 1% subtilin (v/v) , and samples were taken 120 min after the onset of induction. Control cells, to which no subtilin was added, were collected at the same time point. For every experiment, three independent biological replicates were analysed. Cells 30 mL of bacterial cell culture wasere harvested by centrifugation (10,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C), and cell pellets were washed thrice with Tris EDTA (TE) buffer (20 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.5). The corresponding supernatants were filtered and stored at -80 °C for further preparation of extracellular protein fraction. Cells were mechanically disrupted using the FastPrep24 instrument (MPBiomedicals). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C), and the recovered supernatant was designated as whole cell extract. Protein concentration of these extracts was determined by a Bradford-based assay with standard addition. Membrane Enrichment. An aliquot with a protein content of 5 mg was used as starting material for membrane preparation. This lysate was adjusted upfilled up  to 1.5 mL TE buffer and subjected to ultracentrifugation (100,000 × g at 4 °C). The supernatant was designated as cytosolic fraction and the pellet was detached from the bottom by adding 0.75 mL high salt buffer (10 mM EDTA, 1M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) and incubation in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min at room temperature. This was followed by pipetting the suspension up and down until the pellet was homogenised. The pipette was then rinsed with 0.75 mL high salt buffer and the solution was incubated in a rotator at 8 rpm and 4 °C for 30 min, followed by ultracentrifugation under the same conditions as above. Pellet resuspension and ultracentrifugation were then performed with alkaline carbonate buffer  solution (10 mM EDTA, 100 mM Na2CO3, 100 mM NaCl, pH 11), and in a final step with tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB; 50 mM). The pellet containing the final crude membrane extract was ressupended in 70 µL 6 M Urea/2 M Thiourea.  Sample Preparation for MS Analysis. For shotgun-based absolute quantification, 10 µg of crude membrane and cytosolic extract were used for protein digestion using the S-Trap protocol according to the manufacturer (ProtiFi). The cytosolic fraction was prepared for quantification of IsaA protein. UPS2 proteins (Sigma-Aldrich-Merck) were added in a 1:4 ratio (2.5 µg). For LC/MS analysis, 4 µg of peptide mixture per biological replicate was desalted using C18 – Zip Tips (Merck Millipore). Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Preparation of whole cell- and membrane extracts for targeted-MS followed the same digestion protocol as described above, except for the addition of UPS2 standards. Instead, samples were spiked with heavy peptides of the anchor proteins used in this study – QcrA and YwbN – to a final amount of 5 pmol. A detailed list of used peptides and their optimized transitions is available in supplemental Table S2.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS Data Analysis of Shotgun MS and Global Absolute Quantification of Membrane Proteins. For data processing and protein identification, raw data were imported into MaxQuant (1.6.3.3) (46) incorporated with an Andromeda search engine (47), and processed via the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm (48). Database search was carried out against a reversed B. subtilis IIG-Bs27-47-24 database (36) with manually added UPS2, IsaA, SpaR, and SpaK sequences and with common contaminants added by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; min fragment ions matches per peptide: 1; match between runs was enabled with default settings; primary digest reagent: trypsin; missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl C (+57.0215); and variable modifications: oxidation M (+15.9949), acetylation N, K (+42.0106). Results were filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on spectrum, peptide and protein levels. All identification and quantitation data are summarized in the Supporting Information (supplemental Table S5) and the mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (49) partner repository with the dataset identifier XXXXXXXXX. Proteins   were only considered for further analysis if they contained at least one unique peptide and when quantified in three out of three biological replicates. LC/MS Data Analysis of Targeted MS and Absolute Quantification of AQUA peptides. Raw files were processed using Skyline 4.2 (MacCoss Lab Software (50)).  A peptide ratio of native and heavy species was based on, at least, four to six transitions  that were averaged . Based on the added amount of heavy peptides, the absolute quantity of target anchor proteins could be calculated (20). Absolute protein abundances derived from SRM were compared to shotgun MS absolute protein abundances  derived from iBAQ intensities and a correction factor was obtained by calculating a ratio between the targeted and the shotgun average concentration of QcrA. In addition, an enrichment factor was attained by calculating the ratio between the averaged value of QcrA   in the membrane and total cell extract fraction. The enrichment factor allowed the subsequent calculation of protein copy numbers per total surface area (molecules/µm2), as it accurately provides the percentage   of enrichment of the hydrophobic fraction and, thus, allows to calculatecalculating back to the natural form structure  of the membrane protein proteome in the cell prior to enrichment. The recently published method on absolute membrane protein quantification has demonstrated that the enrichment factor is similar for membrane proteins with different physicochemical properties (different number of transmembrane domains (TMD)), indicating that increasing the number of membrane protein exemplars would not provide additional information (Antelo-Varela et al, 2019). Hence, in this study we have used a single anchor membrane protein for calculation of the enrichment factor – QcrA.   On the other hand, YwbN – a secreted protein – served as confirmation for depletion of non-membrane proteins  . Like for QcrA, we calculated both a correction and enrichment factor to demonstrate that the employed method is exclusively designed for global quantification of hydrophobic proteinsnot suitable  for global quantification of soluble proteins (Antelo-Varela et al, 2019) .

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bacillus subtilis</i> has been extensively used as a microbial cell factory for industrial enzymes due to its excellent capacities for protein secretion and large-scale fermentation. This bacterium is also an attractive host for biopharmaceutical production. However, the secretion potential of this organism is not fully utilized yet, mostly due to a limited understanding of critical rearrangements in the membrane proteome upon high-level protein secretion. Recently, it was shown that bottlenecks in heterologous protein secretion can be resolved by genome minimization. Here, we present for the first time absolute membrane protein concentrations of a genome-reduced <i>B. subtilis</i> strain ("midi<i>Bacillus</i>") expressing the immunodominant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> antigen A (IsaA). We quantitatively characterize the membrane proteome adaptation of midi<i>Bacillus</i> during production stress on the level of molecules per cell for more than 400 membrane proteins, including determination of protein concentrations for &#x223c;61% of the predicted transporters. We demonstrate that &#x223c;30% of proteins with unknown functions display a significant increase in abundance, confirming the crucial role of membrane proteins in vital biological processes. In addition, our results show an increase of proteins dedicated to translational processes in response to IsaA induction. For the first time reported, we provide accumulation rates of a heterologous protein, demonstrating that midi<i>Bacillus</i> secretes 2.41 molecules of IsaA per minute. Despite the successful secretion of this protein, it was found that there is still some IsaA accumulation occurring in the cytosol and membrane fraction, leading to a severe secretion stress response, and a clear adjustment of the cell's array of transporters. This quantitative dataset offers unprecedented insights into bioproduction stress responses in a synthetic microbial cell.

### Keywords
Heterologous protein production, Proteomics, Absolute quantification, Srm, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Institut für Mikrobiologie Universität Greifswald Felix Hausdorff Str.8 17489 Greifswald Tel.:  (+49) 03834 420 5903 Fax.: (+49) 03834 420 5002
Institute of Microbiology University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Minia Antelo

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institut für Mikrobiologie Universität Greifswald Felix Hausdorff Str.8 17489 Greifswald Tel.:  (+49) 03834 420 5903 Fax.: (+49) 03834 420 5002


