### Accession
PXD001065

### Title
Compartment resolved reference map from highly purified naive, activated, effector and memory CD8+ cells

### Description
Differentiation of CD8+ T lymphocytes into effector and memory cells is key for an adequate immune response and relies on complex interplay of pathways that convey signals from cell surface to nucleus. In this study, we fractionated four CD8+ T cell subtypes; naïve, recently activated effector, effector and memory cells into membrane, cytosol, soluble nucleus, chromatin-bound and cytoskeleton compartments. Using LC-MS/MS analysis, identified peptides were matched to human peptides/proteins (SwissProt). Compartment fractionation and gel-LC-MS separation identified 2399 proteins in total. Among these 735 were detected in all five, 241 in four, 257 in three, 368 in two and 798 found in only one fraction. Comparison between the two most different subsets, naïve and effector, yielded 146 significantly regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
To purify naïve CD8+ lymphocytes, cells were initially isolated by magnetic separation from the spleens of naive untreated B6 mice using Thy1.2 MACS beads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Naïve CD8+ T cells (CD8+CD44-CD62Lhigh) were then isolated via FACS on an Aria III sorter (BD). To purify memory CD8+ T cells, cells were isolated by magnetic separation from the spleens of rVV-OVA-primed B6 mice. To purify activated effector CD8+ T cells, an influenza A virus NP366-374-specific line (90% pure and derived from B6.Ly5.1 mice) was initially activated by co-culturing for 3 h at 37°C with EL-4 target cells pre-pulsed with the NP366-374 peptide at 10-9 M. The cells were then labelled with anti-CD8 and anti-CD45.1 mAbs. Activated effector CD8+ T cells (CD8+CD45.1+) were then isolated via FACS. To purify non-activated cells, the same effector CD8+ T cells were co-cultured for 3 h at 37°C with unpulsed EL-4 target cells. Cells were then labelled with anti-CD8 and anti-CD45.1 mAbs. Non-activated effector CD8+ T cells (CD8+CD45.1+) were then isolated via FACS. For enhancing the coverage of LC-MS/MS, a separation of the compartments into membrane, cytosol, soluble nucleus, chromatin-bound and cytoskeleton was prepared as described in Rockstroh et al (2010) using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, USA). 13 µg of each fraction (except for the cytoskeletal fraction, were 8 µg were used) were precipitated. The pellets were resolved in SDS-running buffer and further pre-fractionated by 1D-PAGE prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Each lane was cut into three slices and processed by tryptic digestion. Mass spectrometric analysis of the obtained peptides was performed in with a nano-HPLC system (nanoAquity, Waters, Milford, USA), online coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA).  Liquid chromatography was carried out using a 110 min gradient. Samples were injected on a trapping column (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm particles, Waters), followed by separation on a C18 column (nanoAquity UPLC column, C18, 7 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particles, Waters) using the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% FA in water): 0 min – 2%, 5 min – 6 %, 45 min – 20%, 70 min – 30%, 75 min – 40 %, 80 min – 85%, 95 -110 min – 2%, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full-scan MS spectra (from 300 to 2000 m/z, R = 60000) were acquired in a positive ion mode in the LTQ-Velos Orbitrap. Up to 10 most intense ions per scan with a charge >2 were fragmented and analysed in the linear trap. Peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 3000 were chosen for collision induced dissociation within the linear ion trap (isolation width 4 m/z, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 30ms, activation q = 0.25). For MS/MS acquisition, a dynamic exclusion of 2 min was applied.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.2.0.18). Proteins were identified using the Andromeda peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment using the international protein index protein sequence database (ipi.HUMAN.v3.68.fasta). The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin/P. The search was adjusted with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein FDR were set to 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the peptide N-terminus was set as variable modifications. Proteins were unambiguously identified with one unique and at least two matching peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Differentiation of CD8(+) T lymphocytes into effector and memory cells is key for an adequate immune response and relies on complex interplay of pathways that convey signals from the cell surface to the nucleus. In this study, we investigated the proteome of four cytotoxic T-cell subtypes; na&#xef;ve, recently activated effector, effector, and memory cells. Cells were fractionated into membrane, cytosol, soluble nuclear, chromatin-bound, and cytoskeletal compartments. Following LC-MS/MS analysis, identified peptides were analyzed via MaxQuant. Compartment fractionation and gel-LC-MS separation resulted in 2399 proteins identified in total. Comparison between the different subsets resulted in 146 significantly regulated proteins for na&#xef;ve and effector cells, followed by 116 for activated, and 55 for memory cells. Besides Granzyme B signaling (for activated and/ or effector cells vs. na&#xef;ve cells), the most prominent changes occurred in the TCA cycle and aspartate degradation. These changes suggest that correct balancing of metabolism is key for differentiation processes. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001065 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001065).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cd8+, Murine

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstrasse 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtzzentrum für Umweltforschung - UFZ

### Submitter
Janina Tomm

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstrasse 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany


