### Accession
PXD008998

### Title
Mitochondria enriched proteome from heart of heart Sod2 knockout mice LC MS/MS

### Description
Superoxide dismutases (SOD) convert superoxide to hydrogen peroxide and therefore provide an important ROS defence mechanism. SOD2 is the sole superoxide dismutase in mitochondrial matrix and thus SOD2 knockout mice can be utilized to analyse what effects increased oxidative stress has on mitochondrial proteome. To this end, we purified heart mitochondria from heart Sod2 knockout mice (Sod2 Ckmm cre) and controls and analysed their proteome with label free LS MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were purified from fresh tissue with differential centrifugation. First, the heart tissue was minced into small pieces, rinsed with PBS and homogenized into 10 ml of mitobuffer (320 mM sucrose, 20 ml Tris-HCl, 1 mM EGTA, 0.2% BSA, pH 7.2, 1x cOmplete, EDTA-free, Roche) with a glass homogenizer. The tissue was first homogenized with loose Teflon pestle by hand with 10 strokes and then with tight Teflon pestle with another 10 strokes at 200 rpm. Next, homogenates were spun 10 min at 1000 g to pellet the cell debris followed by 10 min spin at 10 000 g to pellet the mitochondria. The enriched mitochondria were then resuspended into mitobuffer lacking BSA. The samples were kept on ice throughout the procedure and centrifugations were carried out at +4°C.  Mitochodria were purified further with Percoll gradient to exclude the mitochondria-associated membranes. 8 ml Percoll gradients were poured with 20% Percoll solution in mitobuffer with BSA in Ultraclear ultracentrifugation tubes (14 x 89 mm) and the resuspended mitochondria were layered on top of the gradient. The gradient was spun in SW41 swing-out rotor (Beckman) at 40 000 g at +4°C for 30 min. Then the brown mitochondria layer was collected and diluted 10 x with mitobuffer lacking BSA to remove the Percoll. Then the diluted mitochondria were re-collected with 6 300 g for 10 min at +4°C.  Percoll purified heart mitochondria were prepared for LC MS/MS with guanidinium chloride preparation. The mitochondria pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidium chloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 μl per 100 mg of heart tissue) and a 20 μl aliquot of the resuspended mitochondria were lyzed with heating (95°C, 10 min) and sonication (Bioruptor, 30 s sonication, 30 s break, 10 cycles). The debris was removed by pelleting the lysis at 20 000 g for 20 min. Small aliquot of the lyzed sample was diluted 10 x with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3 to dilute guanidium chloride and 50 μg of the sample was digested with trypsin (1:100 ratio enzyme:protein, Promega Mass spec grade) overnight at 37°C. Then, the digested peptides were cleaned with home-made StageTip (Empore Octadecyl C18; 3M) (Rappsilber et al. 2003, Anal. Chem., 75 663-670) and eluted with 60% ACN/0.1% formic acid. The elute was then dried with speed-vac and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then analyzed using an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a Nano-electrospray ion source, coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) UHPLC. A 25 cm long reversed-phase C18 column with 75 μm inner diameter (PicoFrit, LC Packings) was used for separating peptides. The LC runs lasted 130 min with a concentration of 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) increasing to 25% over 120 min and further to 40% over 10 min. The column was subsequently washed and re-equilibrated. The flowing rate was 200 nl/min. MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner with a top 10 method. For MS, the mass range was set to 300−1500 m/z and resolution to 60 K at 200 m/z. The AGC target of MS was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. Peptides were fragmented with HCD with collision energy of 25. For MSMS, the resolution was set to 30 K. The AGC target was 2e5and the maximum injection time was 80 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008)with integrated Andromeda search engine(Cox et al., 2011) was used for analyzing the LC/MSMS raw data. The raw data were searched against the mouse proteome from UniProt (knowledgebase 2016_04). Following parameters were used for data analysis: for ‘’fixed modification’’: cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation; for ‘’variable modification’’: methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; for ‘’digestion’’ specific with Trypsin/P, Max. missed cleavages 2; for label-free quantification, match between runs is selected. Other parameters were set as default.  Protein quantification significant analysis was performed with the Perseus statistical framework (Cox, 2014) (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) version 1.5.2.4. After removing the contaminants and reverse identifications, the intensities were transformed to log2. The replicates of each genotype were grouped and filtered with at least 3 validate values in at least one group. The missing values were replaced from normal distribution with width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Two-sample test was performed to identify the significantly different proteins between knockout and wild type groups. Each group has five replicates.  Proteins with an adjusted p-value (“BH” FDR of less than 0.05) were designated as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations become more prevalent with age and are postulated to contribute to the ageing process. Point mutations of mtDNA have been suggested to originate from two main sources, i.e. replicative errors and oxidative damage, but the contribution of each of these processes is much discussed. To elucidate the origin of mtDNA mutations, we measured point mutation load in mice with deficient mitochondrial base-excision repair (BER) caused by knockout alleles preventing mitochondrial import of the DNA repair glycosylases OGG1 and MUTYH (Ogg1 dMTS, Mutyh dMTS). Surprisingly, we detected no increase in the mtDNA mutation load in old Ogg1 dMTS mice. As DNA repair is especially important in the germ line, we bred the BER deficient mice for five consecutive generations but found no increase in the mtDNA mutation load in these maternal lineages. To increase reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and oxidative damage, we bred the Ogg1 dMTS mice with tissue specific Sod2 knockout mice. Although increased superoxide levels caused a plethora of changes in mitochondrial function, we did not detect any changes in the mutation load of mtDNA or mtRNA. Our results show that the importance of oxidative damage as a contributor of mtDNA mutations should be re-evaluated.

### Keywords
Heart, C57bl/6n, Mitochondria, Mnsod2, Mouse, Superoxide dismutase 2, Sod2

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Germany

### Submitter
Xinping Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xinping Li
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Germany


