### Accession
PXD020677

### Title
Distinct phenotype and proteomic signature of peripheral blood-endothelial colony-forming cells of subjects with varied cardiovascular disease risks

### Description
Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are circulating endothelial precursors shown to incorporate into foci of neovascularisation. Herein, we describe phenotypic characteristics of an EPC sub-type called endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs). Peripheral blood-isolated ECFCs expressed endothelial and progenitor surface antigens and displayed cobblestone-patterned colonies with clonal proliferative and angiogenic capacities in vitro. ECFCs demonstrated endothelial cell-like shear stress responses including cell alignment and PECAM-1 expression. Proteomic comparison with an endothelial reference population (human umbilical vein endothelial cells) confirmed a similar proteomic profile. Hierarchical clustering revealed two distinct ECFC clusters with differences in cell growth, proliferation and angiogenesis capacities. The cluster with compromised functionality was also associated with elevated blood pressure and impaired lipid profile. Our findings described an endothelial-like phenotype of blood-derived ECFCs with distinctive proteomic signatures based on cellular and clinical characteristics. ECFCs may aid in identifying novel mechanisms associated with cardiovascular disease risk and new targets to enhance angiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs (n=4) and ECFCs (n=11) were utilised for proteomic analysis at passage number two. Cell pellets (cell count) were re-suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM dithiothreitol, boiled (5 minutes) and incubated (30 minutes, RT) for full protein solubilisation. Total protein (~250 µg) was digested and desalted after 2 rounds of chloroform.methanol precipitation (reference Wessel Fluegge), reduction/alkylation with DTT/Iodoacetamide. Digested and desalted proteins were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded into the nano-LC-MS/MS system (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in collaboration with the Oxford Target Discovery Institute.  MS-report system and conditions  Peptides were separated with a gradient of 2-35% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic acid/5% DMSO on an EasySpray column (50cm x 75µm) over 60 minutes and with a flow rate of 250nl/min. MS data was acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos using a standard method as described earlier (“Universal Method” REF DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00915).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by searching the MS raw files against the Human SwissProt database downloaded in 11/2015 (containing 20,268 human sequences). MASCOT data outputs were filtered by applying a 20 ion cut off and 1% FDR above identity or homology threshold. Perseus (Max Planck institute of Biochemistry, Germany) was used for quantitative analysis of the log-transformed (normalised protein abundance) after label free quantitation as performed in Progenesis QI (Waters) using default settings. The data were filtered per row for 70% of the valid values and with ≥ 2 unique identified peptides. T-test was used to make comparisons between the groups and genes satisfying a fold change of -1.5< abs(log(average expression difference)) >1.5 and p < 0.01 were considered statistically significant. Gene Ontology enrichments among cluster enriched, differential genes,  were computed and retrieve with the following ontology sources: KEGG Pathway, GO Biological Processes, Reactome Gene Sets, Canonical Pathways and CORUM using Metascape (http://www.metascape.org). Functional protein association networks of identified proteins were created using STRING (http://www.string-db.org) and InstantClue software.

### Publication Abstract
Background A subpopulation of endothelial progenitor cells called endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs) may offer a platform for cellular assessment in clinical studies because of their remarkable angiogenic and expansion potentials in vitro. Despite endothelial cell function being influenced by cardiovascular risk factors, no studies have yet provided a comprehensive proteomic profile to distinguish functional (ie, more angiogenic and expansive cells) versus dysfunctional circulating ECFCs of young adults. The aim of this study was to provide a detailed proteomic comparison between functional and dysfunctional ECFCs. Methods and Results Peripheral blood ECFCs were isolated from 11 subjects (45% men, aged 27&#xb1;5&#xa0;years) using Ficoll density gradient centrifugation. ECFCs expressed endothelial and progenitor surface markers and displayed cobblestone-patterned morphology with clonal and angiogenic capacities in vitro. ECFCs were deemed dysfunctional if &lt;1 closed tube formed during the in vitro tube formation assay and proliferation rate was &lt;20%. Hierarchical functional clustering revealed distinct ECFC proteomic signatures between functional and dysfunctional ECFCs with changes in cellular mechanisms involved in exocytosis, vesicle transport, extracellular matrix organization, cell metabolism, and apoptosis. Targeted antiangiogenic proteins in dysfunctional ECFCs included SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine), CD36 (cluster of differentiation 36), LUM (lumican), and PTX3 (pentraxin-related protein PYX3). Conclusions Circulating ECFCs with impaired angiogenesis and expansion capacities have a distinct proteomic profile and significant phenotype changes compared with highly angiogenic endothelial cells. Impaired angiogenesis in dysfunctional ECFCs may underlie the link between endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular disease risks in young adults.

### Keywords
Endothelial progenitor cells, Cardiovascular disease

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford


