### Accession
PXD041473

### Title
A novel peptide from Bothrops cotiara peptidome

### Description
The knowledge regarding toxins diversity, composition, structure, molecular and pharmacological interactions involved in the process of envenomation provide lessons for drug design based on these natural molecular scaffolds and pharmacophores of toxins. This study unravels new toxins sequenced by mass spectrometry analysis of Bothrops cotiara peptidome, and the potential biological activities of these toxins were explored.

### Sample Protocol
Venom pools of Bothrops cotiara were provided by Instituto Butantan. Briefly, the animals were previously anesthetized with carbon dioxide. Venoms were directly extracted into a beaker in ice bath, and immediately mixed with the protease inhibitors EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) and PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) to final concentrations of 5 mM and 2 mM, respectively. Venom solutions were centrifuged at 1,700 g and 4 °C for 30 min to remove debris, lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until further fractionation.  Solid phase extraction for natural and synthetic peptides was performed using C18 cartridges TopTip (PolyLC) according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, 100 µg of BC venom or 25 µg of synthetic peptide were loaded to the columns, desalted with sequential washes, and eluted with 40% acetonitrile, 0,1% trifluoroacetic acid.  LC-MS/MS analysis of synthetic versus natural peptides was performed on the chromatographic system nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Synapt G2 HDMS (Waters). Samples were loaded into a trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 300 μm × 25 mm, Waters) at 8 μL min−1 of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water for 5 min. Then, the mixture of trapped peptides was eluted in an analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 300 μm × 150 mm, Waters) with a gradient of 5–40% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), phase A (0.1% formic acid in deionized water), over 60 min at a flow rate of 3 μL min−1. MS data were acquired in replicates, one full-MS scan run on data independent mode in the m/z range of 50–2000 and one selected reaction monitoring run (m/z 482.73 precursor mass of Bc-7a). Peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation, in which collision energies were alternated between low (4 eV) and high (ramped from 23 to 58 eV) for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan time of 1.0 s. The electrospray ionization source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.1 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. The column temperature was set at 55 °C. For lock mass correction, a [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (500 fmol mL−1 in 50% methanol, 0.1% formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 2 μL min−1 and sampled every 60 s for external calibration.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data from the peptidomics samples and synthetic peptide were processed in ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 (Waters) by the Apex3D module, using a low-energy threshold of 750 counts and a high-energy threshold of 50 counts. The MS/MS spectra were exported as .mzML files to PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) for de novo analysis and database search. De novo analysis was carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.025 Da. De novo sequenced peptides with average local confidence (ALC) scores of ≥50% were selected for database search against Bothrops cotiara metalloproteinases transcriptome database (16 sequences). Searches were performed using, oxidation of Met and N-terminal pyroglutamic acid form Gln or Glu as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are primarily composed of proteins and peptides, which selectively interact with specific molecular targets, disrupting prey homeostasis. Identifying toxins and the mechanisms involved in envenoming can lead to the discovery of new drugs based on natural peptide scaffolds. In this study, we used mass spectrometry-based peptidomics to sequence 197 peptides in the venom of Bothrops cotiara, including a novel 7-residue peptide derived from a snake venom metalloproteinase. This peptide, named Bc-7a, features a pyroglutamic acid at the N-terminal and a PFR motif at the C-terminal, homologous to bradykinin. Using FRET (fluorescence resonance energy transfer) substrate assays, we demonstrated that Bc-7a strongly inhibits the two domains of angiotensin converting enzyme (K<sub>i</sub>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;1&#xa0;&#x3bc;M). Our findings contribute to the repertoire of biologically active peptides from snake venoms capable of inhibiting angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), beyond current known structural motifs and precursors. In summary, we report a novel snake venom peptide with ACE inhibitory activity, suggesting its potential contribution to the hypotensive effect observed in envenomation.

### Keywords
Peptidome., Bothrops cotiara

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil.
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil.


