### Accession
PXD006600

### Title
Soybean, root-rhizobia, LC-MSMS

### Description
We previously found that rhizobia-inoculation enhanced the soybean's salt tolerance; the transcription factor (TF) GmMYB173 and its downstream gene GmCHS5 dictate soybean’s flavonoid metabolism in response to this stress. For revealing the mechanism of the enhancement, quantitative phosphoproteomics and metabonomic approaches were used to identify phosphoproteins and metabolites that dominant the common pathway between salinity and rhizobia induced response in soybean roots.

### Sample Protocol
NanoRPLC-MS/MS Analysis of phosphorylated peptides. For NanoRPLC-MS/MS Analysis, 5 μg (≤ 10 μL) phosphopeptides solution was subjected to a two dimensional EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In the nanoLC separation system, mobile phase A solution contains 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B solution contains 84 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Before peptides loading, the Thermo EASY SC200 trap column (RP-C18, 3 μm, 100 mm × 75 μm) was pre-equilibrated with 95 % mobile phase A for 30 min. The phosphopeptides were firstly transferred to the Thermo scientific EASY column (2cm × 100μm 5μm-C18) and then separated via the trap column using a gradient of 0–55 % mobile phase B for 220 min. And then, the columns were rinsed with 100 % mobile phase B for 8 min and re-equilibrated to the initial conditions for 12 min. The flow rate of the above procedures was 0.25 μL per min.

### Data Protocol
NanoRPLC-MS/MS Analysis of phosphorylated peptides. For NanoRPLC-MS/MS Analysis, 5 μg (≤ 10 μL) phosphopeptides solution was subjected to a two dimensional EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In the nanoLC separation system, mobile phase A solution contains 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B solution contains 84 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Before peptides loading, the Thermo EASY SC200 trap column (RP-C18, 3 μm, 100 mm × 75 μm) was pre-equilibrated with 95 % mobile phase A for 30 min. The phosphopeptides were firstly transferred to the Thermo scientific EASY column (2cm × 100μm 5μm-C18) and then separated via the trap column using a gradient of 0–55 % mobile phase B for 220 min. And then, the columns were rinsed with 100 % mobile phase B for 8 min and re-equilibrated to the initial conditions for 12 min. The flow rate of the above procedures was 0.25 μL per min. The MS data ranged from 350 to 1800 m/z was acquired at the resolution of 70,000. To acquire MS/MS spectra, 10 most abundant ions from each MS scan were subsequently dissociated by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in alternating data-dependent mode with a resolution no less than 17500.  Phosphopeptide Identification and Quantitative Analysis. The raw data were extracted by Mascot2.2, and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer1.4 (Thermo Scientific). To identify the phosphopeptides, the mascot data was searched against the peptide database uniprot_Glycine_74305_20140429.fasta (http://www.uniprot.org/, on April 29, 2014). For each spectra of a specific sample, the median of its intensity values was used for quantification analysis. And the average value of 8 median of a specific spectra was defined as reference (REF in Supplemental Table 4) for data normalization in one Eight-plex iTRAQ Labeled sample group. A Student’s t-test was performed using the standard deviation to assess the changes between two samples (each had four biological replicates). The phosphopeptides that passed both FDR (False Discovery Rate) value < 0.05 and p value < 0.05 were considered significantly changed.

### Publication Abstract
Soybean (<i>Glycine max</i> (L.) Merrill) is an important component of the human diet and animal feed, but soybean production is limited by abiotic stresses especially salinity. We recently found that rhizobia inoculation enhances soybean tolerance to salt stress, but the underlying mechanisms are unaddressed. Here, we used quantitative phosphoproteomic and metabonomic approaches to identify changes in phosphoproteins and metabolites in soybean roots treated with rhizobia inoculation and salt. Results revealed differential regulation of 800 phosphopeptides, at least 32 of these phosphoproteins or their homologous were reported be involved in flavonoid synthesis or trafficking, and 27 out of 32 are transcription factors. We surveyed the functional impacts of all these 27 transcription factors by expressing their phospho-mimetic/ablative mutants in the roots of composite soybean plants and found that phosphorylation of GmMYB183 could affect the salt tolerance of the transgenic roots. Using data mining, ChIP and EMSA, we found that GmMYB183 binds to the promoter of the soybean <i>GmCYP81E11</i> gene encoding for a Cytochrome P450 monooxygenase which contributes to the accumulation of ononin, a monohydroxy B-ring flavonoid that negatively regulates soybean tolerance to salinity. Phosphorylation of GmMYB183 was inhibited by rhizobia inoculation; overexpression of <i>GmMYB183</i> enhanced the expression of <i>GmCYP81E11</i> and rendered salt sensitivity to the transgenic roots; plants deficient in GmMYB183 function are more tolerant to salt stress as compared with wild-type soybean plants, these results correlate with the transcriptional induction of <i>GmCYP81E11</i> by GmMYB183 and the subsequent accumulation of ononin. Our findings provide molecular insights into how rhizobia enhance salt tolerance of soybean plants.

### Keywords
Root-rhizobia, Lc-msms, Soybean

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Normal University

### Submitter
Erxu Pi

### Lab Head
Dr Erxu, Pi
Hangzhou Normal University


