### Accession
PXD004077

### Title
Quantitative tissue proteomics analysis of primary lung  adenocarcinoma

### Description
In this study, we generated a quantitative lung tissue proteome dataset from lung adenocarcinoma and adjacent normal lung tissues by using iTRAQ labeling combined with 2D-LC-MS/MS. Based on pathway and network analyses, protein expression profiles released in the public Human Protein Atlas database, literature search and novelty, six candidates were selected for validation via immunohistochemistry staining and western blot. Additionally, the clinical and biological significance of two novel candidates, ERO1L and NARS, was further analyzed. Collectively, our results provide a useful biomarker dataset for lung adenocarcinoma diagnosis/prognosis and provide new insights into ERO1L- and NARS- mediated tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins extracted from lung tissues with different extents of lymph node involvement and from adjacent normal tissue were digested and labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ reagents. The labeled peptides were mixed in equal amounts and were separated into 70 fractionations via reversed-phase chromatography using an Ettan MDLC system. The first 15 fractions were pooled into five factions (three fractions per pool), and the resultant 60 fractions were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for further desalting and concentration using a ZipTip packed in-house with C18 resin. Each peptide fraction was prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis, a reversed-phase 18 nanoscale liquid chromatography system coupled with a LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT searching engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.04) against a non-redundant Swiss-Prot database. For protein identification, we set thresholds of 10 ppm for intact peptide tolerance masses and 0.5 Da for pulsed Q collision-induced dissociation fragment ions. The results of the MASCOT database search for each reversed-phase elution were further analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, version 4.0), which included the PeptideProphet, ProteinProphet, and Libra programs. Protein and peptide identifications with ProteinProphet probabilities of at least 0.8 and PeptideProphet probabilities of at least 0.5, respectively, were accepted. Proteins were quantified with the Libra program using the default settings (http://tools.proteomecenter.org/wiki/index.php?title=Software:Libra). In addition, we performed a global normalization for the quantified peptides to obtain the fold-changes in the protein levels in adenocarcinoma cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Both diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers are urgently needed to increase patient survival. In this study, we identified/quantified 1763 proteins from paired adenocarcinoma (ADC) tissues with different extents of lymph node (LN) involvement using an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis. Based on a bioinformatics analysis and literature search, we selected six candidates (ERO1L, PABPC4, RCC1, RPS25, NARS, and TARS) from a set of 133 proteins that presented a 1.5-fold increase in expression in ADC tumors without LN metastasis compared with adjacent normal tissues. These six proteins were further verified using immunohistochemical staining and Western blot analyses. The protein levels of these six candidates were higher in tumor tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues. The ERO1L and NARS levels were positively associated with LN metastasis. Importantly, ERO1L overexpression in patients with early-stage ADC was positively correlated with poor survival, suggesting that ERO1L overexpression in primary sites of early-stage cancer tissues indicates a high risk for cancer micrometastasis. Moreover, we found that knockdown of either ERO1L or NARS reduced the viability and migration ability of ADC cells. Our results collectively provide a potential biomarker data set for ADC diagnosis/prognosis and reveal novel roles of ERO1L and NARS in ADC progression.

### Keywords
Lung cancer; adenocarcinoma; lymph node metastasis; biomarkers; ero1l; nars; itraq

### Affiliations
Chang Gung University, Taiwan
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Jung Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Jung Yu
Chang Gung University, Taiwan


