### Accession
PXD027412

### Title
JEV NS1'-interacting cellular proteins

### Description
We identify NS1' interacting proteins via immunopreciptation of JEV-infected cell lysates with an NS1'-specific antibody.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells infected with the WT JEV at an MOI of 1.0 for a period of 36 h were subjected to lysis with RIPA buffer (Sigma) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The cell lysate was incubated with the normal or JEV NS1' antibodies at 4℃ overnight. Protein A+G agarose beads (50 μl; Beyotime) were added and incubated for another 3h. The agarose beads were subsequently washed three times with wash buffer (0.05 M Tris-HCl with 0.15 M NaCl). The purified products were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and visualized by silver staining. The stained bands were excised, digested in gels with Lys-C, and analyzed by the direct nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system.

### Data Protocol
The stained bands were excised, digested in gels with Lys-C, and analyzed by the direct nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system.

### Publication Abstract
Type I interferon (IFN-I) is a key component of the host innate immune system. To establish efficient replication, viruses have developed several strategies to escape from the host IFN response. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) NS1', a larger NS1-related protein, is known to inhibit the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS)-mediated IFN-&#x3b2; induction by increasing the binding of transcription factors (CREB and c-Rel) to the microRNA 22 (miRNA-22) promoter. However, the mechanism by which NS1' induces the recruitment of CREB and c-Rel onto the miRNA-22 promoter is unknown. Here, we found that JEV NS1' protein interacts with the host cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) protein. Mechanistically, NS1' interrupts the CDC25C phosphatase-mediated dephosphorylation of CDK1, which prolongs the phosphorylation status of CDK1 and leads to the inhibition of MAVS-mediated IFN-&#x3b2; induction. Furthermore, the CREB phosphorylation and c-Rel activation through the I&#x3ba;B&#x3b1; phosphorylation were observed to be enhanced upon the augmentation of CDK1 phosphorylation by NS1'. The abrogation of CDK1 activity by a small-molecule inhibitor significantly suppressed the JEV replication <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. Moreover, the administration of CDK1 inhibitor protected the wild-type mice from JEV-induced lethality but showed no effect on the MAVS<sup>-/-</sup> mice challenged with JEV. In conclusion, our study provides new insight into the mechanism of JEV immune evasion, which may lead to the development of novel therapeutic options to treat JEV infection. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is the main cause of acute human encephalitis in Asia. The unavailability of specific treatment for Japanese encephalitis demands a better understanding of the basic cellular mechanisms that contribute to the onset of disease. The present study identifies a novel interaction between the JEV NS1' protein and the cellular CDK1 protein, which facilitates the JEV replication by dampening the cellular antiviral response. This study sheds light on a novel mechanism of JEV replication, and thus our findings could be employed for developing new therapies against JEV infection.

### Keywords
Jev ns1' human lc-msms

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
秋燕 李

### Lab Head
Dr Deng qin
Huazhong Agricultural University


