### Accession
PXD003923

### Title
Identification of A. thaliana 2-Cys peroxiredoxins interacting proteins

### Description
Peroxiredoxins are ubiquitous thiol-dependent peroxidases for which chaperone and signaling roles have been reported in various types of organisms in the last years. In plants, the peroxidase function of the two typical plastidial 2-Cys peroxiredoxins (2-Cys PRX A and B) has been highlighted while the other functions, particularly in ROS-dependent signal transduction pathways, are still elusive due notably to the lack of knowledge on interacting partners. Using an ex vivo approach based on co-immunoprecipitation of leaf extracts from Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type and mutant plants lacking 2-Cys PRX expression followed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 158 proteins were found associated to 2-Cys PRXs, notably already known partners like thioredoxin-related electron donors (Chloroplastic Drought-induced Stress Protein of 32 kDa, Atypical Cysteine Histidine rich Thioredoxin 2) and enzymes involved in chlorophyll synthesis (Protochlorophyllide OxidoReductase B) or carbon metabolisms (Fructose-1,6-BisPhosphatase), validating the relevance of this approach.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (cv. Col-0) plants were grown from sowing in soil under an 8-h photoperiod and a photon flux density of 200 µmol photons.m-2.s-1 with a temperature regime of 22°C/18°C (day/night) and a relative humidity of 55% during six weeks. Plants were alternatively watered with tap water and a Coïc-Lesaint nutritive solution every two days. One T-DNA double mutant line for the 2-Cys PRX A and 2-Cys PRX B genes here abbreviated prx , produced from crossing the GK_295C05 and SALK_017213 lines was used. Following leaf grinding in liquid nitrogen, soluble proteins were extracted under native conditions using phosphate buffer pH 7 supplied with 1 mM PMSF. Following vigorous shaking at 4°C for 20 min and centrifugation (20 min, 15,000 rpm, 4°C), the supernatant was stored in ice and rapidly used for co-immunoprecipitation. Protein concentration was determined using the “Protein Quantification BCA Assay” kit (Interchim). Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experiments were performed using the Pierce® Co-Immunoprecipitation kit (Ref. 26149, Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Antibodies raised against 2-Cys PRX (50 µL of crude serum) were immobilized on resin beads under slow agitation at room temperature for 3 h 30. One mg of proteins from crude leaf extracts in 400 µL phosphate buffer was incubated with the resin under slow agitation at 4°C for 30 min. Flow-through was then collected by centrifugation (1 min, 1,000g) and the resin was washed five times before elution using the appropriate buffers.  Proteins from eluates were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE 4-12%, Invitrogen) before Coomassie blue staining (R250, BioRad). Gel bands were manually excised and cut in pieces before being washed by 6 successive incubations of 15 min in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and in 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100 % acetonitrile and incubated for 45 min at 53°C with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and for 35 min in the dark with 55 mM iodoacétamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Alkylation was stopped by adding 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and mixing for 10 min. Gel pieces were then washed again by incubation in 25 mM NH4HCO3 before dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. Modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gel pieces for an overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were then extracted from gel pieces in three 15 min sequential extraction steps in 30 µL of 50% acetonitrile, 30 µL of 5% formic acid and finally 30µL of 100% acetonitrile. The pooled supernatants were then vacuum-dried. The dried extracted peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000, Dionex and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Dionex). The nanoLC method consisted in a 120-min gradient ranging from 5% to 45% acetronitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Spray voltage and heated capillary were respectively set at 1.4 kV and 200°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 106 ions (maximum filling time: 500 ms). The twenty most intense ions from the preview survey scan delivered by the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (collision energy 35%) in the LTQ after accumulation of 104 ions (maximum filling time: 100 ms).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed automatically using Mascot Daemon software (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Concomitant searches against Uniprot (Arabidopsis thaliana taxonomy, January 2016 version) and classical contaminant protein sequence (homemade) databases and the corresponding reversed databases were performed using Mascot (version 2.45). ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavage allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethyl (C, fixes) acetyl (N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used to filter the results (conservation of only rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, peptide length ≥ 7, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group) before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxiredoxins are ubiquitous thiol-dependent peroxidases for which chaperone and signaling roles have been reported in various types of organisms in recent years. In plants, the peroxidase function of the two typical plastidial 2-Cys peroxiredoxins (2-Cys PRX A and B) has been highlighted while the other functions, particularly in ROS-dependent signaling pathways, are still elusive notably due to the lack of knowledge of interacting partners. Using an ex vivo approach based on co-immunoprecipitation of leaf extracts from Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type and mutant plants lacking 2-Cys PRX expression followed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 158 proteins were found associated with 2-Cys PRXs. Already known partners like thioredoxin-related electron donors (Chloroplastic Drought-induced Stress Protein of 32kDa, Atypical Cysteine Histidine-rich Thioredoxin 2) and enzymes involved in chlorophyll synthesis (Protochlorophyllide OxidoReductase B) or carbon metabolism (Fructose-1,6-BisPhosphatase) were identified, validating the relevance of the approach. Bioinformatic and bibliographic analyses allowed the functional classification of the identified proteins and revealed that more than 40% are localized in plastids. The possible roles of plant 2-Cys PRXs in redox signaling pathways are discussed in relation with the functions of the potential partners notably those involved in redox homeostasis, carbon and amino acid metabolisms as well as chlorophyll biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Interactome, A. thaliana, Peroxiredoxins

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP


