### Accession
PXD005881

### Title
Acinetobacter nosocomialis type I secretome

### Description
Dimethylation based quantitative proteomics study of the type I acinetobacter nosocomialis secretome

### Sample Protocol
-Precipatation of protein samples -in solution digestion -Dimethylation -LC-MS

### Data Protocol
Data was processed uisng MQ 1.5.3.1. Standard setting were used with all experiments searched together to each a global FDR rate of less then 1%

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic <i>Acinetobacter</i> species, including <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> and <i>Acinetobacter nosocomialis</i>, are opportunistic human pathogens of increasing relevance worldwide. Although their mechanisms of drug resistance are well studied, the virulence factors that govern <i>Acinetobacter</i> pathogenesis are incompletely characterized. Here we define the complete secretome of <i>A. nosocomialis</i> strain M2 in minimal medium and demonstrate that pathogenic <i>Acinetobacter</i> species produce both a functional type I secretion system (T1SS) and a contact-dependent inhibition (CDI) system. Using bioinformatics, quantitative proteomics, and mutational analyses, we show that <i>Acinetobacter</i> uses its T1SS for exporting two putative T1SS effectors, an Repeats-in-Toxin (RTX)-serralysin-like toxin, and the biofilm-associated protein (Bap). Moreover, we found that mutation of any component of the T1SS system abrogated type VI secretion activity under nutrient-limited conditions, indicating a previously unrecognized cross-talk between these two systems. We also demonstrate that the <i>Acinetobacter</i> T1SS is required for biofilm formation. Last, we show that both <i>A. nosocomialis</i> and <i>A. baumannii</i> produce functioning CDI systems that mediate growth inhibition of sister cells lacking the cognate immunity protein. The <i>Acinetobacter</i> CDI systems are widely distributed across pathogenic <i>Acinetobacter</i> species, with many <i>A. baumannii</i> isolates harboring two distinct CDI systems. Collectively, these data demonstrate the power of differential, quantitative proteomics approaches to study secreted proteins, define the role of previously uncharacterized protein export systems, and observe cross-talk between secretion systems in the pathobiology of medically relevant <i>Acinetobacter</i> species.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomcis, Type ii secretion

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Molecular Microbiology 4940 Parkview Place  Campus Box 8230 Saint Louis, MO 63110

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Mario Feldman
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Molecular Microbiology 4940 Parkview Place  Campus Box 8230 Saint Louis, MO 63110


