### Accession
PXD035408

### Title
An integrated multi-omics analysis of rectal cancer patients identified POU2F3 as a putative druggable target and 7-hub genes as predictive biomarkers of response to neoadjuvant therapy

### Description
Rectal cancer (RC) accounts for one-third of colorectal cancer (CRC), and 40% of these are locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) at diagnosis. The use of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT) significantly reduces the rate of local recurrence compared to adjuvant therapy or surgery alone. However, after nCRT, up to 40-60% of patients show a poor pathological response, while only about 20% achieve a pathological complete response. In this scenario, the identification of novel predictors of tumor response to nCRT are urgently needed to reduce LARC mortality, and to spare poorly responding patients from unnecessary treatments. Therefore, by combining gene and microRNA expression datasets with proteomic data from LARC patients, we developed an integrated network centered on seven hub-genes putatively involved in the response to nCRT. In an independent validation cohort of LARC patients, we confirmed the differential expression of NFKB1, TRAF6 and STAT3 depending on a response to nCRT. In addition, the functional enrichment analysis also revealed that these genes are strongly related to hallmarks of cancer and inflammation, whose dysfunction may causatively affect LARC patient’s response to nCRT. Furthermore, by constructing the transcription factor-module network, we hypothesized a protective role of POU2F3 gene, which could be used as a new drug target in LARC patients. Finally, we identified and in vitro tested entinostat, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, as a chemical compound that could be combined with classical therapeutic regimen in order to design more efficient therapeutic strategies in LARC.

### Sample Protocol
Six paired HR and RC decellularized tissues (average weight 2 mg, range 0.5-3.4 mg) were analyzed by mass spectrometry following the protocol published by Naba et al. [11]. Briefly, DHR and DRC were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 8 M urea and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (all from Merk, Darmstadt, Germany) followed by the deglycosylation with PNGaseF (500000 U/mL, New England Biolabs). To digest ECM proteins, Lys-C (0.1 µg /µL, New England Biolabs) and trypsin (0.5 µg /µL, Sequencing Grade Modified Tyrpsin, PROMEGA) were used. Samples were finally desalted using Solid-Phase Extraction (SPE) cartridges (SupelTM-Select HLB SPE tubes, Supelco). Samples were analyzed by an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) mass spectrometer. The peptide mixtures were separated with a Biobasic C18 column, 1 mm ID x 150 mm, 5 μm, using a 3-45 % linear gradient of acetonitrile (Suprapur grade, Romil) + 0.1 % TFA (mobile phase B) in H2O + 0.1 % TFA (mobile phase A) over 110 minutes of analysis. ESI+ mass spec data were acquired in the 300-1500 m/z mass range.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) using the Sequest HT algorithm for protein identification. Search parameters were set as follows: database, SwissProt (v2021_04); enzyme, Trypsin (max 2 missed cleavages); taxonomy, Homo Sapiens; precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C). Dynamic modifications: oxidation (M, P, K); deamidation (N, Q), and phosphorylation (S, T, Y). An acceptable proteins false discovery rate (FDR) was set < 0.01 and a minimum of 2 non-redundant peptides were used for identification. Absolute protein abundances were obtained by Label Free quantitative approach and obtained data were processed using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 web tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoadjuvant therapy, Entinostat, Rectal cancer, Integrative computational biology, Multi-omics analysis, Pou2f3, Molecular signature

### Affiliations
University of Padova
University of Padova, Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology

### Submitter
Edoardo D'Angelo

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Agostini
University of Padova, Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology


