### Accession
PXD025674

### Title
Rne-HupB interaction fosters mycobacterial single-cell homeostasis and fitness during drug treatment and infection

### Description
RNA turnover is a primary source of gene expression variation, in turn promoting cellular adaptation. Mycobacteria leverage reversible mRNA stabilization to endure hostile conditions. Although ribonuclease E is essential for RNA turnover in several species, its role in mycobacterial single cell physiology and functional phenotypic diversification remains unexplored. Here, by integrating live-single-cell and quantitative-mass-spectrometry approaches, we show that ribonuclease E forms dynamic foci, which are associated with cellular homeostasis and single-cell fate, and we discover a versatile molecular interactome. We prove the interaction between ribonuclease E and the nucleoid-associated protein HupB, which is particularly pronounced during drug treatment and intracellularly, where we also observed marked increase of phenotypic diversity. Disruption of ribonuclease E expression affects HupB levels, impairing Mycobacterium tuberculosis growth homeostasis during treatment, intracellular replication and host spread. Our work lays the foundation for rational drug design against Mycobacterium tuberculosis diversification capacity, undermining its cellular balance and fitness landscape.

### Sample Protocol
M. smegmatis bacterial lysate before pull-down (input), the Rne TCA-precipitated pull-down and whole cell lysate were diluted (1 : 2) using the denaturing buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3 and 8 M CH4N2O). Proteins were subsequently reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride solution (TCEP, Sigma) for 30 minutes and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 1 hours in the dark. Reduced and alkylated proteins were then digested over-night at 37 °C with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) using an enzyme : protein ratio (1 : 50). The digestion was stopped with 4% formic acid (FA). For Mass Spectrometry analysis, the resulting peptides from the input, the pull-down and the whole-cell lysate were desalted with stage-tip (Rappsilber et al., 2007) using C18 Empore disc and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA. Finally, all samples were dried in a Speed-Vac, and peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA prior to Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 (input and IP) or version 1.6.10.43 (whole cell proteome) (Tyanova et al., 2016) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt M. smegmatis (strain ATCC 700084 /mc2155) database containing 6601 proteins, usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software against an internal database. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode. For pairwise comparisons, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions . Missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Shotgun proteomics, Q exactive plus, Label-free

### Affiliations
Microbial Individuality and Infection Group, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Giulia Manina
Microbial Individuality and Infection Group, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


