### Accession
PXD005901

### Title
REPARATION:  Ribosome Profiling Assisted (Re-) Annotation of Bacterial genomes - PART 2

### Description
Prokaryotic genome annotation is highly dependent on automated methods, as manual curation cannot keep up with the exponential growth of sequenced genomes. Current automated techniques depend heavily on sequence context and often underestimate the complexity of the proteome. We developed REPARATION (RibosomeE Profiling Assisted (Re-)AnnotaTION), a de novo algorithm that takes advantage of experimental evidence from ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) to delineate translated open reading frames (ORFs) in bacteria, independent of genome annotation. Ribo-seq next generation sequencing technique that provides a genome-wide snapshot of the position translating ribosome along an mRNA at the time of the experiment. REPARATION evaluates all possible ORFs in the genome and estimates minimum thresholds to screen for spurious ORFs based on a growth curve model. We applied REPARATION to three annotated bacterial species to obtain a more comprehensive mapping of their translation landscape in support of experimental data. In all cases, we identified hundreds of novel ORFs including variants of previously annotated and novel small ORFs (<71 codons). Our predictions were supported by matching mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics data and sequence conservation analysis. REPARATION is unique in that it makes use of experimental Ribo-seq data to perform de novo ORF delineation in bacterial genomes, and thus can identify putative coding ORFs irrespective of the sequence context of the reading frame.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight stationary cultures of E. coli tolC CAG12148 cells ordered at the E. Coli Genetic Stock Collection (CGSC7437; F-, λ-, tolC210::Tn10, rph-1;  http://cgsc.biology.yale.edu/) (Singer et al. 1989) were grown in LB media at 37 °C with agitation (200 rpm) and diluted into 100 ml fresh medium until a OD600 of 0.02 and incubated. When the OD600 reached 0.55, 8 µg/ml actinonin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added. After 2 hours of cultivation (OD600 1.1), cells were harvested and collected by centrifugation (3300 × g, 5 min) at 4 °C, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and cryogenically pulverized using a liquid nitrogen cooled pestle and mortar. The frozen pellet of a 50 ml culture was re-suspended and thawed in 1 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9) and subjected to mechanical disruption by 3 repetitive freeze-thaw and sonication cycles as described above. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g and the protein concentration measured using the DC Protein Assay Kit from Bio-Rad according to the manufacturer's instructions. 4 mg of protein material (corresponding to about 1 ml of lysate) was digested overnight at 37°C and 550 rpm with sequencing-graded modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; enzyme/substrate, 1/200 (w/w)). The digested and modified peptides were subjected to a modified version of N-terminal COFRADIC as will be described elsewhere. A final set of 90 samples were vacuum dried, re-dissolved in 20 µl of 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile and analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science).  Searches were performed using 6-FT database of E. coli (K-12 strain MG1655) genome with combined with the Ensembl protein sequence database assembly ASM584v2 version 87.1. The Mascot search parameters were set as follows: Heavy acetylation at lysine side-chains (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (K)) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide, formylation, acetylation and heavy acetylation of N-termini (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (N-term)) all at peptide level) and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and to 0.5 Da on fragment ions. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP.  Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was be selected as enzyme allowing for 1 missed cleavages.  Only peptides that were ranked one, have a minimum amino acid length of seven, scored above the threshold score, set at 95% confidence, and belonged to the category of peptides compliant with the rules of initiator methionine (iMet) processing were withheld. More specifically, iMet processing was considered in the case of iMet-starting N-termini followed by any of the following amino acids; Ala, Cys, Gly, Pro, Ser, Thr, Met or Val and only if the iMet was encoded by ATG or any of the following near-cognate start codons; GTG and TTG.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: escherichia coli, Shotgun, N-terminal cofradic, Genome (re-)annotation, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
VIB Midical Biotechnology Center, University of Gent, Belgium
University of Ghent

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
VIB Midical Biotechnology Center, University of Gent, Belgium


