### Accession
PXD000186

### Title
AtT 20 endogenous peptides -  Improving the identification rate of endogenous peptides using electron transfer dissociation and collision-induced dissociation

### Description
We performed LC-MSMS analysis using both CID and ETD for the identification of endogenous peptides. Endogenous peptides were extracted from mouse AtT 20 cells by acidified methanol method and all large molecules including proteins were removed by centrifugation. The supernatant containing endogenous peptides was freeze-dried. For LC-MSMS analysis, extracted peptides were resuspended and injected to Ultimate 3000 HPLC system and analysed on LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. A 60 min gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 50% acetonitrile, both containing 0.1% formic acid was used to separate peptides on C18 column.The LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the three most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. A chosen precursor ion was first fragmented by CID and ETD. Data processing: The raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3. The CID and ETD spectra were then written to Mascot generic files. OMSSA (version 2.1.9) was used and b- and y- ions were selected for CID data, and c-, y- and z- ions were used for ETD. The spectra were searched by setting the parent ion mass accuracy to +/- 0.02 Da. For fragment ions, the mass tolerance was set to +/- 0.4 Da. For the genome-wide peptide search, the mouse genomic sequence (NCBI build 37.61) was directly translated in its 6 reading frames, and used for spectral searching. No enzymatic cleavage was taken into account during the database searches. No variable PTMs were included.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) combined with bioinformatics tools have enabled fast and systematic protein identification based on peptide-to-spectrum matches. However, it remains challenging to obtain accurate identification of endogenous peptides, such as neuropeptides, peptide hormones, peptide pheromones, venom peptides, and antimicrobial peptides. Since these peptides are processed at sites that are difficult to predict reliably, the search of their MS/MS spectra in sequence databases needs to be done without any protease setting. In addition, many endogenous peptides carry various post-translational modifications, making it essential to take these into account in the database search. These characteristics of endogenous peptides result in a huge search space, frequently leading to poor confidence of the peptide characterizations in peptidomics studies. We have developed a new MS/MS spectrum search tool for highly accurate and confident identification of endogenous peptides by combining two different fragmentation methods. Our approach takes advantage of the combination of two independent fragmentation methods (collision-induced dissociation and electron transfer dissociation). Their peptide spectral matching is carried out separately in both methods, and the final score is built as a combination of the two separate scores. We demonstrate that this approach is very effective in discriminating correct peptide identifications from false hits. We applied this approach to a spectral data set of neuropeptides extracted from mouse pituitary tumor cells. Compared to conventional MS-based identification, i.e., using a single fragmentation method, our approach significantly increased the peptide identification rate. It proved also highly effective for scanning spectra against a very large search space, enabling more accurate genome-wide searches and searches including multiple potential post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Peptidome

### Affiliations
Biology Department

### Submitter
Eisuke Hayakawa

### Lab Head


