### Accession
PXD000877

### Title
In-depth proteomic analysis of carp (Cyprinus carpio L) spermatozoa

### Description
Using a combination of protein fractionation by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and high performance liquid chromatography - electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 348 proteins in carp spermatozoa, most of which were for the first time identified in fish. Dynein, tubulin, HSP90, HSP70, HSP60, adenosylhomocysteinase, NKEF-B, brain type creatine kinase, mitochondrial ATP synthase, and valosin containing enzyme represent high abundance proteins in carp spermatozoa. These proteins are functionally related to sperm motility and energy production as well as the protection of sperm against oxidative injury and stress. Moreover, carp sperm is equipped with functionally diverse proteins involved in signal transduction, transcription, translation, protein turnover and transport. About 15% of carp sperm proteins identified here were also detected in seminal plasma which may be a result of leakage from spermatozoa into seminal plasma, adsorption of seminal plasma proteins on spermatozoa surface, and expression in both spermatozoa and cells secreting seminal plasma proteins. The availability of a catalogue of carp sperm proteins provides substantial advances for an understanding of sperm function and for future development of molecular diagnostic tests of carp sperm quality, the evaluation of which is currently limited to certain parameters such as sperm count, morphology and motility or viability.

### Sample Protocol
Samples with spermatozoa content  >10 x 109 ml-1 and > 80 % motile spermatotoa were selected for proteomic analysis.  To obtain sperm, milt was centrifuged at 3000 × g for 30 min (4 °C). After the removal of the supernatant, the pellets (containing the spermatozoa) were washed twice in a sperm immobilizing solution (20 mM Tris, 200 mM KCl, pH 8.0) by centrifugation at 1000 x g at 4 °C for 30 min. The pellets were suspended in the protein extraction buffer (immobilization solution with 0.1% Triton) , sonicated (5s x 3), kept on ice for 1 h and centrifuged for 10 min at 14 000 x g at 4 °C. Protein lysates were stored at −80 °C until analysis.  Aliquots of 35 µg of proteins of carp sperm extract (n=4) were mixed with sample loading buffer (65 mM Tris-HCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS, 5% (v/v) mercaptoethanol, 1% bromophenol blue), heated (95 °C, 4 min), loaded onto  polyacrylamide gel (4% stacking gel and 12 % separating gel; 8.6 x 6.8 x 0.1 cm) and run in a Mini Protean II Cell (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 80 V for 15 min and 120 V for 1.5 h. After the electrophoresis gels were stained overnight using Coomassie Brillant Blue R250, destained at 5% (v/v) methanol with 7% (v/v) acetic acid and washed in water. The corresponding gel lanes of carp sperm extracts (n=4) were cut into 12 slices, incubated in a solution of 5 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 65°C for the reduction of cysteine residues, in a solution of 55 mM iodoacetamide (30 min) for alkylation and each slice was individually subjected to in-gel digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher, v 2.0), and uploaded to a Mascot version 2.1.03 (Matrix Science, London, UK,) server to search against a NCBInr Cyprinidae database with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and parent ion mass tolerance of 2 Da. The following parameters were used for MASCOT searches: one missed cleavage allowed, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. The occurrence of false positives (FDR) was determined through running searches using the same parameters against a decoy database (sequence-reversed NCBInr Cyprinidae database).

### Publication Abstract
Using a combination of protein fractionation by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and high performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry, we identified 348 proteins in carp spermatozoa, most of which were for the first time identified in fish. Dynein, tubulin, HSP90, HSP70, HSP60, adenosylhomocysteinase, NKEF-B, brain type creatine kinase, mitochondrial ATP synthase, and valosin containing enzyme represent high abundance proteins in carp spermatozoa. These proteins are functionally related to sperm motility and energy production as well as the protection of sperm against oxidative injury and stress. Moreover, carp spermatozoa are equipped with functionally diverse proteins involved in signal transduction, transcription, translation, protein turnover and transport. About 15% of proteins from carp spermatozoa identified here were also detected in seminal plasma which may be a result of leakage from spermatozoa into seminal plasma, adsorption of seminal plasma proteins on spermatozoa surface, and expression in both spermatozoa and cells secreting seminal plasma proteins. The availability of a catalog of carp sperm proteins provides substantial advances for an understanding of sperm function and for future development of molecular diagnostic tests of carp sperm quality, the evaluation of which is currently limited to certain parameters such as sperm count, morphology and motility or viability. The mass spectrometry data are available at ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD000877 (DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.6019/PXD000877).

### Keywords
Carp, Sperm, Lc-ms/ms, Fish, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology, Olsztyn, Poland
Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola  Dietrich

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola A. Dietrich
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology, Olsztyn, Poland


