### Accession
PXD039248

### Title
Effect of processing methods of human saliva on proteomic profile and protein-mediated biological processes

### Description
Human saliva has been commonly used as protein source in in vitro microbiological and biological assays to mimic the protein pellicle formation, termed acquired salivary pellicle, that precedes microbial and cell adhesion on surfaces exposed to the oral environment. However, saliva requires previous processing to remove food debris, microorganisms, and other molecules prior its use in microbiological and biological in vitro assays. For this purpose, 0.22 μm filtration, 0.45 μm filtration, and pasteurization methods have been commonly used, but the effect of these processing methods on the proteomic profile of saliva has not been tested experimentally. Stimulated human saliva was collected from 8 healthy volunteers and submitted to the following processes: non-processing (control), 0.22 μm filtration, 0.45 μm filtration, and pasteurization. The proteomic profile of non-processed saliva was compared with 0.22 μm filtered-, 0.45 μm filtered-, and pasteurized-saliva by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The effect of processed saliva in microbial adhesion was tested using bacterial and fungus species, and in biological cell behavior using HaCaT immortalized human keratinocytes. Two hundred seventy-eight proteins were identified in non-processed saliva, 54 proteins (≈19%) were exclusive. Saliva processing reduced identified proteins to 222 (≈80%) for the 0.22 μm filtered saliva, 219 (≈79%) for the 0.45 μm filtered saliva, and 201 (≈72%) for the pasteurized saliva, compared to non-processed saliva. Although there were slight differences in the protein composition, the proteomic profile showed similar molecular functions and biological processes. The different saliva processing methods did not alter microbial adhesion (ANOVA, p>0.05). Interestingly, pasteurized saliva reduced keratinocytes cell viability. Saliva processing methods tested reduced the proteomic profile diversity of saliva, but maintained similar molecular functions and biological processes mediated by remaining proteins, not interfering on microbial adhesion and cell viability, except for pasteurization, which reduced cell viability.

### Sample Protocol
This study was approved by the Local Research Ethics Committee (CAAE: 55366416.0.0000.5418). Healthy volunteers donated stimulated human saliva as the protein source.  Saliva collection Fresh stimulated human saliva was obtained from 8 volunteers with good systemic and oral health and normal stimulated salivary flow rate (>0.7 mL min-1), following inclusion criteria previously described (Souza et al.: Biofouling. 2018, 34, 1175-1184; Souza et al.: Biofouling. 2020, 36, 428-441) Saliva collection was performed at least 2 h after volunteers had eaten and brushed their teeth. The salivary flow was stimulated by chewing a piece of flexible film (Parafilm M; American Can Co., Neenah, WI, USA). After collection, collected saliva from all volunteers was mixed (pooled) and processed for the experiments.  Saliva processing methods The following saliva processing methods were tested: 0.22 μm filter (Polyethersulfone membrane, JET Biofil® Syringe Filter, Guangzhou Jet Bio-Filtration Co. Ltd., China), 0.45 μm filter (Polyethersulfone membrane JET Biofil® Syringe Filter), and pasteurized saliva, ubiquitously used methods for microbiological and biological assays and salivary pellicle adsorption. A non-processed pool of stimulated saliva (only centrifuged at 3,800 g, 4°C for 10 min for cell debris removal) was used as a control to identify proteins lost as a function of the saliva processing methods. For filtered saliva, the pool of saliva was centrifuged at 3,800 g, 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was filtered in the respective filters of 0.22 μm or 0.45 μm pore size. For pasteurized saliva, the pool of saliva was centrifuged at 7,000 g, 4°C for 7 min 30 s, and the supernatant was transferred to a sterile Falcon tube and incubated in a water bath at 65°C for 30 min. Then, the tube was centrifuged again at 7,000 g, 4°C for 7 min 30 s, and the supernatant was transferred to a new sterile tube. The saliva collection and experiments were made in triplicate. An aliquot of each group in each experiment was used for proteomic evaluation.   Liquid Chromatography coupled with Tandem Mass Spectrometry The proteomic profile was evaluated by Liquid Chromatography coupled with Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) conducted according to a previous protocol (Siqueira & Oppenheim: Arch. Oral Biol. 2009, 54, 437-444). Collected samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 50 mL of urea (8 M). The Bradford method was used to quantify the total protein content.35 For protein extraction, the proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin (1:50 w w-1), and subjected to LC-MS/MS.36 Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and immersed in 22.5 µL of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2 µL (0.88 µg) was analyzed on LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to the EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid in an analytical PicoFrit Column (20 cm × ID75 µm, 5 µm particle size) (New Objective Inc., Woburn, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 300 mL min-1 over 27 min, as conducted by a previous study (Salmon et al.: J. Proteomics. 2016, 141, 12-23; Carnielli et al. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3598). The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the source temperature was 275ºC. All instrument methods were set up in the data-dependent acquisition mode. After accumulation to a target value of 1 × 106, full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300-1,600) were made from an Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of r=60,000. The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). Thousand (1,000) counts were the signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event. A size list of 500, a duration of 60 s, and a repeat count of 1 were enabled for dynamic exclusion. An activation q=0.25 and a time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences acquired were identified using MaxQuant software (v.1.3.0.3), and MS/MS spectra were searched against The Human UniProt database (released in May 2017; 92,646 sequences; 36,874,315 residues) using the Andromeda search engine. For search, the parameters were considered: a tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor ions (MS search) and 0.5 Da for fragment ions (MS/MS search), with a maximum of two missed cleavages. A maximum of a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set. Protein quantification was performed using the LFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and a window of 2 min for matching between runs.  The list of peptides identified was filtered by a minimum of 0.75 localization probability of containing at least one peptide with the application software Perseus v.1.2.7.4. Reverse and contaminant entries were excluded from further analysis. Venn diagrams were constructed using a free web-based tool (Heberle et al.: BMC Bioinformatics. 2015, 16, 169) to show exclusive proteins identified in each group according to the comparisons adopted. The molecular function, biological process, and mass (Da) of proteins identified were checked by Uniprot Database. For this, each protein ID was used to search on Uniprot Database for all information. Then, for each protein, one molecular function and one biological process were collected based on the main function described by the database or a common function related to the oral cavity and microbial and cell adhesion. All molecular functions and biological processes were included in a standard Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet. Heatmaps were constructed using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.0.0 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) to show LFQ intensity (protein intensity/expression) for each group.

### Publication Abstract
The use of saliva as a protein source prior to microbiological and biological assays requires previous processing. However, the effect of these processing methods on the proteomic profile of saliva has not been tested. Stimulated human saliva was collected from eight healthy volunteers. Non-processed saliva was compared with 0.22 &#x3bc;m filtered, 0.45 &#x3bc;m filtered, and pasteurized saliva, by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039248. The effect of processed saliva on microbial adhesion was tested using bacterial and fungus species and in biological cell behavior using HaCaT immortalized human keratinocytes. Two hundred and seventy-eight proteins were identified in non-processed saliva, of which 54 proteins (&#x2248;19%) were exclusive. Saliva processing reduced identified proteins to 222 (&#x2248;80%) for the 0.22 &#x3bc;m group, 219 (&#x2248;79%) for the 0.45 &#x3bc;m group, and 201 (&#x2248;72%) for the pasteurized saliva, compared to non-processed saliva. The proteomic profile showed similar molecular functions and biological processes. The different saliva processing methods did not alter microbial adhesion (ANOVA, <i>p</i> &gt; 0.05). Interestingly, pasteurized saliva reduced keratinocyte cell viability. Saliva processing methods tested reduced the proteomic profile diversity of saliva but maintained similar molecular functions and biological processes, not interfering with microbial adhesion and cell viability, except for pasteurization, which reduced cell viability.

### Keywords
Microbiology, Proteomic, Sterilization, Study model, Saliva

### Affiliations
Department of Periodontology, Dental Research Division, Guarulhos University (UnG), Guarulhos, Sāo Paulo 07023-070, Brazil | Dental Science School (Faculdade de Ciências Odontológicas - FCO), Montes Claros, Minas Gerais 39401-303 Brazil.
University of Campinas, UNICAMP

### Submitter
Luis Fernando Bandeira Miranda

### Lab Head
Dr João Gabriel S. Souza
Department of Periodontology, Dental Research Division, Guarulhos University (UnG), Guarulhos, Sāo Paulo 07023-070, Brazil | Dental Science School (Faculdade de Ciências Odontológicas - FCO), Montes Claros, Minas Gerais 39401-303 Brazil.


