### Accession
PXD020806

### Title
Isobaric tag-based protein profiling across eight human cell lines using high-Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) and real-time database searching (RTS)

### Description
A vast assortment of human cell lines is available for cell culture model-based studies, and as such the potential exists for discrepancies in findings due to cell line selection. To investigate this concept, we determined the relative protein abundance profiles of a panel of eight diverse, but commonly studied, human cell lines. This panel includes: HAP1, HEK293T, HeLa, HepG2, Jurkat, Panc1, SH-SY5Y, and SVGp12. We use a mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflow designed to enhance quantitative accuracy while maintaining analytical depth. To this end, our strategy leverages TMTpro16-based sample multiplexing, high-Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS), and real-time database searching (RTS). The data show that cell line diversity was reflective of differences in the relative protein abundance profiles. We also determined that several hundred proteins were highly enriched for a given cell line and performed gene ontology and pathway analysis on these cell line-enriched proteins. We provide an R Shiny application to query protein abundance profiles and retrieve proteins with similar patterns. The workflows used herein can be applied to additional cell lines to aid cell line selection in addressing a given scientific inquiry or in improving an experimental design.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth and harvesting. Methods of cell growth and propagation followed techniques utilized previously. In brief, adherent cells were propagated in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. For adherent cells, the growth media was aspirated upon achieving ~90% confluency, and the cells were washed thrice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Adherent cells were dislodged with a non-enzymatic reagent and harvested by trituration. Jurkat cells were propagated in RPMI 1640 with 2mM L-glutamine and 10% FBS in suspension, with cell density maintained between 1x105 and 3x106 cells/ml. Cells were harvested at 3x106 cells/ml and washed thrice with 10 mL PBS. After washing, all cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed. Five hundred microliters of 200 mM EPPS, 8M urea, pH 8.5 supplemented with 1X Pierce Protease Inhibitors, Mini was added directly to each 15 cm cell culture dish for harvest and lysis. Cell lysis and protein digestion. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle and incubated at 4°C with gentle agitation for 30 min. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 20 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, 4 parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, 1-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and 3 parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2019). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.

### Publication Abstract
A vast number of human cell lines are available for cell culture model-based studies, and as such the potential exists for discrepancies in findings due to cell line selection. To investigate this concept, the authors determine the relative protein abundance profiles of a panel of eight diverse, but commonly studied human cell lines. This panel includes HAP1, HEK293T, HeLa, HepG2, Jurkat, Panc1, SH-SY5Y, and SVGp12. A mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflow designed to enhance quantitative accuracy while maintaining analytical depth is used. To this end, this strategy leverages TMTpro16-based sample multiplexing, high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry, and real-time database searching. The data show that the differences in the relative protein abundance profiles reflect cell line diversity. The authors also determine several hundred proteins to be highly enriched for a given cell line, and perform gene ontology and pathway analysis on these cell line-enriched proteins. An R Shiny application is designed to query protein abundance profiles and retrieve proteins with similar patterns. The workflows used herein can be applied to additional cell lines to aid cell line selection for addressing a given scientific inquiry or for improving an experimental design.

### Keywords
Rts, Eclipse, Sps-ms3, Multi-notch, Faims, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, USA


