### Accession
PXD035501

### Title
Identification of novel SCF FBXW7 substrates in asynchronous and mitotic cells

### Description
FBXW7 loss-of-function has been implicated in chemoresistance against antimicrotubule drugs. FBXW7 is frequently mutated in human cancers and the identification of FBXW7 substrates, which could be involved in this phenotype, is a major task.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture. HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-EV, Flag-FBXW7 and Flag-FBXW7 (T439I, S462A, T463A, R465A) using PEI. Two sets were prepared for Flag-FBXW7 and mutant. Proteins were overexpressed for 48 h. One of each WT and mutant FBXW7 cultures was treated with 250 ng/ml nocodazole during the last 19 h to arrest cells in mitosis. Cells were harvested and lysed in NP40 buffer with 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors. Clarified supernatants were used for anti-Flag immunoprecipitations using Flag M2 beads. Proeints were eluted using 3xFlag peptide. Samples were denatured using Laemmli buffer and seperated on a SDS-gel. The gel was stained with MS-compatible Coomassie. Sample preparation. Coomassie-stained bands were excised and chopped into small pieces. For all following steps, buffers were exchanged by two consecutive 15 min incubation steps of the gel pieces with 200 µl of acetonitrile (ACN) whereby ACN was removed after each step. Proteins were reduced by the addition of 200 µl of a 10 mM DTT solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiC, Sigma Aldrich, A6141) and incubation at 56°C for 30 min. 180 µl ACN were added following 15 min incubation at room temperature. The solvent was removed and proteins were alkylated by the addition of 200 µl of a 55 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) solution in 100 mM AmBiC. Samples were incubated for 20 min in the dark. Gel pieces were incubated twice with 200 µl ACN for 15 min at room temperature. In-gel enzymatic digest. 0.2 µg/µl stock solution of trypsin (Promega, V511A) in resuspension buffer (Promega, V542A) was diluted with ice-cold 50 mM AmBiC buffer to achieve a final concentration of 2 ng/µl.# 200 µl thereof were added to gel pieces, which were incubated for 30 min on ice and thereafter over night at 37°C. Gel pieces were sonicated for 15 min, spun down and the supernatant was transferred into a glass vial (VDS Optilab, 93908556). Remaining gel pieces were washed with 50 µl of an aqueous solution of 50% ACN and 1% formic acid and sonicated for 15 min. The combined supernatants were dried in a speedvac and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were subjected to a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well µElution Plate, Waters #186001828BA), dried down and reconstituted in 10 µl of 100 mM Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.5. Peptides were reacted with 80 µg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111) label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous solution of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were mixed 1:1, subjected to reverse phase clean-up step and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scentific) as previously described (PMID: 29706546).  Briefly, peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn; C18 PepMap 100, 5 lm, 300 lm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 A°) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase HSS C18 T3, 75 lm × 25 cm, 1.8 lm, 100 A°). Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). Peptides were loaded on the trapping cartridge using solvent A for 3 min with a flow of 30 µl/min. Peptides were separated on the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µl/min applying a 2 h gradient of 2 – 28% of solvent B in A, followed by an increase to 40% B. Peptides were directly analyzed in positive ion mode applying with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 320°C using a Nanospray-Flex ion source and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 lm OD × 20 lm ID; 10 lm tip (New Objective). MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1.200 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 70.000 [maximum fill time of 250 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 10 peaks with charge 2–4 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 30 second dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 32). Precursors were isolated with a 0.7 m/z window and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 35,000 (maximum fill time of 120 ms or an AGC target of 2e5 ions).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant (PMID: 26379230) and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse UniProt FASTA Homo sapiens database (UP000005640) including common contaminants and the following two protein sequences: Flag-FBXW7: MDYKDDDDKVPGSSVVEFALQKLLEMNQELLSVGSKRRRTGGSLRGNPSSSQVDEEQMNRVVEEEQQQQLRQQEEEHTARNGEVVGVEPRPGGQNDSQQGQLEENNNRFISVDEDSSGNQEEQEEDEEHAGEQDEEDEEEEEMDQESDDFDQSDDSSREDEHTHTNSVTNSSSIVDLPVHQLSSPFYTKTTKMKRKLDHGSEVRSFSLGKKPCKVSEYTSTTGLVPCSATPTTFGDLRAANGQGQQRRRITSVQPPTGLQEWLKMFQSWSGPEKLLALDELIDSCEPTQVKHMMQVIEPQFQRDFISLLPKELALYVLSFLEPKDLLQAAQTCRYWRILAEDNLLWREKCKEEGIDEPLHIKRRKVIKPGFIHSPWKSAYIRQHRIDTNWRRGELKSPKVLKGHDDHVITCLQFCGNRIVSGSDDNTLKVWSAVTGKCLRTLVGHTGGVWSSQMRDNIIISGSTDRTLKVWNAETGECIHTLYGHTSTVRCMHLHEKRVVSGSRDATLRVWDIETGQCLHVLMGHVAAVRCVQYDGRRVVSGAYDFMVKVWDPETETCLHTLQGHTNRVYSLQFDGIHVVSGSLDTSIRVWDVETGNCIHTLTGHQSLTSGMELKDNILVSGNADSTVKIWDIKTGQCLQTLQGPNKHQSAVTCLQFNKNFVITSSDDGTVKLWDLKTGEFIRNLVTLESGGSGGVVWRIRASNTKLVCAVGSRNGTEETKLLVLDFDVDMK Flag-FBXW7deltaWD40: MDYKDDDDKVPGSSVVEFALQKLLEMNQELLSVGSKRRRTGGSLRGNPSSSQVDEEQMNRVVEEEQQQQLRQQEEEHTARNGEVVGVEPRPGGQNDSQQGQLEENNNRFISVDEDSSGNQEEQEEDEEHAGEQDEEDEEEEEMDQESDDFDQSDDSSREDEHTHTNSVTNSSSIVDLPVHQLSSPFYTKTTKMKRKLDHGSEVRSFSLGKKPCKVSEYTSTTGLVPCSATPTTFGDLRAANGQGQQRRRITSVQPPTGLQEWLKMFQSWSGPEKLLALDELIDSCEPTQVKHMMQVIEPQFQRDFISLLPKELALYVLSFLEPKDLLQAAQTCRYWRILAEDNLLWREKCKEEGIDEPLHIKRRKVIKPGFIHSPWKSAYIRQHRIDTNWRRGELKSPKVLKGHDDHVITCLQFCGNRIVSGSDDNTLKVWSAVTGKCLRTLVGHTGGVWSSQMRDNIIISGSTDRTLKVWNAETGECIHTLYGHTAAVACMHLHEKRVVSGSRDATLRVWDIETGQCLHVLMGHVAAVRCVQYDGRRVVSGAYDFMVKVWDPETETCLHTLQGHTNRVYSLQFDGIHVVSGSLDTSIRVWDVETGNCIHTLTGHQSLTSGMELKDNILVSGNADSTVKIWDIKTGQCLQTLQGPNKHQSAVTCLQFNKNFVITSSDDGTVKLWDLKTGEFIRNLVTLESGGSGGVVWRIRASNTKLVCAVGSRNGTEETKLLVLDFDVDMK The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
During prolonged mitotic arrest induced by antimicrotubule drugs, cell fate decision is determined by two alternative pathways, one leading to cell death and the other inducing premature escape from mitosis by mitotic slippage. FBWX7, a member of the F-box family of proteins and substrate-targeting subunit of the SKP1-CUL1-F-Box E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, promotes mitotic cell death and prevents mitotic slippage, but molecular details underlying these roles for FBWX7 are unclear. In this study, we report that WDR5 (WD-repeat containing protein 5), a component of the mixed lineage leukemia complex of histone 3 lysine 4 methyltransferases, is a substrate of FBXW7. We determined by coimmunoprecipitation experiments and in&#xa0;vitro binding assays that WDR5 interacts with FBXW7 in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro. SKP1-CUL1-F-Box-FBXW7 mediates ubiquitination of WDR5 and targets it for proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, we find that WDR5 depletion counteracts FBXW7 loss of function by reducing mitotic slippage and polyploidization. In conclusion, our data elucidate a new mechanism in mitotic cell fate regulation, which might contribute to prevent chemotherapy resistance in patients after antimicrotubule drug treatment.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Fbxw7, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
Cell Cycle Control and Carcinogenesis, F045, German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Simon Haenle-Kreidler

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Hoffmann
Cell Cycle Control and Carcinogenesis, F045, German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


