### Accession
PXD045154

### Title
Interferon restores replication fork stability and cell viability in BRCA-defective cells via ISG15

### Description
DNA replication and repair defects or genotoxic treatments trigger interferon (IFN)-mediated inflammatory responses. However, whether and how IFN signaling in turn impacts the DNA replication process has remained elusive. Here we show that basal levels of the IFN-stimulated gene 15, ISG15, and its conjugation (ISGylation) are essential to protect nascent DNA from degradation. Moreover, IFN treatment restores replication fork stability in BRCA1/2-deficient cells, which strictly depends on topoisomerase-1, and rescues lethality of BRCA2-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells. Although IFN activates hundreds of genes, these effects are specifically mediated by ISG15 and ISGylation, as their inactivation suppresses the impact of IFN on DNA replication. ISG15 depletion significantly reduces cell proliferation rates in human BRCA1-mutated triple-negative, whereas its upregulation results in increased resistance to the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin in mouse BRCA2-deficient breast cancer cells, respectively. Accordingly, cells carrying BRCA1/2 defects consistently show increased ISG15 levels, which we propose as a novel, in-built mechanism of drug resistance linked to BRCAness.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin extraction. SUM149PT EV and ISG15 WT cells were plated (3x106) in 15 cm plates in triplicates for each experimental condition and treated with 1 µg/mL of doxycycline. Forty-eight hours after doxycycline treatment, cells were optionally treated with HU (4 mM, 4 h). Cells were collected in ice-cold harvesting buffer (10 mM NEM, 1 mM PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail). Small fractions of cells (1/20) were lysed in 1% SDS 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 (95°C for 10 min) and loaded as total cell extracts. The remaining cells were subjected to cell fractionation by resuspending the cell pellet in ice-cold buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 300 mM sucrose, 0.5% Triton-X, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NEM, 10 µM PJ-34). After centrifugation, supernatants were kept as cytosolic fraction. The pellet was further treated with ice-cold buffer B (10 mM HEPES pH 7, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NEM, 10 µM PJ-34). After centrifugation, supernatants were kept as nuclear soluble fraction. Pellets were further treated with ice-cold buffer C (10 mM HEPES pH 7, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NEM, 10 µM PJ-34) and sonicated for 10 min with high intensity and 30 sec on/off cycles. After centrifugation supernatants were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford method according to manufacturer’s protocol.   Mass spectrometry analysis   Sample preparation. Protein samples were denaturated using 4% SDS at 95°C for 10 min followed by reduction with 2 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine and alkylation with 15 mM Chloroacetamide for 30 min at 30°C in the dark. Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample-Preparation (SP3) was used for sample clean-up prior to tryptic digestion as described previously 67. On beads trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:100 in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. The reaction was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid followed by samples desalting using Stage-Tip C18 columns. Samples were dried on SpeedVac and dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid for further nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.   NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters). Biological triplicate samples were acquired in a randomized order to allow label free quantitation analysis. Loaded peptides were trapped on a  ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap column and eluted on a  ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 column (Waters). Peptides were separated and eluted with a 90-min gradient of 35% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.    Data acquisition was performed using data-dependent operation mode. Full-scan MS spectra (300−2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z using Easy Spray Ion Source with spray voltage set to 2.3 kV. MS/MS data were acquired using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw data were searched by Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) against the human proteome database (UniProt entry 9606, taxonomy, 20190709), using cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed protein modification. Variable modifications consisted of methylation, oxidation, acetylation, deamidation and di-glycine addition on lysine residues. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.   Data processing was performed using Scaffold software (version 5.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). Protein identifications were accepted if they scored over 95% probability. Protein and peptide thresholds were set at 1% and 0.1%FDR, respectively, and a minimum number of two identified peptides for each protein was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
DNA replication and repair defects or genotoxic treatments trigger interferon (IFN)-mediated inflammatory responses. However, whether and how IFN signaling in turn impacts the DNA replication process has remained elusive. Here we show that basal levels of the IFN-stimulated gene 15, ISG15, and its conjugation (ISGylation) are essential to protect nascent DNA from degradation. Moreover, IFN&#x3b2; treatment restores replication fork stability in BRCA1/2-deficient cells, which strictly depends on topoisomerase-1, and rescues lethality of BRCA2-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells. Although IFN&#x3b2; activates hundreds of genes, these effects are specifically mediated by ISG15 and ISGylation, as their inactivation suppresses the impact of IFN&#x3b2; on DNA replication. ISG15 depletion significantly reduces cell proliferation rates in human BRCA1-mutated triple-negative, whereas its upregulation results in increased resistance to the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin in mouse BRCA2-deficient breast cancer cells, respectively. Accordingly, cells carrying BRCA1/2 defects consistently show increased ISG15 levels, which we propose as an in-built mechanism of drug resistance linked to BRCAness.

### Keywords
Orbitrap fusion lumos mass spectrometer, Ubiquitiin, Dna replication, Homo sapiens, Isg15

### Affiliations
University of Zurich
Penengo Lab, Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lorenza Penengo

### Lab Head
Dr Lorenza Penengo
Penengo Lab, Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland


