### Accession
PXD017584

### Title
Protocol for high-yield production of photo-leucine-labeled proteins in Escherichia coli

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is an emerging technique to obtain structural information of biomacromolecules and their complexes in cells and in vitro. In particular, certain photo-reactive amino acids (pA) such as photo-leucine (pLeu) and photo-methionine can provide unique short-distance information on structural core regions of proteins. Here, we present a protocol for high-yield incorporation of pLeu in proteins recombinantly expressed in Escherichia coli. The protein is expressed at high cell densities, which reduces the required amount of the photo-reactive amino acid by a factor of 10 compared to standard protocols, while maintaining high incorporation rates. For the two chaperones Trigger Factor and SecB, up to 3 mg of photo-leucine labeled protein were thus obtained from 100 ml of cell culture, with label incorporation rates of up to 34%. For Trigger factor, UV-induced cross-linking lead to the identification of 12 cross-links that are in agreement with published three-dimensional structures. The accessibility of milligram amounts of photo-leucine-labeled proteins at low costs will be highly useful to address structural biology questions.

### Sample Protocol
Incorperation experiments: To measure the incorporation rates of pLeu, non-UV irradiated cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH = 8.5) and cells were disrupted by ultra-sonication with Bioruptor pico system (diagenode). After cell disruption, samples were centrifuged for 10 min, 21130 g, 4 °C and supernatant was used for further analysis. To prepare the tryptic peptides, extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 95°C for 10 min and, after cooling to room temperature, the proteins were alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 2.5%. Peptides were cleaned up using PreOmics Cartridges (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufactures instructions, dried using a vacuum concentrator and stored at – 20°C until analysis. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid by sonication and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 10% B over 5 min to 35% B over 70 min to 50 % B over 15 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode set to obtain one high resolution MS1 scan in the orbitrap at a resolution of 240’000 full width at half maximum (@ 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS1) and 25ms (MS2). MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1x106 ions and 10,000 ions, respectively. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one micro scan was acquired for each spectrum. CL-MS: E. coli cells equal to 300 µg whole cell protein were cross-linked as described in section 2.5. Afterwards the cells were disrupted by ultra-sonication and Trigger factor was purified by standard His-tag purification protocol. The purified protein was reduced at 95°C for 10 min with 10 mM TCEP, and after cooling to room temperature, the protein was alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. For the digest, we used sequencing-grade modified trypsin in 1/50 ratio (w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the samples were supplemented with TFA to a final concentration of 2.5%. Peptides were cleaned up using C18 columns (Silica C18, MacroSpin column, The Nest group Inc.) following the manufactures instructions. In the next step, cross-linked peptides were enriched by size exclusion protocol.Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid by sonication and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 36 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 65% B over 60 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in targeted mode with an inclusion list of 22 masses of crosslinked peptides (see Supplemental Material). One MS1 scan was followed by 22 MS2 scans of the targeted crosslinked peptides. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM (@ 200 m/z), a scan range from 250 to 1500 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 1x106. MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60’000 FWHM, with isolation with of the quadrupole set to 0.4 m/z, a scan range from 150 to 1700 m/z, a maximum injection time of 118 ms and an AGC target of 1x106. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to (NCE: 35%) or CID (NCE: 29%) or stepped HCD (NCE: 25-35%).

### Data Protocol
Incorperation experiment: Incorporation rates of photo-leucine were measured on Thermo Orbitrap Elite in DDA-mode as describe in 2.3 based on MS1 raw intensities. Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.2.3. MS/MS data were searched against the Escherichia coli strain K12 Swissprot databases containing 4350 proteins downloaded from the UniProt homepage on the 18th of March 2018 (21-23). The following analysis settings were used: (i) digestion mode: Trypsin/P (ii) Max missed cleavages: 2 (iii) peptide tolerance first search 20 ppm; main search 4.5 ppm, (iv) three variable modifications (oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-term and pLeu) and one fixed modification (Carbamidomethylation of cysteine), (v) “include contaminants” was enabled, (vi) PSM FDR 1%, protein FDR 1%, (vii) FTMS MS/MS match tolerance 20 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.5 Da. From the “evidence.txt” output file, all peptides that were marked as ‘Reverse’, ‘Potential Contaminants’ or ‘Only identified by site’ were discarded and raw intensities for each peptide summed and extracted for further analysis. CL-MS: Raw data were peak picked and converted into mzXML/mgf-format with MSConvert 3.0. Data analysis of XL-MS-data was performed with Software MeroX 1.6.6 (FDR: 5%, Score > 95) and in-house python scripts.

### Publication Abstract
UV-cross-linking mass spectrometry is an emerging technique to obtain structural information of biomacromolecules and their complexes <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. In particular, certain photo-reactive amino acids (pA) such as photo-leucine (pLeu) and photo-methionine can provide unique short-distance information on the structural core regions of proteins. Here, we present a protocol for high-yield incorporation of pLeu in proteins recombinantly expressed in <i>Escherichia coli</i>. The protein of interest is expressed at high cell densities, which reduces the required amount of the pA by a factor of 10, as compared to the standard protocols, while maintaining high incorporation rates. For the two chaperones, trigger factor and SecB, up to 3 mg of pLeu-labeled protein were thus obtained from 100 mL of cell culture, with label incorporation rates of up to 34%. For trigger factor, UV-induced cross-linking leads to the identification of 12 cross-links that are in agreement with the published three-dimensional structures. The accessibility of milligram amounts of pLeu-labeled proteins at low costs will be highly useful to address structural biology questions.

### Keywords
Molecular chaperones, Uv cross-linking, Photo-leucine, High-cell density culture, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Basel
Biozentrum
FG Sebastian Hiller
Klingelbergstrasse 70
4056 Basel
University of Basel  Biozentrum  FG Sebastian Hiller  Klingelbergstrasse 70  4056 Basel

### Submitter
Bastian Kohlb

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Hiller
University of Basel  Biozentrum  FG Sebastian Hiller  Klingelbergstrasse 70  4056 Basel


