### Accession
PXD008986

### Title
Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM)-Driven Profiling of  Hypoxia-responsive Pathways Associated with Metastasis in Osteosarcoma

### Description
In this study, we aimed to refine our understanding of the molecular events associated with the proteomic response to hypoxia in OS cells with different anatomic origins, namely from a primary and metastatic site. There are similarities in biology and treatment of OS in human and canine. We opted to use a canine parental osteosarcoma cell line (POS), which was cultured from a primary canine tumor24; and a highly metastatic POS cell line (HMPOS) that was derived from pulmonary metastatic lesions in mouse POS xenografts. We have chosen a protein-centric study design that combines 1) initially a label-free data dependent acquisition (DDA) method for enabling quantification of larger sets of proteins and global assessment of adaptive responses induced by hypoxia, 2) selection of hypoxia-responsive protein targets and 3) using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) for quantitative monitoring of signature peptides of hypoxia-responsive protein targets to determine their precise response to hypoxia and to confirm hypoxia-regulated pathways.  Functional biochemical assays provide additional validation of the proteomic findings. Taken together, our results describe the hypoxia response of OS cell phenotypes by inducing comprehensive alterations in the proteome biology that are associated with metabolic reprogramming, redox modulation and extra cellular matrix (EMC) remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by trypsinization by using 0.05 % (w/v) trypsin-EDTA (GibcoTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After rinsing with HBSS three times, cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 1280 RCF (relative centrifugal force) at room temperature. Cell pellets were re-suspended with lysis buffer consisting of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 8 M urea and complete proteinase inhibitor cocktail, and then transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. Cells were lysed by sonication (10 × 2 s bursts) while immersed in an ice bath. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 RCF at 4°C for 15 minutes.   Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. Equal amount of proteins from each sample was reduced by 5mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hour, and alkylated with 10mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 1 hour. The denatured proteins were precipitated by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation (at 15,000 RCF), the protein pellets were re-dissolved in 50mM NH4HCO3 with 0.1% RapiGest, digested with trypsin using a 1:50 ratio (w/w) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The RapiGest surfactant was removed according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot Canis database with 25,439 entries using Mascot as search engine. The mass tolerances for precursors and fragments were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed; oxidation on methionine residues was set as a dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as a static modification. A 1% FDR cutoff was applied at both peptide level and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common bone cancer in children and young adults. Solid tumors are characterized by intratumoral hypoxia, and hypoxic cells are associated with the transformation to aggressive phenotype and metastasis. The proteome needed to support an aggressive osteosarcoma cell phenotype remains largely undefined. To link metastatic propensity to a hypoxia-induced proteotype, we compared the protein profiles of two isogenic canine OS cell lines, POS (low metastatic) and HMPOS (highly metastatic), under normoxia and hypoxia. Label-free shotgun proteomics was applied to comprehensively characterize the hypoxia-responsive proteome profiles in the OS cell phenotypes. Hypothesis-driven parallel reaction monitoring was used to validate the differential proteins observed in the shotgun data and to monitor proteins of which we expected to exhibit hypoxia responsiveness, but which were absent in the label-free shotgun data. We established a "distance" score (|z<sub>HMPOS</sub>&#x2009;-&#x2009;z<sub>POS</sub>|), and "sensitivity" score (|z<sub>Hypoxia</sub>&#x2009;-&#x2009;z<sub>Normoxia</sub>) to quantitatively evaluate the proteome shifts exhibited by OS cells in response to hypoxia. Evaluation of the sensitivity scores for the proteome shifts observed and principal component analysis of the hypoxia-responsive proteins indicated that both cell types acquire a proteome that supports a Warburg phenotype with enhanced cell migration and proliferation characteristics. Cell migration and glucose uptake assays combined with protein function inhibitor studies provided further support that hypoxia-driven adaption of pathways associated with glycolytic metabolism, collagen biosynthesis and remodeling, redox regulation and immunomodulatory proteins typify a proteotype associated with an aggressive cancer cell phenotype. Our findings further suggest that proteins involved in collagen remodeling and immune editing may warrant further evaluation as potential targets for anti-metastatic treatment strategies in osteosarcoma.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Osteosarcoma, Parallel reaction monitoring, Hypoxia, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Oregon State University 
Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University, US

### Submitter
Zifeng  Song

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia S. Maier
Department of Chemistry, Oregon State University, US


