### Accession
PXD002468

### Title
Proteomic analysis of salivary glands of female Aedes aegypti Linn

### Description
Aedes aegypti is a major vector for dengue, chikungunya and yellow fever. Though salivary gland plays a crucial role in transmission of virus and vector life cycle, there is no global and unbiased published report on salivary gland proteome of Ae. aegypti. In this study, we have carried out mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis of salivary gland from adult female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes.  By fractionating the proteins isolated from salivary gland on SDS-PAGE and analyzing the in-gel digested bands on high resolution mass spectrometry, we identified 1,205 proteins. This is by far the largest catalogue of salivary gland proteome of Ae. aegypti. These proteins were then assigned molecular functions and biological processes. Several immunity related pathways were found to be enriched in salivary gland. In addition, subset of proteins was predicted to secretory in nature and may play an important role during blood feeding. This study provides a useful resource of proteins expressed in salivary gland of Ae. aegypti female mosquitoes and will aid in biomedical research focused on development of transmission blocking vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary glands from 600 lab- reared Ae. aegypti female mosquitoes were dissected and homogenized in 200 µl of 0.5% SDS using ultrasonication. The extracted suspension was centrifuged for 20 min, 14000 rpm at 4˚C and supernatant was collected without disturbing the pellet. The extracted proteins were quantified according to Bicinchoninic acid assay. Approximately 200µg of proteins derived from salivary gland were resolved on SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie blue and the destained gel bands were processed for in-gel digestion as previously described. Briefly, the destained gel bands were subjected to reduction by 5mM of dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with 10 mM of iodoacetamide. In-gel digestion of proteins was carried out using trypsin at 37 ᴼC for 16 hours. Digested peptides were then extracted and stored at -80 ᴼC until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
High resolution MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein database of Ae. Aegypti using Sequest and Mascot search engines through Proteome discoverer software (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters used were as follows: a) Trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavages) b) Peptide mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; c) Fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da; d) Allowed fixed post translational modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The female Aedes aegypti mosquito is an important vector for several tropical and subtropical diseases such as dengue, chikungunya, and Zika and yellow fever. The disease viruses infect the mosquito and subsequently spread to the salivary glands after which the viruses can be transmitted to humans with probing or feeding by the mosquito. Omics systems sciences offer the opportunity to characterize vectors and can inform disease surveillance, vector control and development of innovative diagnostics, personalized medicines, vaccines, and insecticide targets. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we performed an analysis of the A. aegypti salivary gland proteome. The A. aegypti proteome resulted in acquisition of 83,836 spectra. Upon searches against the protein database of the A. aegypti, these spectra were assigned to 5417 unique peptides, belonging to 1208 proteins. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest set of proteins identified in the A. aegypti salivary gland. Of note, 29 proteins were involved in immunity-related pathways in salivary glands. A subset of these proteins is known to interact with disease viruses. Another 15 proteins with signal cleavage site were found to be secretory in nature, and thus possibly playing critical roles in blood meal ingestion. These findings provide a baseline to advance our understanding of vector-borne diseases and vector-pathogen interactions before virus transmission in global health, and might therefore enable future design and development of virus-blocking strategies and novel molecular targets in the mosquito vector A. aegypti.

### Keywords
Ltq-velos mass spectrometer, Hypothetical proteins, Saliva

### Affiliations
National Institute of Malaria Research, Field Station, Goa 403001, India
Dept of Community Medicine, Armed Forces Medical College, Pune

### Submitter
Rakhi Dhawan

### Lab Head
Dr Ashwani Kumar
National Institute of Malaria Research, Field Station, Goa 403001, India


