### Accession
PXD012564

### Title
Specific inhibition of splicing factor activity by decoy RNA oligonucleotides

### Description
Alternative splicing, a fundamental step in gene expression, is deregulated in many diseases. Splicing factors (SFs), which regulate this process, are up- or down regulated or mutated in several diseases including cancer. To date, there are no inhibitors that directly inhibit the activity of SFs. We designed decoy oligonucleotides, composed of several repeats of a RNA motif, which is recognized by a single SF. Here we show that decoy oligonucleotides targeting splicing factors RBFOX1/2, SRSF1 and PTBP1, can specifically bind to their respective SFs and inhibit their splicing and biological activities both in vitro and in vivo. These decoy oligonucleotides present a novel approach to specifically downregulate SF activity and have the potential to treat diseases where SFs are up-regulated, such as cancer.

### Sample Protocol
RBFOXi, PTBP1i and SF2i interacting proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion. The complexes were reduced with 1mM Dithiothreitol in 2 mM urea for 30minutes, followed by alkylation with 5mM Iodoacetamide in 2mM urea for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and digestion was terminated by adding 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 stage tips. Prior to MS analysis, peptides were eluted from the stage tips using 80% acetonitrile, vacuum-concentrated and diluted in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and subjected for MS measurements. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using nano-ultra high performance liquid chromatography (nano-UPLC; Easy-nLC1000; Thermo Scientific) coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted using 240-minutes gradient of water:acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.5.3.36) and the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched with reference to human UNIPROT database and a decoy database to determine false discovery rate (FDR). FDR thresholds were set to 0.01 for protein and peptide identification. All the statistical analyses of the MaxQuant output tables were performed with the Perseus software. For each analysis ProteinGroups file was filtered to include only proteins that were identified in at least two (out of three) replicates of the pull down. We then imputed missing values by replacing them with a constant value that matches the lowest intensity in the dataset (RBFOXi) or by creating a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 of the original (PTBPi). Different imputation strategies were selected due to the significantly higher purity of the RBFOXi samples. Significant interactors were examined by performing one-sided T-test for RBFOX1/2, PTBP1 against SCRM with permutation-based FDR cut-off of 0.05 and S0=0.1 65 and SRSF1 against SCRM  with FDR cut-off of 0.1 and S0=0.3. The MS raw files (related to the search result - combined-RBFOX,SRSF1) named as Fox refers to RBFOX, scr refers to scrambled and inhibitor refers to SRSF1. In the search result related to combined-PTBP1, SRSF1 files were not included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing, a fundamental step in gene expression, is deregulated in many diseases. Splicing factors (SFs), which regulate this process, are up- or down regulated or mutated in several diseases including cancer. To date, there are no inhibitors that directly inhibit the activity of SFs. We designed decoy oligonucleotides, composed of several repeats of a RNA motif, which is recognized by a single SF. Here we show that decoy oligonucleotides targeting splicing factors RBFOX1/2, SRSF1 and PTBP1, can specifically bind to their respective SFs and inhibit their splicing and biological activities both in vitro and in vivo. These decoy oligonucleotides present an approach to specifically downregulate SF activity in conditions where SFs are either up-regulated or hyperactive.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Alternative splicing, Rbfox2, Ptbp1, Srsf1, Decoy oligonucleotides, Splicing factors, Cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel


