### Accession
PXD019730

### Title
Snake venom color and LAAO: an evidence of long-term captive Crotalus durissus terrificus venom plasticity

### Description
The venom color variation of C. d. terrificus (Cdt) is attributed to the presence of the toxin LAAO. However, the driving mechanisms of such variability have not been studied and identified so far. During the venom milking routine at Butantan Institute, we have noticed that most of the venoms of captive Cdt specimens show a yellowish color, while most of the venoms of wild specimens are white. Here we describe a comparative analysis of long-term captive (LTC) and recently wild-caught (RWC) Cdt, focusing on the enzyme LAAO. For the identification of LAAO in individual venoms, four different approaches were employed: evaluation of the enzymatic activity, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting and ELISA. In addition, mass spectrometry analysis was performed using pooled samples. Although some variation among these methodologies was observed, it was clear the significative higher percentage of individual venom samples presenting LAAO in LTC venoms. LAAO was identified in 60-80% LTC specimens and in only 10-12% of RWC specimens. Furthermore, this enzyme accounts for 5.6% of total venom proteins of LTC Cdt pooled venom, while it corresponds to only 0.7% of RWC Cdt pooled venom. These findings strongly suggest that the captive maintenance increases the expression of LAAO in Cdt venom.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestions were performed with 100 μg of lyophilized venoms that were dissolved in 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were incubated with 0.2% of the surfactant Rapigest (Waters) at 80 ˚C for 15 min, followed by reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 °C, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were digested with porcine trypsin (Promega) at the 1:100 ratio (enzyme:substrate) and at 37 °C overnight. The reactions were stopped by addition of 10 µL of 5% TFA (final concentration of 0.5%) and incubation at 37 °C for 45 minutes. Samples were cleaned-up through reversed phase C18 handmade “StageTip” micro-columns. Briefly, the membrane was conditioned with methanol followed by washing with buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) through the tip. Samples were then diluted in buffer A (4% ACN e 0.1% TFA), loaded on the StageTip and peptides were eluted sequentially with a buffer C (40% ACN, 0.1% TFA). The eluates were dried by a vacuum centrifuge and peptide concentration was adjusted to approximately 2.5 µg/µL with formic acid 0,1%. Digested peptides were analyzed on a Synapt G2 (Waters) mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) with methodology adapted from previous works. Approximately 12.5 µg of the peptide mixture were injected into a trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100Å, 5 µm, 300 µm x 25 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µL/min for 5 minutes, using 0.1% formic acid (solution A). Peptides were eluted on a capillary analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 µm, 300 µm x 150 mm, Waters) using a gradient of 93% A (0.1% formic acid) and 7% B (99.9% ACN/0.1% formic acid) to 35% B over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 3 µL/min. Data were acquired in the data independent acquisition method MSE in the m/z range of 50-2000 and resolution mode. Peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) in which energies were alternated between 4 eV (low energy) and a collision energy ramp of 19-48 eV (high energy) using scan times of 1 second . The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. For lock mass correction, Glu-Fibrinopeptide B (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled for 0.5 s every 60 s. Samples were analyzed in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Quantification was performed in Label-Free mode in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The raw data were loaded in the software and a reference run for the replicates was automatically selected. Precursor ion retention times were processed for alignment, peak picking and normalized to the reference run with default parameters. The reference run was automatically selected for peak peaking and alignment of the peptide ions. The alignment tool compares all runs and selects the reference based on the greatest similarity to all other runs for the alignment. Precursor ion were processed for retention time alignment, peak picking and normalized to the reference run with default parameters. The database search in the UniprotKB/Swissprot were performed using reviewed Crotalus durissus terrificus sequences (36 sequences, downloaded on January 31st, 2020 from www.uniprot.org). The following parameters were used: automatic tolerances for the precursor and fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methioni¬ne, acetylation of N-terminus and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. The following criteria were considered for protein identification: a minimum of 3 ionic fragments per peptide, 7 ionic fragments per protein, 3 peptides per protein and a maximum false discovery rate of 4%. Protein identifications were only considered if the protein was identified in both replicates of each biological sample. Protein quantification was performed by the average intensity of the three most intense peptide ions (Hi3) and normalization was performed by the sum of intensities of all identified proteins in each run. Significances of the differently abundant proteins between groups were determined by the Student's t-test, considering p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The venom color variation of Crotalus durissus terrificus (Cdt) is attributed to the presence of the toxin L-amino acid oxidase (LAAO). During the venom milking routine of Instituto Butantan, we have noticed that most venoms of captive Cdt specimens show a yellowish color, while most venoms of wild specimens are white. Here we describe a comparative analysis of long-term captive (LTC) and recently wild-caught (RWC) Cdt, focusing on LAAO variation. For the identification of LAAO in individual venoms, four different approaches were employed: evaluation of the enzymatic activity, SDS-PAGE, Western blotting, and ELISA. In addition, mass spectrometry analysis was performed using pooled samples. Although some variation among these methodologies was observed, it was possible to notice that the presence of LAAO was significantly higher in the venom of LTC individuals. LAAO was identified in 60-80% LTC specimens and in only 10-12% of RWC specimens. Furthermore, this enzyme accounts for 5.6% of total venom proteins of LTC Cdt pooled venom, while it corresponds to only 0.7% of RWC Cdt pooled venom. These findings strongly suggest that captive maintenance increases the expression of LAAO in Cdt venom.

### Keywords
Snake venom; crotalus durissus terrificus; snake venom plasticity; intraspecific venom variability; captivity maintenance; l-amino acid oxidase.

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, UniversidadeFederal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, UniversidadeFederal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil


