### Accession
PXD012218

### Title
Human osteoclast derived from SAPHO PBMC

### Description
Inducing the PBMCs from SAPHO patients differentiation into osteoclasts while stimulating with serum exosomes. Compared with exosomes from normal volunteer, we found that about 2/3 of patients’ osteoclast differentiation were inhibited in response to exosomes from SAPHO patients. We present a TMT-labeled quantitative proteomics analysis of the osteoclasts which respond differently to different exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Osteoclast were harvest and lysised by 8 M Urea.Each TMT-labeled group of proteins (100 µg/µl) were treated with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 55°C, then were incubation with 25 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples digestion was completed by incubating with trypsin/Lys-C Mix at a protein/protease ratio of 25:1 for 12 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, the digested proteins were desalted, dried and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). TMT isobaric label reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl 99.9% acetonitrile) were separately used to label two technical sets of different groups of peptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions.TMT labeled in the following manner: OC unchanged by SAPHO exosomes-130, OC unchanged control-126, OC inhibited by SAPHO exosmes-131, OC inhibited control-129.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (Version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) was used to analysis MS/MS raw data against the reviewed Swiss-Prot human FASTA database of UniProt database.The criteria for searching were set as follows according to the software recommendations: A maximum number of two missed trypsin/Lys-C cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set as 10 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyzer) and 0.02 Da (all MS2 spectra), respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT-6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (methionine, M) was specified as the dynamic modification. The proteins and peptides identified within a 1% global FDR were selected for further analysis. Based on the representative MS/MS spectral data of identified peptides and the intensity of TMT precursor, relative protein intensities were quantified using the TMT-6plex method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sapho, Proteomics, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology


