### Accession
PXD018215

### Title
Human DDI2 is a ubiquitin-directed endo-protease

### Description
The Ddi1/DDI2 proteins are classified as ubiquitin shuttling factors and are implicated in a wide range of cellular functions. In addition to ubiquitin-binding and ubiquitin-like domains, these proteins contain a conserved region with similarity to retroviral proteases, but whether and how they function as proteases has remained unknown. Here we show that human DDI2 knock-out cells are sensitive to proteasome inhibition and accumulate high-molecular weight, ubiquitylated proteins that are poorly degraded by the proteasome. These proteins are targets for the protease activity of purified DDI2. Thus far, no evidence for DDI2 acting as a de-ubiquitylating enzyme has been uncovered, suggesting that it might cleave the ubiquitylated protein itself. In support of this idea, cleavage of transcription factor NRF1 is known to require DDI2 activity in vivo. We show that DDI2 is capable of cleaving NRF1 in vitro, but only when NRF1 protein is poly-ubiquitylated. Together, these data suggest that DDI2 represents the first example of a ubiquitin-directed endo-protease.

### Sample Protocol
For MS of ubiquitylated proteins associated with DDI2, proteins eluted from FLAG-DDI2DN (also by DDI2 cleavage) were subjected to MS. WT or DDI2 KO cells were labelled either heavy or light using SILAC. Cell extracts were subjected to affinity chromatography using immobilized, catalytically inactive DDI2 protein (FLAG-DDI2DN). Bound proteins were eluted with SDS-loading buffer or by proteolysis with DDI2. Forward and reverse SILAC mixtures were created by mixing the eluates and subjecting them to SDS-PAGE. Gel lanes were cut from the top to the bottom into 22 different molecular weight regions and prepared for MS analysis using an in-gel trypsin digestion protocol. MS data was acquired using an Ultimate3000 HPLC connected to Lumos-Tribrid Orbitrap operated in Data Dependent Acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Heavy to light protein ratios for each gel slice were determined using Maxquant software version 1.6.0.1 whereby a shift in heavy/light ratio indicates DDI2 dependent proteolysis. In a second round of searches using the same raw data files, the enzyme specificity setting was changed from tryptic to semi-tryptic to search for novel proteolytic cleavage sites. The UniProt canonical Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded November 2017) was used to search data.

### Publication Abstract
The Ddi1/DDI2 proteins are ubiquitin shuttling factors, implicated in a variety of cellular functions. In addition to ubiquitin-binding and ubiquitin-like domains, they contain a conserved region with similarity to retroviral proteases, but whether and how DDI2 functions as a protease has remained unknown. Here, we show that DDI2 knockout cells are sensitive to proteasome inhibition and accumulate high-molecular weight, ubiquitylated proteins that are poorly degraded by the proteasome. These proteins are targets for the protease activity of purified DDI2. No evidence for DDI2 acting as a de-ubiquitylating enzyme was uncovered, which could suggest that it cleaves the ubiquitylated protein itself. In support of this idea, cleavage of transcription factor NRF1 is known to require DDI2 activity in&#xa0;vivo. We show that DDI2 is indeed capable of cleaving NRF1 in&#xa0;vitro but only when NRF1 protein is highly poly-ubiquitylated. Together, these data suggest that DDI2 is a ubiquitin-directed endoprotease.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitin, Ddi2, Silac

### Affiliations
Proteomics Science and Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute United Kingdom
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Proteomics Science and Technology Platform The Francis Crick Institute United Kingdom


