### Accession
PXD010807

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of brain form Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common neurodegenerative disorder caused by neuronal loss which results in memory loss. Formation of neurofibrillary tangles composed of abnormal hyper phosphorylation of tau protein is one of the major pathological hallmarks for AD. Several neurodegenerative disorders including AD are associated with abnormal protein phosphorylation events.

### Sample Protocol
The 500 μg of protein from each brain samples were reduced at cysteine residues and alkylated with 5 mM DTT for 20 min at 60 °C and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature respectively. Protein digestion was carried out using lys-C (1:100) for 4 h. followed by trypsin (1:20) at 37°C for 12-16 h. Resulted peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 material. Peptides from the respective brain samples were labeled using TMT as per the manufacturer’s instruction (Catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides derived from control brain samples were labeled with TMT tags as 126, 127N, 128N and 128C and patient samples with TMT tag as 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131. After labeling reaction were quenched using with 5% hydroxylamine followed by sample were pooled together. These peptides were subjected to the IMAC enrichment. Briefly peptides were reconstituted in 1 Fe-IMAC solvent A (30% ACN, 0.07% (v/v) TFA) and loaded onto Fe-IMAC column (4 × 50 mm or 9 × 50 mm ProPac IMAC-10, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Agilent 1260 HPLC system. Charging of column was carried out as per manufacturer's instructions. After column charging sample was loaded (0.1 ml/min over 10 min), and unbound peptides were washed out with Fe-IMAC solvent A (0.3 ml/min over 16 min). Subsequent phosphopeptide elution was achieved with a linear gradient from 0% to 45% Fe-IMAC solvent B (0.5% (v/v) NH4OH) (0.2 ml/min over 60 min). After an increase to 100% solvent B and a 5-min holding step, the column was re-equilibrated with Fe-IMAC solvent A (0.5 ml/min over 30 min). Flow-through and phosphopeptide fraction was collected according to the UV signal (280 nm) and dried down. Enriched phosphopeptides were subjected to stage tip based SCX fractionation to generate 6 fractions. These enriched fractions were analyzed on mass spectrometer in replicates. 200 μg of each brain sample from each individual were used for the targeted analysis. Protein were reduced using 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA. Protein was double digested using LysC (1:00) for 4 h. followed by trypsin (1:20) for 12-14h. Resulting peptides were purified using sep-pak column C18 material and sample swere dried in a speed vac. These purified peptides enriched with batch IMAC method for phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 73, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using SEQUEST search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). The algorithms search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level as well as at 1% at protein level. Acquired PRM data was processed in the Skyline software package (23) . Peak integrations were calculated within the platform and reviewed manually; results were exported for additional data and statistical analysis. PRM data was assessed for (i) peak symmetry and baseline; (ii) consistency of retention times (iii) retention time consistency across transitions of the same analyte; and (iv) signal: noise ratio. To minimize run-to-run variability during assay screens, it has become common practice to normalize data acquired across sample batches using an External Standard (ES). Here, all data was adjusted for potentially confounding instrument performance variations using heavy haemoglobin protoeotypic peptide measurements.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder caused by neuronal loss that results in cognitive and functional impairment. Formation of neurofibrillary tangles composed of abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau protein is one of the major pathological hallmarks of AD. Importantly, several neurodegenerative disorders, including AD, are associated with abnormal protein phosphorylation events. However, little is known thus far on global protein phosphorylation changes in AD. We report a phosphoproteomics study examining the frontal gyrus of people with AD and age-matched cognitively normal subjects, using tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplexing technology along with immobilized metal affinity chromatography to enrich phosphopeptides. We identified 4631 phosphopeptides corresponding to 1821 proteins with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Of these, 504 phosphopeptides corresponding to 350 proteins were significantly altered in the AD brain: 389 phosphopeptides increased whereas 115 phosphopeptides decreased phosphorylation. We observed significant changes in phosphorylation of known as well as novel molecules. Using targeted parallel reaction monitoring experiments, we validated the phosphorylation of microtubule-associated protein tau and myristoylated alanine-rich protein kinase C substrate (MARCKS) in control and AD (Control&#x2009;=&#x2009;6, AD&#x2009;=&#x2009;11) brain samples. In conclusion, our study provides new evidence on alteration of RNA processing and splicing, neurogenesis and neuronal development, and metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (GRM5) calcium signaling pathways in the AD brain, and it thus offers new insights to accelerate diagnostics and therapeutics innovation in AD.

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease (ad), Tmt, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Akhilesh Pandey, M.D, Ph.D. 527 Miller Research Building 733 N. Broadway Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Akhilesh Pandey, M.D, Ph.D. 527 Miller Research Building 733 N. Broadway Baltimore, MD 21205


