### Accession
PXD021836

### Title
Chemical phosphoproteomics sheds new light on the targets and modes of action of AKT inhibitors

### Description
Due to its important roles in oncogenic signaling, AKT has been subject to extensive drug discovery efforts leading to small molecule inhibitors investigated in advanced clinical trials. To better understand how these drugs exert their therapeutic effects at the molecular level, we combined chemoproteomic target affinity profiling using kinobeads and phosphoproteomics to analyses the five clinical AKT inhibitors AZD5363 (Capivasertib), GSK2110183 (Afuresertib), GSK690693, Ipatasertib and MK-2206 in BT-474 breast cancer cells. Kinobead profiling identified between four and 29 nanomolar targets for these compounds and showed that AKT1 and AKT2 were the only common targets. Similarly, measuring the response of the phosphoproteome to the same inhibitors identified ~1,700 regulated phosphorylation sites, 276 of which were perturbed by all five compounds. This analysis expanded the known AKT signaling network by 119 phosphoproteins that may represent direct or indirect targets of AKT. Within this new network, 41 regulated phosphorylation sites harbor the AKT substrate motif and recombinant kinase assays validated 16 as novel AKT substrates. These included CEP170 and FAM83H, suggesting a regulatory function of AKT in mitosis and cytoskeleton organization. In addition, a specific phosphorylation pattern on the ULK1-FIP200-ATG13-VAPB complex was found to determine the active state of ULK1, leading to elevated autophagy in response to AKT inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Measurement of Kinobead eluates was performed using a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on a trap column in 0.1 % FA at 5 µl/min and separated on an analytical column using a 100 min linear gradient from 4-32 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A1 (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 400) in the orbitrap value of 1e6 or maximum injection time of 100ms. Up to 15 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; isolation width of 2 Th, maximum injection time of 100 ms, AGC value of 2e5) using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed in the Orbitrap (7,500 resolution). For TMT phosphoproteomics, measurement of phosphopeptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on a trap column in 0.1 % FA and separated on an analytical column using a 120 min gradient from 3-25% B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in 100% ACN) in solution A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in water). Full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 300-1700 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (AGC target value 4e5, maximal injection time 50 ms). Fragmentation was performed using CID at 40 % NCE and MS2 spectra acquisition (AGC target value 4e4, maximal injection time 60 ms) took place in the ion trap. MS3 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap over a m/z range of 100-500 at 60,000 resolution. Fragment ions were selected by multi-notch isolation, allowing a maximum of 10 notches and an ion trap isolation width of 2 Da, and fragmented by HCD at 55 % NCE (AGC target value 1e5, maximal injection time 120 ms). Measurement of peptides for generating a spectral library and the PRM assay was performed using a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For generating the spectral library, full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (AGC target value 4e5, maximal injection time 50 ms). Targeted MS2 scans were acquired over a range of 120-2000 m/z and fragmentation was performed using HCD at 30 % NCE (AGC target value 1e5, maximal injection time 50 ms) in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution by taking into account the mass list of phosphopeptides. For the PRM assay, full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 15,000 (AGC target value 4e5, maximal injection time 50 ms). Targeted MS2 scans were acquired over a range of 120-2000 m/z and fragmentation was performed using HCD at 30 % NCE (AGC target value 2e5, maximal injection time 100 ms) in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution by taking into account the final mass list of phosphopeptides. Measurement of peptides deriving from the in vitro kinase assay was performed using a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted on a trap column in 0.1 % FA and separated on an analytical using a 51 min two-step gradient from 4-15-27 % B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in 100% ACN) in solution A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in water). The Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. Full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (AGC target value 5e4, maximal injection time 50 ms). Fragmentation was performed using HCD at 30 % NCE (AGC target value 5e4, maximal injection time 120 ms) in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (1) (version 1.5.6.5). If not stated otherwise,the MS data was searched against all human canonical and isoform protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (42,095 entries, downloaded 14.11.2016) using the embedded search engine Andromeda (2). Kinome Carbamidomethylated cysteine was a fixed modification; and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Label-free quantification (3) and data matching were enabled within MaxQuant. Protein intensities were normalized to the respective DMSO control. IC50 and EC50 values were deduced by a four-parameter log-logistic regression using an internal pipeline that utilizes the ‘drc’ (4) package in R. TMT6 phosphoproteome Carbamidomethylated cysteine was a fixed modification; and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. MS3-based TMT quantification was enabled, taking TMT correction factors as supplied by the manufacturer into account. Within one replicate, the sum of phosphorylation site intensities per TMT channel were normalized to the average sum of intensities of all TMT channels. Subsequently, the average intensities for each phosphorylation site per replicate was normalized to the average intensity of the same phosphorylation site across all replicates. Data was further analyzed by Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) (6). In vitro kinase assay Peptide identification and quantification was performed by searching the MS data against a database containing only sequences of the screened peptides. Phosphorylation of serine and threonine, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. PRM assay In order to obtain the spectral library, respective raw files were searched in MaxQuant with carbamidomethylated cysteine as a fixed modification; and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The PRM raw data files were imported into the Skyline software package (version 4.1.0.11714) (7) and were further analyzed. 1. Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature biotechnology. 2008;26:1367. 2. Cox J, Neuhauser N, Michalski A, Scheltema RA, Olsen JV, Mann M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 2011;10(4):1794-805. 3. Cox J, Hein MY, Luber CA, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;13(9):2513-26. 4. Ritz C, Baty F, Streibig JC, Gerhard D. Dose-Response Analysis Using R. PLoS One. 2015;10(12):e0146021. 5. Medard G, Pachl F, Ruprecht B, Klaeger S, Heinzlmeir S, Helm D, et al. Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling. J Proteome Res. 2015;14(3):1574-86. 6. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Meth. 2016;13(9):731-40. 7. MacLean B, Tomazela DM, Shulman N, Chambers M, Finney GL, Frewen B, et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England). 2010;26(7):966-8.

### Publication Abstract
Due to its important roles in oncogenic signaling, AKT has been subjected to extensive drug discovery efforts leading to small molecule inhibitors investigated in advanced clinical trials. To better understand how these drugs exert their therapeutic effects at the molecular level, we combined chemoproteomic target affinity profiling using kinobeads and phosphoproteomics to analyze the five clinical AKT inhibitors AZD5363 (Capivasertib), GSK2110183 (Afuresertib), GSK690693, Ipatasertib, and MK-2206 in BT-474 breast cancer cells. Kinobead profiling identified between four and 29 nM targets for these compounds and showed that AKT1 and AKT2 were the only common targets. Similarly, measuring the response of the phosphoproteome to the same inhibitors identified &#x223c;1700 regulated phosphorylation sites, 276 of which were perturbed by all five compounds. This analysis expanded the known AKT signaling network by 119 phosphoproteins that may represent direct or indirect targets of AKT. Within this new network, 41 regulated phosphorylation sites harbor the AKT substrate motif, and recombinant kinase assays validated 16 as novel AKT substrates. These included CEP170 and FAM83H, suggesting a regulatory function of AKT in mitosis and cytoskeleton organization. In addition, a specific phosphorylation pattern on the ULK1-FIP200-ATG13-VAPB complex was found to determine the active state of ULK1, leading to elevated autophagy in response to AKT inhibition.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Akt inhibitor, Kinobeads

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany
TU Munich, Proteomics and Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Svenja Wiechmann

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium Emil Erlenmeyer Forum 5 85354 Freising Germany


