### Accession
PXD023603

### Title
Proteome analysis of aged mouse oocytes

### Description
The proteome changes were quantified in aged mouse oocytes using TMT 6-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes proteins were reduced, and trypsin was digested, and labeled by TMT 6-plex labeling reagents. Peptides from two replicates of three stages of oocytes were labelled with respective isobaric tags and mixed together. Two labelling experiments were performed for the four replicates of oocytes at each stage.  The TMT 6-Plex labeled peptide mixtures were subjected to fractionation by high-pH reverse phase column using an XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (300μm×150mm, 1.7μm, Waters) with an M-class HPLC system (Waters), 30 fractions were collected and then dried with a SpeedVac concentrator.  All fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX) and an analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database using MaxQuant software (1.2.2.5). FDR cut-offs were set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Enzyme specificity was considered full cleavage by trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine fixed modifications, with TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications for TMT data. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term).

### Publication Abstract
Aging has many effects on the female reproductive system, among which decreased oocyte quality and impaired embryo developmental potential are the most important factors affecting female fertility. However, the mechanisms underlying oocyte aging are not yet fully understood. Here, we selected normal reproductively aging female mice and constructed a protein expression profile of metaphase II (MII) oocytes from three age groups. A total of 187 differentially expressed (DE) proteins were identified, and bioinformatics analyses showed that these DE proteins were highly enriched in RNA splicing. Next, RNA-seq was performed on 2-cell embryos from these three age groups, and splicing analysis showed that a large number of splicing events and genes were discovered at this stage. Differentially spliced genes (DSGs) in the two reproductively aging groups versus the younger group were enriched in biological processes related to DNA damage repair/response. Binding motif analysis suggested that PUF60&#xa0;might be one of the core splicing factors causing a decline in DNA repair capacity in the subsequent development of oocytes from reproductively aging mice, and changing the splicing pattern of its potential downstream DSG Cdk9 could partially mimic phenotypes in the reproductively aging groups. Taken together, our study suggested that the abnormal expression of splicing regulation proteins in aged MII oocytes would affect the splicing of nascent RNA after zygotic genome activation in 2-cell embryos, leading to the production of abnormally spliced transcripts of some key genes associated with DNA damage repair/response, thus affecting the developmental potential of aged oocytes.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Mouse, Aging, Tmt, Oocyte

### Affiliations
18351998967
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
yao ping

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China


