### Accession
PXD020137

### Title
Naturally processed flucloxacillin haptenated HLA ligands

### Description
This study has demonstrated that natural flucloxacillin haptenated HLA-B*57:01 ligands arepresented by antigen presenting cells through multiple pathways. Identification of such epitopes will help to define the chemical signals responsible for drug-induced immunological disease.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-bound peptides from pellets of 1x109 cells were isolated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described previously (Illing et al. 2012). Briefly, cell pellets were lysed in 0.5% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and protease inhibitors (complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche). The lysate was cleared by ultracentrifugation (180,000 x g) and MHC class I complexes captured through solid-phase-bound W6/32 antibody. Bound complexes were eluted in 10% acetic acid. The mixture of MHC-bound peptides, MHC heavy chain and β2-microglobulin was fractionated using by reversed phase-HPLC over a 100 x 4.6 mm monolithic C18 column (Chromolith, Merck) using mobile phases containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (B). Peptide containing HPLC fractions were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge (Speedvac, Eppendorf) at 30°C. C1R-B*57:01 cells treated with 1.5 mM flucloxacillin for 48 hours were pelleted and lysed using the methods described for the detection of flucloxacillin modified proteins by Western blotting. Cell lysates were cleared using centrifugation, reduced (10 mM DTT, room temperature for 20 minutes) and alkylated (55 mM IAA, room temperature in the dark, for 20 minutes). Digestion was performed using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Samples were purified using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and dried in a centrifugal concentrator (Eppendorf speedvac).

### Data Protocol
Peaks studo was used to charactrize peptides, which were also manually identified using characteristic fragment ions of m/z at 160.04, 295.03, and 454.06; diagnostic ions indicative of the presence of a covalently linked flucloxacillin molecule. Manual annotation of MS/MS spectra was performed to identify the peptides and subsequent NCBI Blast searches were used to identify the native protein sources. For HLA-B*57:01 peptide repertoire analysis, identifications to the target database at a 2% peptide spectrum match FDR were exported from PEAKS Studio for further processing. Peptides mapping to the contaminant database were removed, as were peptides previously isolated from CIR parental cells (lacking HLA-B*57:01 expression) via similar procedures (Schittenhelm et al. 2014) and list provided by Shutao Mei). The cell treatment and HLA isolation followed by ligand analysis process was performed 4 times for flucloxacillin treated cells, and once for untreated cells. An additional 3 untreated CIR.B*57:01 data sets were generated via searching 3 previously published data sets (Thomson et al. 2020) publicly available in the PRIDE Archive PXD015398 (Perez-Riverol et al. 2019) as above using PEAKS 8.5. Peptide sequence lists derived from each treatment group were combined, and duplicated sequences were removed. Processed peptide sequences were used for both length distribution and amino acid motif analysis. Seq2logo was used to generate sequence motifs using default settings (Thomsen and Nielsen 2012). Predicted binding affinities were calculated by NetMHC4.0 (Andreatta and Nielsen 2016; Nielsen et al. 2003).

### Publication Abstract
Flucloxacillin is a &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotic associated with a high incidence of drug-induced liver reactions. Although expression of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B*57:01 increases susceptibility, little is known of the pathological mechanisms involved in the induction of the clinical phenotype. Irreversible protein modification is suspected to drive the reaction through the modification of peptides that are presented by the risk allele. In this study, the binding of flucloxacillin to immune cells was characterized and the nature of the peptides presented by HLA-B*57:01 was analyzed using mass spectrometric-based immunopeptidomics methods. Flucloxacillin modification of multiple proteins was observed, providing a potential source of neoantigens for HLA presentation. Of the peptides eluted from flucloxacillin-treated C1R-B*57:01 cells, 6 putative peptides were annotated as flucloxacillin-modified HLA-B*57:01 peptide ligands (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020137). To conclude, we have characterized naturally processed drug-haptenated HLA ligands presented on the surface of antigen presenting cells that may drive drug-specific CD8+ T-cell responses.

### Keywords
Dili, Hla-b*57:01, Flucloxacillin, Drug hypersensitivity

### Affiliations
The University of Liverpool

### Submitter
James Waddington

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoli Meng
The University of Liverpool


