### Accession
PXD005435

### Title
Bottlenose Dolphin Plasma Proteome

### Description
This study was designed to characterize and evaluate the proteome in plasma samples collected before and after a public swim interaction involving four male (2 to 6 y) aquarium-based bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus). Blood samples were collected from the tail flukes appoximately 15 min before (n=4 samples) and 15 min after (n=4 samples) the first swim interaction of the day, which was reinforced by a regularly scheduled feeding regimen. Samples were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as well as conventional clinical biochemistry analysis. Mass spectra data were used to search the NCBI database restricted to Tursiops truncatus which resulted in the identification of 196 unique proteins with a broad range of functional roles based on manual GO analysis. Differential regulation of proteins was based on log2 mean fold change (FC) and statistical probability such that the abundance of lysozyme (FC -1.2036; P<0.058) an immune-related protein and flavin reductase (FC -0.9702; P<0.004) a metabolic-related protein were highest before compared to after the swim interaction. Both proteins decreased by 58 and 52%, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction involved 200 µL of plasma combined with 1000 µL of cold acetone (-20°C) followed by vortex for 30 s and centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 min. Thereafter, samples were incubated for 3 h and centrifuged again as previously indicated. Supernatants were discarded and protein extracts were air dried at room temperature and frozen at -80°C until analysis. Protein extracts were re-solubilized in SDS buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris / HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT – dithiothreitol) boiled at 95°C for 5 min and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 10 min setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 65%. Protein concentration was estimated using the Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland). For each of the 8 extracts, 50 µg of proteins were digested on-filter using an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol [10]. Briefly, proteins were diluted in 200 µL of UT buffer (Urea 8M in 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2), loaded on Ultracel 3000 MWCO centrifugal unit (Amicon Ultra, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 min. Reduced proteins were alkylated by incubation at room temperature with 100 µL iodoacetamide 0.05M in UT buffer for 5 min followed by three, 100 µL washing steps with UT buffer and three, 100 µL washing steps with NaCl 0.5M. On-filter digestion was done using 120 µL of 0.05 Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) containing trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Digestion was performed overnight in a wet chamber at room temperature. After elution, the solutions containing peptides were acidified to a final 0.1% TFA and 3% acetonitirile concentration. For each solution, peptides were desalted using self-packed C18 Stage-Tips, dried, and re-solubilized in 30 µL of 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Two-channel solvent composition was with 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each of the peptide solutions, 2 μL was loaded on a self-made column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by a gradient from 2 to 35% B in 80 min, 47% B in 4 min, and 98% B in 4 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300 to 1700 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3x106 followed by Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 3.5x104 using normalized collision energy of 25 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5x104 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 8.3x103 were selected for MS/MS (2% underfill ratio). Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. Samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw LC-MS/MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Each file was kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Mass spectra data were searched against a forward National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Tursiops truncatus database (release date 2016-01-15), concatenated to common protein contaminants and a reversed decoyed database to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and maximum of two missed-cleavages. Precursor and fragment tolerances were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, for the initial search. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01(1%) for peptides and 0.05 (5%) for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled and a 2 min window for match between runs was applied with the re-quantify option selected. For protein abundance, intensities as expressed in the protein groups file were used, which corresponded to the sum of the precursor intensities of all identified peptides for the respective protein groups. Only quantifiable proteins defined as protein groups showing ≥2 razor peptides were considered for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tursiops, Plasma, Dolphin, Bottlenose

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics Center of Zurich, Switzerland
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Blake Miller

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Nanni
Functional Genomics Center of Zurich, Switzerland


