### Accession
PXD016447

### Title
In-depth proteome profiling of kidney in 5/6 Nephrectomy rat model

### Description
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is characterized by a slow and gradual loss of kidney function, with glomerular filtration loss over months or years, inevitably leading to end-stage renal disease. The renal failure resulting from this irreversible process derives from fibrotic lesions of each compartment of the kidney; glomerulosclerosis, vascular sclerosis, and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Here, we aimed to specify CKD-related injury markers through proteomics analysis in animal kidney tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney tissue samples were prepared using the FASP method modified for frozen tissue preparation. First, frozen tissue samples were homogenized with lysis buffer (4% SDS, 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). The protein concentration was determined using a reducing agent-compatible BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). To remove contaminants, we performed acetone precipitation at −20 C with 200 g of the lysate. The protein pellet was dissolved in 50 l of reduction buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, and 0.1 M Tris-Cl, pH 7.4) and heated at 95 C for 15 min. Reduced proteins were loaded onto a 30 K spin filter (Millipore). Buffer was exchanged with UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-Cl, pH 8.5) by centrifugation. After triple UA exchange, the reduced cysteines were alkylated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. We exchanged UA buffer to 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100 enzyme to substrate ratio) at 37 °C for 16 hr.Then, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and an additional elution step was subsequently performed with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 M NaCl. All samples were desalted and fractionated using homemade C18-SDB-StageTip.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive HF-X Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS raw files for rat kidney tissue were analyzed in a Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) environment. Mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 20 ppm for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A minimal peptide length of six amino acids was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the RAT UniProt sequence database with 248 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. The peptide identifications across different LC-MS runs and the spectral library were matched by enabling the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Urinary proteomics studies have primarily focused on identifying markers of chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression. Here, we aimed to determine urinary markers of CKD renal parenchymal injury through proteomics analysis in animal kidney tissues and cells and in the urine of patients with CKD. Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis based on liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on urine samples obtained from 6 normal controls and 9, 11, and 10 patients with CKD stages 1, 3, and 5, respectively, and on kidney tissue samples from a rat CKD model by 5/6 nephrectomy. Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics analysis was performed for glomerular endothelial cells (GECs) and proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs) before and after inducing 24-h hypoxia injury. Upon hierarchical clustering, out of 858 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the urine of CKD patients, the levels of 416 decreased and 403 increased sequentially according to the disease stage, respectively. Among 2965 DEPs across 5/6 nephrectomized and sham-operated rat kidney tissues, 86 DEPs showed same expression patterns in the urine and kidney tissue. After cross-validation with two external animal proteome data sets, 38 DEPs were organized; only ten DEPs, including serotransferrin, gelsolin, poly ADP-ribose polymerase 1, neuroblast differentiation-associated protein AHNAK, microtubule-associated protein 4, galectin-1, protein S, thymosin beta-4, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate, and vimentin, were finalized by screening human GECs and PTECs data. Among these ten potential candidates for universal CKD marker, validation analyses for protein S and galectin-1 were conducted. Galectin-1 was observed to have a significant inverse correlation with renal function as well as higher expression in glomerulus with chronic injury than protein S. This constitutes the first multisample proteomics study for identifying key renal-expressed proteins associated with CKD progression. The discovered proteins represent potential markers of chronic renal cell and tissue damage and candidate contributors to CKD pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Chronic renal failure, Rat, Lc-msms, Kidney

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


