### Accession
PXD016552

### Title
Monosomes actively translate synaptic mRNAs in neuronal processes

### Description
In order to deal with their huge volume and complex morphology, neurons localize mRNAs and ribosomes near synapses to produce proteins locally. A relative paucity of polyribosomes (considered the active sites of translation) detected in electron micrographs of neuronal processes (axons and dendrites), however, has suggested a rather limited capacity for local protein synthesis. Polysome profiling together with ribosome footprinting of microdissected synaptic regions revealed that a surprisingly high number of dendritic and/or axonal transcripts were predominantly associated with monosomes (single ribosomes). Contrary to prevailing views, the neuronal monosomes were in the process of active protein synthesis (e.g. they exhibited elongation). Most mRNAs showed a similar translational status in the somata and neuropil, but some transcripts exhibited differential ribosome occupancy in the compartments. Strikingly, monosome-preferring transcripts often encoded high-abundance synaptic proteins. These data suggest a significant contribution of monosome translation to the maintenance of the local neuronal proteome. This mode of translation can presumably solve some of restricted space issues (given the large size of polysomes) and also increase the diversity of proteins made from a limited number of ribosomes available in dendrites and axons.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal tissue collection and microdissection After sacrifice, the heads of four-week-old male rats (for polysome / ribosome profiling experiments) or eight-week-old male mice (for translating ribosome immunoprecipitation -RiboTag- experiments) were immediately immersed in liquid nitrogen for 6sec to cool down the brains. The brains were removed, the hippocampi were rapidly dissected on an ice-cooled disk. Hippocampal slices (500 μm) were prepared in a drop of ice-cold RNase-free PBS containing 100 ug/ml cycloheximide using a manual tissue slicer (Stoelting). Each slice was immediately passed to a second experimenter who microdissected the CA1 somatic and the neuropil layer at 0-4°C on a cold-plate (TCP50, Thermoelectrics) in a drop of ice-cold RNase-free PBS containing 100 ug/ml cycloheximide. To ensure the purity of the microdissected neuropil, only slices located in the middle portion of the dorso-ventral axis of the hippocampus were used (~ 6 slices per hippocampus). Somata and neuropil sections were immediately snap-frozen after their dissection und kept at -80°C until lysis. Three replicates of rat neuropil were microdissected as described above. Tissue pieces were snap-frozen and kept at -80°C until lysis. Tissue pieces were lysed in 4% Chaps, 8M Urea, 0.2M Tris HCl, 1M NaCl. All samples were digested, reduced and alkylated based on a previously published FASP protocol (97). Dried peptide pellets were stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteolytic digests were analysed via Nano-LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). After dissolving the dried peptides in 20 ul 0.1% FA in 5% acetonitrile, samples were separated using an Acclaim pepmap C18 column (50 cm x 75 um, particle size 2 um) after trapping on an Acclaim pepmap C18 pre-column (2 cm x 75 um, particle size 3 um). Trapping was performed for 6min with a flow rate of 6μl/min using a loading buffer (98/2 water/acetonitrile with 0.05% Triflouroacetic acid). Peptides were then eluted and separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 300nl/min with the following gradient: from 4 to 33% B in 150 min, 33 to 48% B in 20 min, 48 to 90% B in 1 min, and constant 90% for 13 min (buffer A: 0.1% FA in water, buffer B 0.1% FA in 80/20 acetonitrile/water). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Honeywell/ Riedel del Häen. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Nano Flex ESI260 source and analysed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer in data-dependent-mode. Survey scans were acquired over the mass range of 350-1400 m/z in the Orbitrap (maximum injection time 50s, AGC, automatic gain control, fixed at 2x10E5 and R = 120K) and sequence information was acquired by a “Top-Speed” method with a fixed cycle time of 2s for the survey and following MS/MS-scans. MS/MS-scans were performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 5 with an intensity minimum of 5x10E3. Picked precursors were isolated in the quadrupole at 1.4 Da and fragmented using HCD at NCE (normalized collision energy) = 30%. For MS/MS an AGC of 10E4 and a maximum injection time of 300 sec was used. Resulting fragments were detected in the Ion Trap using the rapid scan mode. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. All samples were measured in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the Max Quant software version 1.6.2.2 (100). MS/MS- spectra were searched against the UniprotKB-database from Rattus norvegicus (36080 entries, downloaded on 21/12/2017) and additionally against a database containing common mass spec contaminations using the probabilistic based algorithm from the Andromeda search engine. The set of stringent constraints allowed only peptides with full tryptic specificity allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline and up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The first search was performed with 20 ppm precursor tolerance for mass recalibration and the main search mass tolerance was set to 4.5ppm. The fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da and the “match between runs” option was enabled. Peptides and proteins were identified based on a 1% FDR with the use of a decoy strategy and only those protein groups which were identified with at least 1 unique peptide were used for further analysis. The Perseus package v1.6.2.2 (102) was used for further bioinformatics analysis of the resulting expression data from MaxQuant. Before further processing, decoy and contaminant database hits as well as proteins only identified using modified peptides (“identified by site”) were excluded. Additionally, only those protein groups which were identified in at least 2 out of 3 technical replicates and in 2 out of 3 biological replicates were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
To accommodate their complex morphology, neurons localize messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and ribosomes near synapses to produce proteins locally. However, a relative paucity of polysomes (considered the active sites of translation) detected in electron micrographs of neuronal processes has suggested a limited capacity for local protein synthesis. In this study, we used polysome profiling together with ribosome footprinting of microdissected rodent synaptic regions to reveal a surprisingly high number of dendritic and/or axonal transcripts preferentially associated with monosomes (single ribosomes). Furthermore, the neuronal monosomes were in the process of active protein synthesis. Most mRNAs showed a similar translational status in the cell bodies and neurites, but some transcripts exhibited differential ribosome occupancy in the compartments. Monosome-preferring transcripts often encoded high-abundance synaptic proteins. Thus, monosome translation contributes to the local neuronal proteome.

### Keywords
Protein synthesis, Monosomes, Mrna, Neuronal processes

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPIs for Brain Research and Biophysics


