### Accession
PXD007770

### Title
Effect of Sec61 inhibitor mycolactone on the proteome of the MED17.11 neuronal cell line

### Description
Mycolactone is a mycobacteria-derived macrolide that blocks the biogenesis of a large array of secreted and transmembrane proteins through potent inhibition of the Sec61 translocon. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to delineate the direct and indirect effects of mycolactone-mediated Sec61 blockade on mouse on MED17.11 cells, as a model of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) sensory neurons, in resting and LPS-stimulated conditions. This analysis completes two previously reported ones, which investigated the effects of mycolactone on the proteome of the mouse MutuDC dendritic cells (Project PXD006103) and human Jurkat T cells (Project PXD002971).

### Sample Protocol
MED17.11 cells (107 cells, n=3) were pre-treated with 25 nM mycolactone or DMSO for 30minutes, then 10nM LPS was added to activated conditions. Cells in each condition were then harvested and washed twice with PBS. The resulting cell pellets were re-suspended in 4 ml lysis buffer (1 mg/ml amphipol A8-35 (Anatrace) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 ) and further processed as described in (20). Briefly, lysates were sonicated (three bursts of 15 seconds at an amplitude of 20%) and centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000 x g at 4˚C to remove insoluble material. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and 1 ml of each sample containing approximately 1 mg of total protein was used to continue the protocol. Proteins in each sample were reduced by addition of 20 mM DTT and incubation for 30 min at 55˚C, and then alkylated by addition of 40 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were acidified with 5% formic acid (FA) to pH 3.0 and precipitated proteins and amphipol were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 x g at room temperature. The resulting protein pellet was washed once with 500 µl water and redissolved in 1 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Proteins were digested with 4 µg LysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4h at 37°C and then digested with 4 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/250, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH 3.0 and samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove amphipol. Purified peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying, re-dissolved in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) and 3 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A (on a reverse-phase column produced in-house, 100 µm I.D. x 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) followed by loading the sample on a 40 cm column packed in the needle (produced in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in linear gradients from 2% to 30% in 100 min, then from 30% to 56% in 40 min and finally from 56% to 99% in 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Thomson) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (21) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database version of January 2016, www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, then quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (22). A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.4.1) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. The statistical analysis to determine differentially expressed proteins was performed in R software (version 3.3.2) using the limma package. P values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method to obtain a False Discovery Rate (FDR). Proteins with a FDR ≤ 0,1 and a log2 mycolactone/control LFQ intensity fold change (log2 FC) > 0.5 were considered upregulated by mycolactone, while proteins with a FDR ≤ 0.1 and a log2 FC < -0.5 were considered downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Mycolactone is a bacteria-derived macrolide that blocks the biogenesis of a large array of secretory and integral transmembrane proteins (TMP) through potent inhibition of the Sec61 translocon. Here, we used quantitative proteomics to delineate the direct and indirect effects of mycolactone-mediated Sec61 blockade in living cells. In T lymphocytes, dendritic cells and sensory neurons, Sec61 substrates downregulated by mycolactone were in order of incidence: secretory proteins (with a signal peptide but no transmembrane domain), TMPs with a signal peptide (Type I) and TMPs without signal peptide and a cytosolic N terminus (Type II). TMPs without a signal peptide and the opposite N terminus topology (Type III) were refractory to mycolactone inhibition. This rule applied comparably to single- and multi-pass TMPs, and extended to exogenous viral proteins. Parallel to its broad-spectrum inhibition of Sec61-mediated protein translocation, mycolactone rapidly induced cytosolic chaperones Hsp70/Hsp90. Moreover, it activated an atypical endoplasmic reticulum stress response, differing from conventional unfolded protein response by the down-regulation of Bip. In addition to refining our mechanistic understanding of Sec61 inhibition by mycolactone, our findings thus reveal that Sec61 blockade induces proteostatic stress in the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Keywords
Mycolactone, Sensory neurons, Sec61

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Immunobiology of Infection Unit,Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France

### Submitter
Jean-David Morel

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Demangel
Immunobiology of Infection Unit,Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France


