### Accession
PXD026749

### Title
SILAC APMS analysis of NHP2 / Gar1 interactome in HEK-293 cells

### Description
The conserved box H/ACA RNPs consist of one box H/ACA RNA and 4 core proteins: Dyskerin, NHP2, NOP10 and GAR1. The assembly of the H/ACA RNPs is a stepwise process which requires several assembly factors: SHQ1, NAF1, the Survival of Motor Neuron complex SMN, and the R2TP complex. It implicates the co-transcriptional assembly of a pre-particle containing the nascent RNAs, Dyskerin, NOP10, NHP2 and NAF1. The latest keeps the H/ACA RNP inactive, and needs to be replaced by GAR1 to produce mature and functional H/ACA RNPs in the Cajal bodies. In this study, we explore in details the molecular mechanism leading to the assembly of mature box H/ACA RNPs. We performed extensive analysis of GAR1, NHP21 and NAF interactomes by quantitative stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture proteomic analyses (SILAC), and revealed new assembly intermediates: 1) an early protein-only pre-H/ACA RNP complex containing the core proteins DKC1, NOP10 and NHP2, and the assembly factors SHQ1 and NAF1, and 2) a late assembly intermediates containing the RNA, the core proteins and NAF1. We showed that the SMN complex is associated with late forming H/ACA pre-RNP complexes containing GAR1. Moreover, our study identifies new proteins highly and specifically associated with GAR1, NHP2 and NAF1, reflecting their importance in box H/ACA assembly or function, such as the PRMT1 and PRMT5 arginine methylases. MS analysis of purified GAR1 revealed new sites of arginine methylations in the two GAR domains of GAR1, and showed that most of these methylated arginines exist both in mono-methylated and di-methylated forms in cells. By different methods, we showed that unmethylated GAR1 is correctly incorporated in H/ACA RNPs. Therefore, GAR1 methylation should be important for its function.

### Sample Protocol
Six 15-cm diameter plates per condition of Flp-In T-REx 293 cells inductibly expressing the GFP-tagged proteins were grown for 15 days in each isotopically labeled media (CIL/Eurisotop), to ensure complete incorporation of isotopically L-Lysine-2HCl / L-Arginine-HCl light label (K0R0 or L condition corresponding to the control condition), L-Lysine-2HCl (2H4, 96–98%)/L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 99%) semi-heavy label (K4R6 or M condition) or L-Lysine-2HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N2, 99%)/L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N4, 99%) heavy label (K8R10 or H condition) (percentages represent the isotopic purity of the labeled amino acids). Control Flp-In T-REx 293 cells that did not express the GFP fusion were cultured in light R0K0 SILAC condition.. After 3 h of induction of the expression of the GFP-tagged protein by adding 1 mg/ml Doxycyclin in the culture media, cells were rinsed with PBS, trypsinized and cryogrinded and powder was resuspended in HNT lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche)). Extracts were incubated 20 min at 4 °C and clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 g. For all IP experiments, extracts were pre-cleared by incubation with Protein G Sepharose beads (GE healthcare) for 1 h at 4 °C. Each extract was then incubated with 50 µl of GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) for 1.5 h at 4 °C, washed five times with HNT buffer, and beads from the different isotopic conditions were finally pooled. Bound proteins were eluted by adding 1% SDS to the beads and boiling for 10 min.  Reduction and alkylation were performed on the eluate with DTT (10 mM) for 2 min at 95 °C followed by iodoacetamide treatment (50 mM) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and in gel-digested with trypsin in 20 mM NH4HCO3 (Trypsin Gold, Promega V5280). Ten slices were cut, and extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution before being analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to Fourier transform tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-FT-MS/MS) using a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap precolumn (0.3 mm 10 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient consisting of 2–40% buffer B (B=99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 3–33 min) and 40–80% B (33–34 min) was used to separate peptides at 300 nL/min from a Pepmap capillary reversed-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired using a top-20 collision-induced dissociation (CID) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The Orbitrap was programmed to perform a FT 400–1,400 Th mass scan (60,000 resolution) with the top 20 ions in intensity selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) datadependent acquisition (DDA) MS/MS in the LTQ. FT spectra were internally calibrated using a single lock mass (445.1200 Th). Target ion numbers were 500,000 for FT full scan on the Orbitrap and 10,000 MSn on the LTQ. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed using the program MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8;http://www. maxquant.org/). Few parameters were not default: database: human reference proteome set (canonical isoforms downloaded from Expasy on May 29th 2017); enzyme specificity trypsin/P; variable modifications: methionine oxidation and protein N-Acetylation; Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation; MS/ MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; False Discovery Rate (FDR): 1%. In addition to the FDR, proteins were considered to be identified if they had at least two peptides including one unique/Razor peptide and they were considered quantified if they had at least one quantified SILAC pairs. Proteins labeled as REV (non-real proteins from the reverse database) and CONT (contaminants) were automatically discarded, as well as proteins that did not show any SILAC M/L, H/L and H/M ratio. B Significance calculation were done with the software Perseus v1.4.2 to highlight statistically significant protein ratios (pvalue < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The conserved H/ACA RNPs consist of one H/ACA RNA and 4 core proteins: dyskerin, NHP2, NOP10, and GAR1. Its assembly requires several assembly factors. A pre-particle containing the nascent RNAs, dyskerin, NOP10, NHP2&#xa0;and NAF1 is assembled co-transcriptionally. NAF1 is later replaced by GAR1 to form mature RNPs. In this study, we explore the mechanism leading to the assembly of H/ACA RNPs. We performed the analysis of GAR1, NHP2, SHQ1&#xa0;and NAF1 proteomes by quantitative SILAC proteomic, and analyzed purified complexes containing these proteins by sedimentation on glycerol gradient. We propose the formation of several distinct intermediate complexes during H/ACA RNP assembly, notably the formation of early protein-only complexes containing at least the core proteins dyskerin, NOP10, and NHP2, and the assembly factors SHQ1 and NAF1. We also identified new proteins associated with GAR1, NHP2, SHQ1&#xa0;and NAF1, which can be important for box H/ACA assembly or function. Moreover, even though GAR1 is regulated by methylations, the nature, localization, and functions of these methylations are not well known. Our MS analysis of purified GAR1 revealed new sites of arginine methylations. Additionally, we showed that unmethylated GAR1 is correctly incorporated in H/ACA RNPs, even though with less efficiency than methylated ones.

### Keywords
Interactome, Apms, Silac

### Affiliations
IGF, CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France
UMR 7367 CNRS-UL IMoPA Biopôle de l'Université de Lorraine Campus Brabois-Santé 9 avenue de la forêt de Haye 54505 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy FRANCE

### Submitter
Franck Vandermoere

### Lab Head
Dr Severine Massenet
UMR 7367 CNRS-UL IMoPA Biopôle de l'Université de Lorraine Campus Brabois-Santé 9 avenue de la forêt de Haye 54505 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy FRANCE


