### Accession
PXD015619

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid ecto-GPR37 in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Improved diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers which reflect pathological progression would benefit the management of Parkinson’s disease. GPR37, also known as parkin associated endothelin-like (Pael) receptor, is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor, which has a defective parkin-mediated ubiquitination in autosomal recessive Parkinson’s disease. By means of immunoblot and mRNA determinations we detected increased GPR37 levels in postmortem substantia nigra from Parkinson’s disease subjects. We revealed the presence of the N-terminal domain of GPR37 (ecto-GPR37) in human and mouse cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). We engineered a Nanoluciferase-based ELISA to evaluate ecto-GPR37 in CSF and demonstrated the presence of ecto-GPR37 in CSF from wild-type, but not from GPR37-/-, mice. Subsequently, the relative abundance of ecto-GPR37 in CSF in healthy controls (n=48) and Parkinson’s disease (n=45) patients was assessed. Interestingly, we found that ecto-GPR37 was significantly increased (P = 0.0002) in the CSF from Parkinson’s disease patients. Importantly, mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitation of GPR37 in CSF supported the analytical validity of our ELISA to measure ecto-GPR37 in human CSF. Overall, these results open exciting perspectives and encourage further systemically studies to confirm the clinical validity and utility of ecto-GPR37 as a potential Parkinson’s disease diagnostic/prognostic biomarker

### Sample Protocol
Purified proteinswere dried and resuspended in 6M Urea / 200mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and diluted to 1M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion. After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 using a 60 minute chromatographic gradient.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5 Matrix Science ). The data were searches against a Swiss-Prot human database (as in April 2018, 20797 entries) plus a list  of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
CRG
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
CRG


