### Accession
PXD010779

### Title
Quantitative mass spectrometry to interrogate proteomic heterogeneity in metastatic lung adenocarcinoma and validate a novel somatic mutation CDK12-G879V

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death both in men and women. Tumor heterogeneity is an impediment to targeted treatment of all cancers, including lung cancer. Here, we sought to characterize changes in tumor proteome and phosphoproteome by longitudinal, prospective collection of tumor tissue of an exceptional responder lung adenocarcinoma patient who survived with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma for more than seven years with HER2-directed therapy in combination with chemotherapy. We employed “Super-SILAC” and TMT labeling strategies to quantify the proteome and phosphoproteome of a lung metastatic site and ten different metastatic progressive lymph nodes collected across a span of seven years, including five lymph nodes procured at autopsy. We identified specific signaling networks enriched in lung compared to the lymph node metastatic sites. We correlated the changes in protein abundance with changes in copy number alteration (CNA) and transcript expression. To further interrogate the mass spectrometry data, patient-specific database was built incorporating all the somatic variants identified by whole genome sequencing (WGS) of genomic DNA from the lung, one lymph node metastatic site and blood. An extensive validation pipeline was built for confirmation of variant peptides. We validated 360 spectra corresponding to 55 germline and 6 somatic variant peptides. Targeted MRM assays demonstrated expression of two novel variant somatic peptides, CDK12 G879V and FASN-R1439Q, with expression in lung and lymph node metastatic sites, respectively. CDK12 G879V mutation likely results in a nonfunctional kinase and knockdown of CDK12 in lung adenocarcinoma cells increased chemotherapy sensitivity, explaining the complete resolution of the lung metastatic sites in this patient.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissue was frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen before transporting to the laboratory for storage at -80oC. About 10-15 mg of tumor tissue was cut and lysed in 400µl of urea lysis buffer using a tissue lyser (Qiagen). Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4oC for 10 mins and the clear supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Protein concentrations were determined by the Modified Lowry method (BioRad) Human lung adenocarcinoma cells were obtained from ATCC. All cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and Penicillin/Streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The heavy amino acids-labeled super-SILAC mix constituted of 2 immortalized lung epithelial cell lines (HBEC3KT and HPL1D), 1 lung adenocarcinoma cell line with wild type EGFR and KRAS (H1648), 2 EGFRL858R mutant cell lines (H3255, 11-18), 1 EGFRL858R/T790M cell line (H1975), 3 EGFRDEL mutant cell lines (H1650, PC9, and HCC827), and 3 KRAS mutant cell lines (A549, H2030, and H358). Labeled amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA). Cells were cultured for approximately seven passages in the SILAC medium for complete incorporation of the heavy isotopes. Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate). Protein concentrations were determined by the Modified Lowry method (BioRad). Equal amounts of protein from lysates of each heavy labelled cell line were mixed together to constitute pooled lysate and used as a reference for the super-SILAC experiments. The protein lysate was reduced with 45 mM dithriothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, MO), alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, MO), and subsequently digested with modified sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 30˚C overnight. The digest was then acidified using 0.1% TFA and the peptides were desalted using solid phase extraction C18 columns (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA), and vacuum dried in a centrifugal evaporator. TMT10-plex amine reactive reagents (0.8 mg per vial) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were resuspended in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN), added to 200 ng protein lysates from each sample and mixed briefly on a vortexer. Reactions were proceeded at room temperature for 1 h, quenched by the addition of 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min and then tagged lysates were combined at equal amounts. All tumor tissues were pooled together to make the reference channel and labeled with TMT10-126. Basic RPLC separation was performed with a XBridge C18, 100 x 2.1 mm analytical column containing 5µm particles and equipped with a 10 x 2.1 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA) with a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. The solvent consisted of 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) as mobile phase A, and 10 mM TEABC in ACN as mobile phase B. Sample separation was accomplished using the following linear gradient: from 0 to 1% B in 5min, from 1 to 10% B in 5min, from 10 to 35% B in 30min, and from 35 to 100% B in 5min, and held at 100% B for an additional 3min. A total of 96 fractions were collected during the LC separation in a 96-well plate in the presence of 12.5 µL of 1% formic acid. The collected fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. One tenth of the peptides was injected directly for LC-MS/MS analysis. Nine tenth of the dried peptides was dissolved in solution A containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.4% trifluoracetic acid and 3% Lactic acid and enriched with the TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment spin column (Thermo Scientific). After binding, TiO2 spin columns were washed with solution A and thrice with 80% acetonitrile containing 0.4% trifluoracetic acid. TiO2 bound peptides were eluted using 5% NH4OH and 5% pyrrolidine and immediately acidified using trifluoracetic acid. The peptides were vacuum dried,cleaned on C18 stage-tips before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides separated/fractionated by basic reversed-phase chromatography followed by TiO2 enrichment were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite interfaced with an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The dried peptides and the enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm) and separated on an Easy-sprayTM C18 LC column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% ACN, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Tumor Specific Database Construction Customized patient specific database was created by QUILTS (quilts.fenyolab.org) using Refseq as a reference. (i) a BED file containing RNA-Seq predicted junctions; VCF files containing (ii) somatic variants and (iii) germline variants; and (iv) a fusion file containing all predicted fusion genes were used as inputs. The database contained a total of 71,503 entries. Data Analysis Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the Maxquant software package (version 1.5.3.30) with the Andromeda search engine (9, 10). MS/MS spectra were searched against the customized patient specific database and quantification was performed using default parameters for 3s-SILAC or TMT10plex in MaxQuant. The parameters used for data analysis include trypsin as a protease with two missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20ppm. False discovery rate was calculated using a decoy database and a 1% cut-off was applied to both peptide table and phosphosite table. Normalized ratios from super-SILAC experiment or corrected intensities of the reporter ions from TMT labels were obtained from the MaxQuant search. For the TMT experiment, relative ratios of each channel to the reference channel were calculated. Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) was used to view and further analyse the data. Hierarchical clustering of proteins and phosphosites were obtained in Perseus using log ratios or log intensities of protein and phosphorylation abundance. The protein-protein interaction(PPI) maps of the phosphosite clusters were imported from the “STRING: protein query” module of the cystoscope software (San Diego, CA, USA, version 3.4.0) (11) with the confidence cutoff of 0.80. These maps were analyzed for functional enrichment of the gene ontology biological process categories using the ClueGO 2.2.6 plugin (12)with the kappa statistic >=0.4, a two-sided hypergeometric test for enrichment with Benferroni step down method for correction of the multiple hypothesis testing. A p-value of 0.001 was used as the cut-off criterion.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women. Tumor heterogeneity is an impediment to targeted treatment of all cancers, including lung cancer. Here, we sought to characterize tumor proteome and phosphoproteome changes by longitudinal, prospective collection of tumor tissue from an exceptional responder lung adenocarcinoma patient who survived with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma for over seven years while undergoing HER2-directed therapy in combination with chemotherapy. We employed "Super-SILAC" and TMT labeling strategies to quantify the proteome and phosphoproteome of a lung metastatic site and eight distinct metastatic progressive lymph nodes collected during these seven years, including five lymph nodes procured at autopsy. We identified specific signaling networks enriched in lung compared with the lymph node metastatic sites. We correlated the changes in protein abundance with changes in copy number alteration (CNA) and transcript expression. ERBB2/HER2 protein expression was higher in lung, consistent with a higher degree of <i>ERBB2</i> amplification in lung compared with the lymph node metastatic sites. To further interrogate the mass spectrometry data, a patient-specific database was built by incorporating all the somatic and germline variants identified by whole genome sequencing (WGS) of genomic DNA from the lung, one lymph node metastatic site and blood. An extensive validation pipeline was built to confirm variant peptides. We validated 360 spectra corresponding to 55 germline and 6 somatic variant peptides. Targeted MRM assays revealed two novel variant somatic peptides, CDK12-G879V and FASN-R1439Q, expressed in lung and lymph node metastatic sites, respectively. The CDK12-G879V mutation likely results in a nonfunctional CDK12 kinase and chemotherapy susceptibility in lung metastatic sites. Knockdown of CDK12 in lung adenocarcinoma cells increased chemotherapy sensitivity which was rescued by wild type, but not CDK12-G879V expression, consistent with the complete resolution of the lung metastatic sites in this patient.

### Keywords
Quantitative mass spectrometry, Lung adenocarcinoma, Proteomic heterogeneity

### Affiliations
NCI/NIH
Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch, CCR , NCI, NIH

### Submitter
Udayan Guha

### Lab Head
Dr Udayan Guha
Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch, CCR , NCI, NIH


