### Accession
PXD009303

### Title
Urinary proteome in diabetic nephropathy

### Description
Urinary proteome was analyzed and quantified by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling followed by bioinformatics analysis to study DN pathophysiology and to identify biomarkers of clinical outcome. We included type 2 diabetic normotensive non-obese males with and without incipient DN (microalbuminuria). Sample collection included blood and urine at baseline (control and DN-basal) and, in DN patients, after 3 months of losartan treatment (DN-treated).  Urinary proteome analysis identified 166 differentially abundant proteins between controls and DN patients, 27 comparing DN-treated and DN-basal patients, and 182 between DN-treated patients and controls. Mathematical modeling analysis identified 80 key proteins involved in DN pathophysiology, 15 in losartan effect and 7 of these 95 are essential in both processes. VCAM-1 and neprilysin are the only ones that are differentially expressed in the urinary proteome. We observed an increase of VCAM-1 urine levels in DN-basal patients compared to diabetic controls and an increase of urinary neprilysin in DN-treated patients with persistent albuminuria, the latter confirmed by ELISA . Our results point to neprilysin and VCAM-1 as potential candidates in DN pathology and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Urine collection  First morning urine void was collected, centrifuged and stored at -80 ºC until proteomics analysis. Quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSn) analysis   Four biological replicates from each condition (control, basal and treated) were processed. Each replicate was a pool of three or four different patients as appropriate.  1. Sample preparation  Samples (14-28 ml) were thawed and centrifuged (4000 g, 4 ºC, 20 min) filtered (Steriflip PVDF 0.22 µm pore, Millipore, Watford, UK) and concentrated using Amicon® centrifugal filters (Amicon Ultra 15 ml, Millipore) up to ca. 250 µl final volume. Samples were evaporated in a SpeedVac (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA) to a final volume of ca. 50 µl and albumin/IgG-depleted using the PROTIA Proteoprep Immunoaffinity kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA).  Each sample was immunodepleted separately. Pools of 3-4 different patients were prepared for further processing combining volumes of eluate containing equimolar amounts of protein (26.7 µg each). 2. Protein digestion and peptide labeling   Pooled immunodepleted samples (80 µg of protein) were digested as previously described. Each tryptic peptide mixture was labeled with the corresponding tandem mass tags (TMT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Two labeling experiments were carried out, each containing two of the four biological replicates (6 samples per experiment). In each experiment, the six differentially TMT-labeled samples were combined in a low-bind 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, evaporated, and desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge (3 mL, 15 mg, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). The SPE eluates were evaporated and resuspended in 200 µl of 30 % ACN (0.1% formic acid). 3. Sample fractionation by Strong cation exchange chromatography  SCX fractionation of the TMT-labelled peptide mixtures was performed on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) using a Polysulfoethyl A TM, 50×2.1 mm, 5 µm, 200 Å column at a flow rate of 200 µl/min.  A linear NH4Cl gradient from 0 to 25 % B in 38 min and then to 100 % B in 20 min was used (buffer A: 30 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 30 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid, 0.5 M NH4Cl). Six fractions were collected from minute 10 to 52.  4. LC-MSn Analysis  One fifth of each collected SCX fraction was analyzed by LC-MSn using an Agilent 1200 nano pump (Agilent Technologies) connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoESI source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Separations were carried out using a C18 pre-concentration cartridge (Agilent Technologies) connected to a 15 cm-long 100 μm i.d. C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co, Japan). Separations were done at 0.4 μl/min using a linear ACN gradient from 0 to 40 % in 120 min (solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid, solvent B: ACN 0.1 % formic acid). The spectrometric analysis was performed in an automatic data-dependent mode. A full scan followed of 1 HCD and 1 CID MS/MS scans for the 5 most abundant signals were acquired (Dynamic exclusion: 1, time window: 30 s).

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using the EasierMgf software. Database search was done using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo-Instruments) with a 1 % False Discovery Rate (FDR) and the Uniprot 2014-10 database restricted to Homo sapiens. Search parameters were: parent tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.8 Da; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, TMTsixplex (N-terminal, K), carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Urinary proteome, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Proteomics Laboratory CSIC/UAB, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Montserrat Carrascal
Proteomics Laboratory CSIC/UAB, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.


