### Accession
PXD006382

### Title
Subregion-specific proteomic signature in the hippocampus for memory formation in adult mice

### Description
The hippocampal formation is a brain structure essential for higher-order cognitive functions. It has exquisite differences in anatomical organization and cellular composition, and hippocampal sub-regions have different properties and functional roles. Areas CA1 and CA3 in particular, are key sub-regions for learning and memory formation that fulfill complementary but specific functions. The molecular basis for such specific properties and the link to learning and memory remain unknown. Here using a SWATH-MS proteomic approach and bioinformatic tools, we identify a selective proteomic signature in area CA1 and CA3, and reveal their specific dynamics during memory formation. We show that 30% of all quantifiable proteins are differentially expressed in area CA1 and CA3 at baseline, and that each proteome responds differently during the formation of memory for object or object location. Using clustering and cross-correlational analyses, we outline specific temporal proteomic profiles and an increased correlation between both forms of memory within area CA1, but not within area CA3. These results provide new insight into a proteomic basis for hippocampal sub-region molecular and functional specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Proteins were extracted and processed for SWATH-MS analyses. Proteins were extracted from area CA1 and CA3 samples using 200ul TEAB buffer (100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail P8340 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis MO, USA), 1:500 PMSF (50mM in EtOH)). The samples were mechanically lysed by 15 strokes with a 26G needle and sonicated for 2 minutes. Samples were spun down at 16000g for 30 minutes at 4°C and supernatants were collected. Proteins were quantified using a Qubit protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein extracts were further processed with a filter assisted sample preparation protocol (Wisniewski, Zougman et al. 2009). 20ug of protein were filled up to 30ul of final volume with SDS denaturation buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT). For denaturation, samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with 200ul UA buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) and then loaded to regenerated cellulose centrifugal filter units (Microcon 30, Merck Millipore, Billercia MA, USA). Samples were spun at 14000g at 35°C for 20 min. Filter units were washed once with 200ul of UA buffer followed by centrifugation 14000g at 35°C for 20 min. Cysteines were blocked with 100ul IAA solution (0.05M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) for 1 min at room temperature in a thermomixer at 600rpm followed by centrifugation at 14000g at 35°C for 15 min. Filter units were washed 3 times with 100ul of UA buffer then twice with a 0.5M NaCl solution in water (each washing was followed by centrifugation at 35°C and 14000g for 15 min). Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with a 1:50 ratio of trypsin (0.4ug) in 130ul TEAB (0.05M Triethylammoniumbicarbonate in water). After protein digestion, peptide solutions were spun down at 14000g at 35°C for 15 min and acidified with 3ul of 20% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid).  Peptides clean-up Peptides were cleaned-up using Sep-Pak C18 silica columns (Waters Corporation, Milford MA, USA). Columns were activated with 1ml methanol and washed with 1ml of 60% ACN (acetonitrile) and 0.1% TFA. Columns were equilibrated with 3 x 1ml of 3% ACN 0,1% TFA. Samples were diluted in 800ul of 3% ACN 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the columns. They were then washed with 4x 1ml 3% ACN 0.1% TFA and eluted with 60% ACN 0.1% TFA. Samples were lyophilized in a speedvac then re-solubilized in 19ul 3% ACN 0.1% FA (formic acid) prior to measurement. 1ul of synthetic peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) were added to each sample for retention time calibration.  SWATH-MS measurements Samples were measured on a TripleTOF 5600 (AB Sciex, Washington, USA) in SWATH mode using a previously described method (Gillet, Navarro et al. 2012). Peptides were separated with an Eksigent NanoLC (AB Sciex, Washington, USA). 4ul of each sample were injected and loaded onto a 1.8 um, 100 Å C18 column (heated to 50°C). Peptides were separated using a 144 min linear solvent gradient of 3-40% ACN. Fixed 25Da precursor isolation windows were used within a precursor range of 300-1200 m/z. Fragment ions were acquired in a range of 200-1800 m/z.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS transition identification and quantification For identification and quantification of transitions in SWATH-MS data (Gillet, Navarro et al. 2012), automated peak picking was used. The previously prepared assay list was used to define transitions, relative intensities and iRT values. Spectronaut (version 6, Biognosys AG, Switzerland) was used for automated peak picking. Peak picking was performed independently for area CA1 and CA3 and independently for OR and OLR paradigms. A static window with an iRT-width of 6 min and a linear iRT calibration was used. For transition identification, a dynamic score refinement was used and the base entity was processed within the experiment. Decoys were generated using a scrambled, label-free decoy method. A normal distribution estimator was used for q-values. For transition quantification an interference correction was used and the total peak area was used as normalization base.  SWATH-MS data normalization  SWATH-MS data was normalized with a custom script (Supplemental Information, Script 1). Since large changes in time-dependent intensity were observed over different MS runs, a time-dependent normalization approach was used. Transitions were divided into 15 time-windows according to their predicted iRT values. Time-windows were normalized independently by summing up all intensities within MS runs and calculating a normalization factor matrix for all MS runs and time windows. Intensities for all transitions were then multiplied with the corresponding normalization factor.  Data analyses Following normalization, other scripts (Supplemental Information, Script 2-4) were used to assign group and condition to each run and have a q-value cutoff over the experiments. Transitions for individual samples with a q-value > 0.01 and transitions for all samples with a q-value > 0.01 in more than 25% of samples were excluded. Further, proteins quantified with less than 2 peptides after q-value cutoff were excluded. Duplicate protein entries were removed before running any statistical analysis. For statistical analyses, MSstats (Choi, Chang et al. 2014) was used, a proteomic tool using an R interface for statistical analysis of proteomic data on the transition level. MSstats perform an ANOVA over the whole data set followed by two-group comparisons. Analyses were performed independently for area CA1 and CA3, and for OR and OLR paradigms. Group comparisons between area CA1 and CA3 in basal conditions, and group comparisons between control-test pairs for every time point were performed.

### Publication Abstract
The hippocampal formation is a brain structure essential for higher-order cognitive functions. It has&#xa0;a complex anatomical organization and cellular composition, and hippocampal subregions have different properties and functional roles. In this study, we used SWATH-MS to determine whether the proteomes of hippocampus areas CA1 and CA3 can explain the commonalities or specificities of these subregions in basal conditions and after recognition memory. We show that the proteomes of areas CA1 and CA3 are largely different in basal conditions and that differential changes and dynamics in protein expression are induced in these areas after recognition of an object or object location. While changes are consistent across both recognition paradigms in area CA1, they are not in area CA3, suggesting distinct proteomic responses in areas CA1 and CA3 for memory formation.

### Keywords
Swath-ms lc-ms/ms hippocampus ca1 ca3 mouse memory recognition

### Affiliations
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Laboratory of Neuroepigenetics, University of Zürich/Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Brain Research Institute, Neuroscience Center Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zürich CH-8057, Switzerland

### Submitter
Lukas von Ziegler

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Isabelle M. Mansuy
Laboratory of Neuroepigenetics, University of Zürich/Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Brain Research Institute, Neuroscience Center Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zürich CH-8057, Switzerland


