### Accession
PXD027713

### Title
Ancient proteins resolve controversy over the identity of Genyornis eggshell

### Description
Here we show the potential of proteins preserved in Pleistocene eggshell for addressing a longstanding controversy in human and evolution: the identity of the extinct bird that laid the eggs which were exploited by Australia’s first inhabitants. The eggs had been originally attributed to the iconic extinct flightless Genyornis newtoni, and subsequently dated to before 50 ±5 ka by Miller et al. (2016). This was taken to represent the extinction date for this endemic megafaunal species and thus implied a role of humans in its demise. A contrasting hypothesis, according to which the eggshell was laid by a large megapode (mound-builder), would therefore acquit humans of their responsibility in the extinction of Genyornis.  Ancient protein sequences were reconstructed and used to assess the evolutionary proximity of the undetermined eggshell to extant birds, rejecting the megapode hypothesis. Ancient DNA could not be retrieved from these highly degraded samples, but morphometric data supported the attribution of the eggshell to Genyornis. When used in triangulation to address well-defined hypotheses, palaeoproteomics is a precious tool for reconstructing the evolutionary history of extinct and extant species. Here we show that the identification of Genyornis eggshell implies a more nuanced understanding of the modes of interactions between humans and their environment.

### Sample Protocol
Eggshell fragments targeted for ancient protein analysis were collected at the site of Wood Point, about 10 m asl, along Spencer Gulf, south of Port Augusta (AUS). This is a human occupation site with strong evidence of human exploitation of emu and UO eggs for alimentary purposes (Bird et al., 2003; Smith et al., 1994). It has been dated by Miller et al. (2016) to 44,094-47,419 cal BP.  Sample preparation Sample preparation was carried out in a dedicated laboratory at the University of Turin, handling the samples under a laminar flow cabinet, in accordance with international guidelines (Hendy et al., 2018). Eggshell is an excellent substrate for palaeoproteomics, as it retains a tight closed system of proteins, which can be isolated by extensive bleaching (Crisp et al., 2013; Demarchi et al., 2016). Here we bleached powdered eggshell samples (~40 mg) for 72 hours, then extracted the intracrystalline fraction by demineralising in 0.6 M hydrochloridric acid (fresh solution, cooled to 4 ℃), followed by ultrafiltration (Nanosep® Centrifugal Devices, 3kDa MWCO, Pall Laboratory). Following reduction and alkylation of disulphide bonds with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide according to usual eggshell protocols (Demarchi et al., 2016; Presslee et al., 2017), digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C on two subsamples for each sample, adding: 4 μL trypsin (0.5 μg/μL; Promega, 2800 Woods Hollow Road Madison, WI 53,711 USA) for 'T' subsamples and 4 μL elastase (1 μg/μL; Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) for 'E' subsamples. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of ~0.1% (v/v), peptide digests purified using C18 solid-phase extraction (Pierce zip-tip; Thermo-Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and evaporated to dryness. A procedural blank was included during sample preparation and was analysed alongside the eggshell samples.    LC-MS/MS analysis Trypsin and elastase digests for each sample were resuspended with 25 µL 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and combined. 40 µL was transferred to a 96-well plate prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. To remove the ACN, the plate was vacuum centrifuged until approximately 5 µL remained. Samples were then resuspended with 8 µL of 0.1% TFA 5% ACN and 5 µL was then separated by an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) attached to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter; made in-house laser pulled) and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) over a 77 min gradient. Parameters were the same as those already published for historical samples (Mackie et al., 2018). In short, MS1: 120k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 60k resolution, top 10 mode, maximum IT 118 ms, minimum scan target 3E3, normalized collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z. A wash-blank consisting of 0.1% TFA 5% ACN was run before and after each sample to hinder cross-contamination.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Bioinformatic analysis was carried out using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, (Zhang et al., 2012)). After conducting preliminary screening in order to ensure uniformity across the results, the raw tandem mass spectrometry data from the three samples were combined in a single search. The thresholds for peptide and protein identification were set as follows: peptide score −10lgP ≥ 30, protein score −10lgP ≥ 40, de novo sequences scores (ALC%) ≥ 80, unique peptides ≥ 2 (threshold lowered to unique peptides ≥ 0 for sequence reconstruction, so that all reference sequences could be taken into account). The NCBI database (taxonomy restricted to Aves, downloaded 11/04/2020) was used for carrying out preliminary searches and a database including common contaminants was included (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Further searches were performed against the annotated lactadherin and C-type lectin sequences as described in section “Annotations on B10K sequences”.   Annotations using B10K genomes The Bird 10,000 Genomes (B10K) dataset comprised 363 bird species from 92% of bird families (Feng et al. 2020). After initial analysis indicated that the ootaxon fell within Galloanseres, we added sequences for five additional Galloanseres species from NCBI using BLAST. More specifically, 1) for lactadherin-MFGE8, a total of 353 species from the B10K dataset were annotated and supplemented with four additional Galloanseres genomes (Bambusicola thoracicus POI30273.1, Cygnus atratus XP_035410506.1, Oxyura jamaicensis XP_035191991.1, Aythya fuligula XP_032051139.1); 2) for XCA, a total of 108 species from the B10K dataset were annotated, which were supplemented with data from four additional Galloanseres genomes (Oxyura_jamaicensis XM_035313502.1, Aythya_fuligula XM_032185620.1, Cygnus_atratus XM_035569317.1, Numida_meleagris XM_021383313.1).

### Publication Abstract
The realization that ancient biomolecules are preserved in "fossil" samples has revolutionized archaeological science. Protein sequences survive longer than DNA, but their phylogenetic resolution is inferior; therefore, careful assessment of the research questions is required. Here, we show the potential of ancient proteins preserved in Pleistocene eggshell in addressing a longstanding controversy in human and animal evolution: the identity of the extinct bird that laid large eggs which were exploited by Australia's indigenous people. The eggs had been originally attributed to the iconic extinct flightless bird <i>Genyornis newtoni</i> (&#x2020;Dromornithidae, Galloanseres) and were subsequently dated to before 50 &#xb1; 5 ka by Miller et&#xa0;al. [<i>Nat. Commun.</i> 7, 10496 (2016)]. This was taken to represent the likely extinction date for this endemic megafaunal species and thus implied a role of humans in its demise. A contrasting hypothesis, according to which the eggs were laid by a large mound-builder megapode (Megapodiidae, Galliformes), would therefore acquit humans of their responsibility in the extinction of <i>Genyornis</i>. Ancient protein sequences were reconstructed and used to assess the evolutionary proximity of the undetermined eggshell to extant birds, rejecting the megapode hypothesis. Authentic ancient DNA could not be confirmed from these highly degraded samples, but morphometric data also support the attribution of the eggshell to <i>Genyornis</i>. When used in triangulation to address well-defined hypotheses, paleoproteomics is a powerful tool for reconstructing the evolutionary history in ancient samples. In addition to the clarification of phylogenetic placement, these data provide a more nuanced understanding of the modes of interactions between humans and their environment.

### Keywords
Genyornis eggshell; australia; palaeoproteomics; ancient dna; megafaunal extinction

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy
University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy


