### Accession
PXD031459

### Title
Glycan shield of the ebolavirus envelope glycoprotein GP

### Description
The envelope glycoprotein GP of the ebolaviruses is essential for host cell attachment and entry. It is also the primary target of the protective and neutralizing antibody response in both natural infection and vaccination. GP is heavily glycosylated with up to 17 predicted N-linked sites, numerous O-linked glycans in its disordered mucin-like domain (MLD), and three predicted C-linked mannosylation sites. Glycosylation of GP is important for host cell attachment to cell-surface lectins, as well as GP stability and fusion activity. Moreover, it has been shown to shield GP from neutralizing activity of serum antibodies. Here, we use mass spectrometry-based glycoproteomics to profile the site-specific glycosylation patterns of ebolavirus GP, including N-, O-, and C-linked glycans.

### Sample Protocol
For N-linked glycan analysis, the recombinant GP was denatured at 95 °C in a final concentration of 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 200 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, pH 8.0 for 10 min followed with 30 min reduction at 37 °C for 30 min. Samples were next alkylated by adding 40 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. 3 μg recombinant GP was used for each protease digestion. Samples were split in three for parallel digestion with trypsin (Promega), alpha lytic protease (Sigma), and gluC (Sigma)-trypsin. For each protease digestion, 18 μL of the denatured, reduced, and alkylated samples was diluted in a total volume of 100 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, adding proteases in a 1:15 ratio (w:w) for incubation overnight at 37 °C. For the gluC-trypsin digestion, gluC was added first for two hours, followed by incubation with trypsin overnight. After overnight digestion SDC was removed through precipitation by adding 2 μL formic acid (FA) and centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 min. Following centrifugation, the supernatant containing the peptides was collected for desalting on a 30 µm Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters). The Oasis HLB sorbent was activated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently equilibrated with 10% formic acid in water. Next, peptides were bound to the sorbent, washed twice with 10% formic acid in water and eluted with 100 µL of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid in water (v/v). The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 100 µL of 2% formic acid in water. For O-linked glycan analysis, the recombinant GP was first treated with PNGase F (Sigma) to remove N-glycans. 4 μL PNGase F was added to the sample in PBS and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Following N-glycan removal, GPs were digested following the same protocol as for N-linked glycan analysis, using parallel digestion with trypsin and aLP. Both N- and O-linked analyses were performed in duplicate. For each sample and protease digestion, approximately 0.15 μg of peptides were run by online reversed phase chromatography on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC or Dionex UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. A Poroshell 120 EC C18 (50 cm x 75 µm, 2.7 µm, Agilent Technologies) analytical column and a ReproSil-Pur C18 (2 cm x 100 µm, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) trap column were used for peptide separation. The duplicate samples were analyzed with two different mass spectrometry methods, using identical LC-MS parameters and distinct fragmentation schemes. In one method, peptides were subjected to Electron Transfer/Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation fragmentation. In the other method, all precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation, with additional EThcD fragmentation triggered by the presence of glycan reporter oxonium ions. A 90-min LC gradient from 0% to 44% acetonitrile was used to separate peptides at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode. Orbitrap Fusion parameters for the full scan MS spectra were as follows: a standard AGC target at 60 000 resolution, scan range 350-2000 m/z, Orbitrap maximum injection time 50 ms. The ten most intense ions (2+ to 8+ ions) were subjected to fragmentation. For the EThcD fragmentation scheme, the supplemental higher energy collision dissociation energy was set at 27%. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 800%, maximum injection time 250 ms, scan range 120-4000 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 16 s. For the triggered HCD-EThcD method, the LC gradient and MS1 scan parameters were identical. The ten most intense ions (2+ to 8+) were subjected to HCD fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy from 120-4000 m/z at 30,000 resolution with an AGC target of 100% and a dynamic exclusion window of 16 s. Scans containing any of the following oxonium ions within 20 ppm were followed up with additional EThcD fragmentation with 27% supplemental HCD fragmentation. The triggering reporter ions were: Hex(1) (129.039; 145.0495; 163.0601), PHex(1) (243.0264; 405.0793), HexNAc(1) (138.055; 168.0655; 186.0761), Neu5Ac(1) (274.0921; 292.1027), Hex(1)HexNAc(1) (366.1395), HexNAc(2) (407.166), dHex(1)Hex(1)HexNAc(1) (512.1974), and Hex(1)HexNAc(1)Neu5Ac(1) (657.2349). EThcD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with a normalized AGC target of 400%, maximum injection time 250 ms, and scan range 120-4000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data was analysed using Byonic (v3.9.6) against a custom database of recombinant ebola virus GP protein sequences and the proteases used in the experiment, searching for glycan modifications with 12/24 ppm search windows for MS1/MS2, respectively. Up to six missed cleavages were permitted using C-terminal cleavage at R/K for trypsin, R/K/E/D for gluC-trypsin, or T/A/S/V for alpha lytic protease. For N-linked analysis, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine/tryptophan as variable common 1, and hexose on tryptophan as variable rare 1. N-glycan modifications were set as variable common 2, allowing up to max. 2 variable common and 1 rare modification per peptide. All N-linked glycan databases from Byonic were merged into a single non-redundant list to be included in the database search. All reported glycopeptides in the Byonic result files were manually inspected for quality of fragment assignments. All glycopeptide identifications were merged into a single non-redundant list per sequon. Glycans were classified based on HexNAc content as truncated (≤ 2 HexNAc; < 3 Hex), paucimannose (2 HexNAc, 3 Hex), high-mannose (2 HexNAc; > 3 Hex), hybrid (3 HexNAc) or complex (> 3 HexNAc). Byonic search results were exported to mzIdentML format to build a spectral library in Skyline (v20.1.0.31) and extract peak areas for individual glycoforms from MS1 scans. The full database of variable N-linked glycan modifications from Byonic was manually added to the Skyline project file in XML format. Reported peak areas were pooled based on the number of HexNAc, Fuc or NeuAc residues to distinguish truncated, paucimannose, high-mannose, hybrid, and complex glycosylation, or the degree of fucosylation and sialylation, respectively. For O-linked analysis, all the same protease digestion parameters and peptide modifications were used, with the addition of deamidation at asparagine/glutamine as variable rare 1. O-glycan modifications were set as variable common 6, allowing a maximum of 6 variable common and 2 rare modifications per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The envelope glycoprotein GP of the ebolaviruses is essential for host cell entry and the primary target of the host antibody response. GP is heavily glycosylated with up to 17 N-linked sites, numerous O-linked glycans in its disordered mucin-like domain (MLD), and three predicted C-linked mannosylation sites. Glycosylation is important for host cell attachment, GP stability and fusion activity, and shielding from neutralization by serum antibodies. Here, we use glycoproteomics to profile the site-specific glycosylation patterns of ebolavirus GP. We detect up to 16 unique O-linked glycosylation sites in the MLD, and two O-linked sites in the receptor-binding GP1 subunit. Multiple O-linked glycans are observed within N-linked glycosylation sequons, suggesting crosstalk between the two types of modifications. We confirmed C-mannosylation of W288 in full-length trimeric GP. We find complex glycosylation at the majority of N-linked sites, while the conserved sites N257 and especially N563 are enriched in unprocessed glycans, suggesting a role in host-cell attachment via DC-SIGN/L-SIGN. Our findings illustrate how N-, O-, and C-linked glycans together build the heterogeneous glycan shield of GP, guiding future immunological studies and functional interpretation of ebolavirus GP-antibody interactions.

### Keywords
Virus; ebola; glycosylation

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Utrecht University


