### Accession
PXD033829

### Title
Identification of the potential regulators of G6PD activity in different cell cycle

### Description
Flag-G6PD was expressed in HeLa cells. Then the HeLa cells were synchronized with a double thymidine block procedure. Briefly, the exponentially growing HeLa cells were maintained with 2 mM thymidine for 18 h, followed by a release of 9 h in fresh medium, and then cells were re-cultured in 2 mM thymidine for additional 15 h. These interphase cells were harvested. After a release of 8.5 h in fresh medium, the cells entered into M phase. Mitotic cells were harvested by mitotic shake-off. Then, cell lysate was incubated with anti-Flag M2-agarose. Elutes were separated with 10% SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Visualized bands were excised and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor(Scientz) in lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 100 nM Okadaic acid). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4 °C for 10 mins. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, cell lysate was incubated with anti-Flag M2-agarose (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) for 2 hours at 4 °C; the beads were washed three times with TBS (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4), and the Flag-tagged proteins were eluted by Flag peptides (bank peptide, Hefei, China). Each eluted sample were mixed with 5x loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. For digestion, the visible bands were cut down, destained with 30% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 until the gels were destained. The gels were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at 56°C, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (200 mM IAA/100 mM NH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Gel were briefly rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, respectively. Gel were digested overnight in 12.5 ng/μl trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The peptides were extracted three times with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. The extracts were pooled and dried completely by a vacuum centrifuge.  After trypsin digestion, each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient: 0-55% buffer B for 110 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min (determined by project proposal). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.)  against Uniprot Human database (133549 sequences, download at March 3rd, 2013) and the decoy database. For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) , Variable modification：Oxidation(M), FDR≤0.01.  Then each protein's relative abundance was standardized to G6PD abundances. The logarithm of the relative abundance in interphase and mitosis was applied to the data displayed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
G6pd, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
University of Science and technology of China
university of science and technology of China

### Submitter
Aoxing Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr zhenye yang
University of Science and technology of China


