### Accession
PXD016488

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Retinoblastoma-Derived Exosomes reveals potential biomarkers of vitreous seeding

### Description
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common tumor of the eye in early childhood. Despite recent advances in conservative treatment have greatly improved the visual outcome, local tumor control remain difficult in presence of massive vitreous seeding. Traditional biopsy has long been considered unsafe in RB, due to the risk of extraocular spread. Thus, the identification of new biomarkers is crucial to design safer diagnostic and more effective therapeutic approaches. Exosomes represent an interesting alternative to detect tumor-associated biomarkers. In this study we defined the protein signature of exosomes released by RB tumors (RBT) and vitreous seeding (RBVS) primary cell lines by high resolution mass spectrometry. A total of 5666 proteins were identified.  Among these, 5223 and 3637 were expressed in exosome RBT and one RBVS group respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The exosome pellets were re-suspended in 50 μL of lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP,40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5). In eppendorf cells were lysed, reduced, alkylated, and lastly was added 5% ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega) to enhances protein digestion by providing a denaturing environment prior to protease addition. To the samples were added 0.3 µg LysC and 0.7 µg Trypsin in 250 µl of a dilution buffer (10% ACN, 25 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5) to dilute the ProteaseMAX to 0.1%. After overnight digestion at 37 °C the peptides were acidified with 0.1% TFA and loaded into StageTip. [N. A. Kulak, 2014]

### Data Protocol
All bioinformatics analyses were done with the Perseus software of the MaxQuant computational platform. Protein groups were filtered to require 70 % valid values in at least one experimental group. The label-free intensities were expressed as base log2, and empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution for each column, to best simulate low abundance values close to noise level. For each group a t-test with permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and a s0 of 0.1 was used.To visualize the profile of the experiment hierarchical clustering of resulting proteins was performed on log2 intensities after z-score normalization of the data for each exosome line, using Euclidean distances. Lastly, The network was built on significant proteins obtained by T-Test between two groups (RBT and RBVS) and plot the GO Enrichment using Cytoscape 3.7 and ClueGo app.

### Publication Abstract
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common tumor of the eye in early childhood. Although recent advances in conservative treatment have greatly improved the visual outcome, local tumor control remains difficult in the presence of massive vitreous seeding. Traditional biopsy has long been considered unsafe in RB, due to the risk of extraocular spread. Thus, the identification of new biomarkers is crucial to design safer diagnostic and more effective therapeutic approaches. Exosomes, membrane-derived nanovesicles that are secreted abundantly by aggressive tumor cells and that can be isolated from several biological fluids, represent an interesting alternative for the detection of tumor-associated biomarkers. In this study, we defined the protein signature of exosomes released by RB tumors (RBT) and vitreous seeding (RBVS) primary cell lines by high resolution mass spectrometry. A total of 5666 proteins were identified. Among these, 5223 and 3637 were expressed in exosomes RBT and one RBVS group, respectively. Gene enrichment analysis of exclusively and differentially expressed proteins and network analysis identified in RBVS exosomes upregulated proteins specifically related to invasion and metastasis, such as proteins involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and interaction, resistance to anoikis and the metabolism/catabolism of glucose and amino acids.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biomarkers, Exosomes, Retinoblastoma

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


