### Accession
PXD031648

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of human globus pallidus from progressive supranuclear palsy patients discovers multiple disease pathways

### Description
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically characterized by progressive postural instability, supranuclear gaze palsy, parkinsonism, and cognitive decline caused by degeneration in specific areas of the brain including globus pallidus (GP), substantia nigra, and subthalamic nucleus. However, the pathogenetic mechanism of PSP remains unclear to date.   Unbiased global proteome analysis of patients’ brain samples is an important step toward understanding PSP pathogenesis, as proteins serve as workhorses and building blocks of the cell. In this study, we conducted unbiased mass spectrometry-based global proteome analysis of GP samples from 15 PSP patients, 15 Parkinson disease (PD) patients, and 15 healthy control (HC) individuals. To analyze 45 samples, we conducted 5 batches of 11-plex isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT)-based multiplexing experiments, identifying 10,231 proteins. The gene set enrichment analysis results showed that the PD pathway was the most highly enriched, followed by pathways for oxidative phosphorylation, Alzheimer disease, Huntington disease, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) when PSP was compared to HC or PD. Most of the proteins enriched in the gene set enrichment analysis were mitochondrial proteins such as cytochrome c oxidase, NADH dehydrogenase, acyl carrier protein, succinate dehydrogenase, ADP/ATP translocase, cytochrome b-c1 complex, and/or ATP synthase. Strikingly, all of the enriched mitochondrial proteins in the PD pathway were downregulated in PSP compared to both HC and PD. The subsequent Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis and the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) further supported that the mitochondrial proteins were the most highly enriched in PSP. This is the first global proteome analysis of human GP from PSP patients, and this study paves the way to understanding the pathogenesis mechanism of PSP.

### Sample Protocol
All GP samples were prepared by sonicating in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) on ice. The protein amount of each sample was quantified by BCA protein assay. The 45 GP samples were divided into 5 batches to analyze using 11-plex TMT. Each batch included 1 master pool (MP) and 1 quality control (QC) sample. The MP and QC samples were prepared by combining an equal amount of proteins from all GP samples. The sample order for TMT labeling was randomized to minimize the effect of TMT channel. The MP sample was added to the 11th channel of each TMT experimental batch to normalize data from multiple TMT experimental batches. The QC samples for verification of technical and biological variations between the batches were divided and placed in a channel in each batch before reduction and alkylation. For the reduction and alkylation of the proteins, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM chloroacetamide were added to the samples and then incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Protein digestion was carried out using LysC in ratio of 1:100 for 3 h at 37°C, and then further digestion was conducted using trypsin in a ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight after diluting the concentration of urea from 8 M to 2 M by adding 3 volumes of 50 mM TEAB. The samples were desalted with C18 Stage-Tips after acidifying with 1% trifluoroacetic acid to the final concentration. The eluted solution containing peptides was vacuum-dried using a Savant SPD121P SpeedVac concentrator and then stored at ‒80°C before use. To perform TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry, the digested peptides from GP samples were labeled using 11-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The MP sample was prepared in one tube and labeled by the 131C channel and split into 5 batches. The PSP, PD, HC and QC samples were labeled with the rest of the channels. All TMT labeling reactions were performed for 1 h at RT and then quenched with 1/10 volume of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The samples of each batch were pooled and subjected to prefractionation using basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system. The peptides reconstituted in solvent A (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) were loaded onto a C18 column (Agilent 300 Extend-C18 column, 5 µm, 4.6 mm × 250 mm), and resolved by increasing the gradient of solvent B (10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (ACN), pH 8.5) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/minute. A total of 96 fractions was collected by eluting over 97 min (the total run time of 150 min). Subsequently, the 96 fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions, followed by vacuum drying. The fractionated peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano nanoflow liquid chromatography system. The peptides from each fraction were loaded onto an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 LC C18 NanoViper trap column (100 μm × 2 cm) packed with 5-μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 8 μL/minute. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/minute under an increasing gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN) onto an EASY-Spray™ analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm) packed with 2-μm C18 particles, which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV. The total run time was 120 minutes. Mass spectrometry analysis was completed in data-dependent acquisition mode with a full survey scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300 to 1,800 in the “top speed” setting, 3-sec per cycle. MS1 spectra were acquired for the precursor ions measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. An MS2 scan was acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using a higher-energy collisional dissociation method with 35% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000 at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain controls for MS1 and MS2 were set to one million and 0.05 million ions, respectively. Maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set to 50 milliseconds and 100 milliseconds, respectively. The precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with a 0.4 m/z offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 7-ppm mass window, and singly charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) platform was used for the quantitation and identification of proteins. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a mouse UniProt database (May 2018), including common contaminant proteins. The search parameters and methods used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme including 2 maximum missed cleavage sites; b) precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Dalton (Da); d) carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) at cysteine and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) at lysine and peptide N-terminus as fixed modifications; and e) oxidation (+15.99492 Da) at methionine as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide-spectrum match level using the percolator node and at the protein level using the protein FDR validator node, respectively. Protein quantification was performed with the following parameters and methods. The most confident centroid option was used for the integration mode while the reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification, while protein groups were considered for peptide uniqueness. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, and the missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. The quantification value corrections for isobaric tags were disabled. The average reporter ion S/N threshold was set to 50. Data normalization was disabled. Protein grouping was performed with a strict parsimony principle to generate the final protein groups. All proteins sharing the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped, while protein groups with no unique peptides were filtered out. The Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected the Peptide-Spectrum Matches with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides in the TMT run. The total number of GP samples used in this study was 45, composed of 15 PSP patients, 15 PD patients, and 15 HC individuals. The statistical analysis of the mass spectrometry data was performed with the Perseus version 1.6.0.7 software package. The quality of mass spectrometry data was monitored by measuring coefficient variations of QC samples and the S/N ratios. The S/N ratios were calculated by dividing standard deviations (SD) of the samples by SDs of QCs. The protein abundance data from 5 batches of the TMT experiments were normalized by dividing the abundance data of the PSP/PD/HC samples and QCs by those of the MPs included in each batch, followed by dividing by median values of each protein. The relative abundance values for each sample were log 2-transformed, followed by z-score transformation. We removed proteins with one or more missing values across 45 samples. To further remove batch effects, an additional normalization was conducted with the ComBat package in R. Proteins with a q-value of < 0.05 were considered significant. The fold changes between the comparison groups were calculated by dividing the average abundance values of each protein from one group by the values of another group. The P values between the comparison groups were calculated by the student's two-sample t-test. The q-values for the volcano plots were calculated by a permutation-based FDR estimation in the significance analysis of microarrays method, in which P values and fold-changes were calculated before and after the permutation of samples from two groups. Bootstrap receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was carried out using fbroc package in R. Sampling with replacement was repeated 1000 times for the bootstrap ROC. The area under the curve (AUC) of a bootstrap ROC was computed for each sampling. Mean and SD values of AUCs from 1,000 bootstrap ROC were then calculated. The q-values of bootstrap ROC-based analysis data were calculated as follows: (1) The mean AUC values for non-permuted and permuted data were sorted in descending order for proteins with mean AUCs > 0.5 and in ascending order for proteins with mean AUCs < 0.5; (2) The ratios of the protein numbers for the non-permuted data to the protein numbers for the permuted data were calculated as lowering the cutoff threshold, and the ratios were used as q-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Progressive supranuclear palsy, Proteomics, Globus pallidus, Psp, Mass spectrometry, Human brain tissue

### Affiliations
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Chan Hyun Na
Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Neurology


