### Accession
PXD007857

### Title
BioID reveals novel proteins of the Plasmodium parasitophorous vacuole membrane

### Description
During their development within the vertebrate host, Plasmodium parasites infect hepatocytes and red blood cells. Within these cells, parasites are surrounded by a parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM). The PVM plays an essential role for the interaction of parasites with their host cells, however only a limited number of proteins of this membrane have been identified so far. This is partially because a systematic proteomic analysis of the PVM’s protein content has been difficult in the past, due to difficulties to separate the PVM from other membranes such as the parasite plasma membrane. In this study, we adapted the BioID technique to in vitro cultivated Plasmodium berghei blood stage parasites and utilized the promiscuous biotin ligase BirA* fused to the PVM-resident exported protein 1 to biotinylate proteins of the PVM. These we further processed by affinity purification, liquid chromatography based mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and label-free quantitation leading to a list of 61 known and candidate PVM proteins. Seven proteins were analyzed further during blood and liver stage development. This resulted in the identification of three novel PVM proteins, which were the serine/threonine protein phosphatase UIS2 and two conserved Plasmodium proteins with unknown functions (PBANKA_0519300 and PBANKA_0509000). In conclusion, our study expands the number of known PVM proteins and experimentally validates BioID as a powerful method to screen for novel constituents of specific cellular compartments in P. berghei.

### Sample Protocol
Infection with EXP1-BirA*-V5 and WT mCherryHsp70 parasites was initiated by intraperitoneal injection of blood stabilates into two mice per parasite line. After reaching a parasitemia of 3-4%, mice were sacrificed and blood was removed by cardiac puncture and incubated in an overnight schizont culture. Incubation was done for 18 hours in the presence or absence of 150 µM biotin (Sigma). Schizonts were enriched on a nycodenz gradient. Detergent-based extraction and affinity capture of biotinylated proteins was basically done as described before (Chen et al. 2015, mBio), however incubation on Streptavidin Mag Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) was done at 4° C over night with continuous agitation. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed by the proteomics and mass spectrometry core facility at the Department of BioMedical Research of the University of Bern. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin for six hours at 37° C on beads. Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (PepMap C18, 5µm, 300A, 300µm x 15mm length) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min with solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto the analytical Nano-column (C18, 5 µm, 300A, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150 mm length) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 40 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) via a Nano spay ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the Fourier transform detector (FT) with resolution 120’000 (at m/z=400) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML format with ProteoWizard v3.0.6002 (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/) and searched with Comet (v2015.01) against a combined P. berghei sequence database from www.uniprot.org and plasmodb.org (PlasmoDB-28) with the following parameters: fully tryptic, 2 missed cleavages allowed, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, fixed carbidomethylated cysteins, variable modification on methionines and further processed with the transproteomic pipeline (TPP, v4.7) to obtain identified peptide and protein list at the false discovery rate of 1%. LC-MS/MS runs were aligned and precursor intensities were calculated in ProgenesisQI (Nonlinear Dynamics, v2). Protein abundances and significant testing results of EXP1-BirA*-V5 versus WT parasites were calculated with MSstats (v3.2.2) based on ANOVA models for each replicate separately. P-value was adjusted according to Benjamini and Hochberg. Only proteins with at least two independent peptide measurements were taken into account. Proteins with a fold change of at least three versus wild-type and an adjusted p-value below 0.05 in both biological replicates were regarded as significantly enriched in EXP1-BirA*-V5 parasites.

### Publication Abstract
During their development within the vertebrate host, <i>Plasmodium</i> parasites infect hepatocytes and red blood cells. Within these cells, parasites are surrounded by a parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM). The PVM plays an essential role for the interaction of parasites with their host cells; however, only a limited number of proteins of this membrane have been identified so far. This is partially because systematic proteomic analysis of the protein content of the PVM has been difficult in the past, due to difficulties encountered in attempts to separate the PVM from other membranes such as the parasite plasma membrane. In this study, we adapted the BioID technique to <i>in vitro</i>-cultivated <i>Plasmodium berghei</i> blood stage parasites and utilized the promiscuous biotin ligase BirA* fused to PVM-resident exported protein 1 to biotinylate proteins of the PVM. These we further processed by affinity purification, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), and label-free quantitation, leading to a list of 61 known and candidate PVM proteins. Seven proteins were analyzed further during blood and liver stage development. This resulted in the identification of three novel PVM proteins, which were the serine/threonine protein phosphatase UIS2 (PlasmoDB accession no. PBANKA_1328000) and two conserved <i>Plasmodium</i> proteins with unknown functions (PBANKA_0519300 and PBANKA_0509000). In conclusion, our report expands the number of known PVM proteins and experimentally validates BioID as a powerful method to screen for novel constituents of specific cellular compartments in <i>P.&#xa0;berghei</i>. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Intracellular pathogens are often surrounded by a host-cell derived membrane. This membrane is modified by the pathogens to their own needs and is crucial for their intracellular lifestyle. In <i>Plasmodium</i> parasites, this membrane is referred to as the PVM and only a limited number of its proteins are known so far. Here, we applied in rodent <i>P.&#xa0;berghei</i> parasites a method called BioID, which is based on biotinylation of proximal and interacting proteins by the promiscuous biotin ligase BirA*, and demonstrated its usefulness in identification of novel PVM proteins.

### Keywords
Bioid, Plasmodium berghei, Malaria, Plasma membrane

### Affiliations
Universität Bern Institut für Zellbiologie Baltzerstrasse 4 CH-3012 Bern
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Damaris Bausch-Fluck

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Volker Heussler
Universität Bern Institut für Zellbiologie Baltzerstrasse 4 CH-3012 Bern


