### Accession
PXD000289

### Title
Sulfolobus acidocaldarius phosphoproteome

### Description
Shotgun phosphoproteome of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius using PAciFIC technique. Briefly, proteins were denatured, alkylated, trypsine digestion, SCX separation Fractionated peptides were analysed on Bruker HCTultra. Data processing and bioinformatics: data from mass spectrometry were then extracted to mgf format using Bruker Data Analysis V4.0 with a MRM script, these were then were searched against the Sulfolobus acidocaldarius database (containing 2223 proteins) downloaded from NCBI in March 2010 using Phenyx V 2.6 (Genebio, Geneva). The searches were performed using parameters as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification), oxidation of methionine (variation), and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine (variation), trypsin with 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, other parameters such as parent, MS/MS, tolerances were set at 2.0 and 0.8 Da, respectively, whilst minimum peptide length, z-score, p-value and AC score were set at 5, 5.5, 10-5, and 5.5 respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the in vitro and in vivo functions of the only two identified protein phosphatases, Saci-PTP and Saci-PP2A, in the crenarchaeal model organism Sulfolobus acidocaldarius were investigated. Biochemical characterization revealed that Saci-PTP is a dual-specific phosphatase (against pSer/pThr and pTyr), whereas Saci-PP2A exhibited specific pSer/pThr activity and inhibition by okadaic acid. Deletion of saci_pp2a resulted in pronounced alterations in growth, cell shape and cell size, which could be partially complemented. Transcriptome analysis of the three strains (&#x394;saci_ptp, &#x394;saci_pp2a and the MW001 parental strain) revealed 155 genes that were differentially expressed in the deletion mutants, and showed significant changes in expression of genes encoding the archaella (archaeal motility structure), components of the respiratory chain and transcriptional regulators. Phosphoproteome studies revealed 801 unique phosphoproteins in total, with an increase in identified phosphopeptides in the deletion mutants. Proteins from most functional categories were affected by phosphorylation, including components of the motility system, the respiratory chain, and regulatory proteins. In the saci_pp2a deletion mutant the up-regulation at the transcript level, as well as the observed phosphorylation pattern, resembled starvation stress responses. Hypermotility was also observed in the saci_pp2a deletion mutant. The results highlight the importance of protein phosphorylation in regulating essential cellular processes in the crenarchaeon S. acidocaldarius.

### Keywords
Saci, Phosphoproteome, Mutant strains

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering

### Submitter
Trong Khoa Pham

### Lab Head


