### Accession
PXD000899

### Title
Cell cycle dependent phosphorylation of transmembrane proteins on the Theileria annulata schizont surface

### Description
The invasion of Theileria sporozoites into bovine leukocytes is rapidly followed by the liberation of the parasite from the parasitophorpous vacuole membrane, allowing the parasite to establish its niche within the host cell cytoplasm. Theileria infection induces host cell transformation, characterised by increased host cell proliferation and invasiveness, and the activation of anti-apoptotic genes.  This process is strictly dependent on the presence of a viable parasite. Several host cell kinases, including PI3-K, PKA, CK2 and Src-family kinases, are known to be constitutively activated in Theileria infected cells and to contribute to the transformed phenotype. A number of host cell molecules, including the IB kinase and polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), are recruited to the schizont surface, although very little is known about the schizont molecules involved. In this study we used immunofluorescence analysis to detect phosphorylated threonine (p-Thr and p-Thr-Pro) and serine (p-Ser) epitopes on the schizont during host cell cycle progression, revealing extensive schizont surface phosphorylation during host cell interphase. Further, we isolated schizonts from infected macrophages following synchronisation in S-phase or mitosis, and used mass spectrometry to detect phosphorylated schizont proteins. In total, 65 phosphorylated Theileria proteins were detected, 15 of which are potentially secreted or expressed on the surface of the schizont and thus mayight be targets forof host cell kinases. In particular, we describe the cell-cycle stage phosphorylation of two T. annulata surface expressed proteins, TaSP and p104. Phospho-peptides of both proteins were significantly more abundant in schizonts purified from S-phase cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from whole cell lysate were prepared using in solution trypsin digest. One portion of the sample were further enriched using TiO2 column for phosphopeptides. Peptides mixture from both whole cell lysate and phosphor-enriched fractions were analysed on LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Progenesis LC-MS to extract quantitative information followed by protein identification on PEAKS Studio 7.

### Publication Abstract
The invasion of Theileria sporozoites into bovine leukocytes is rapidly followed by the destruction of the surrounding host cell membrane, allowing the parasite to establish its niche within the host cell cytoplasm. Theileria infection induces host cell transformation, characterised by increased host cell proliferation and invasiveness, and the activation of anti-apoptotic genes. This process is strictly dependent on the presence of a viable parasite. Several host cell kinases, including PI3-K, JNK, CK2 and Src-family kinases, are constitutively activated in Theileria-infected cells and contribute to the transformed phenotype. Although a number of host cell molecules, including IkB kinase and polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), are recruited to the schizont surface, very little is known about the schizont molecules involved in host-parasite interactions. In this study we used immunofluorescence to detect phosphorylated threonine (p-Thr), serine (p-Ser) and threonine-proline (p-Thr-Pro) epitopes on the schizont during host cell cycle progression, revealing extensive schizont phosphorylation during host cell interphase. Furthermore, we established a quick protocol to isolate schizonts from infected macrophages following synchronisation in S-phase or mitosis, and used mass spectrometry to detect phosphorylated schizont proteins. In total, 65 phosphorylated Theileria proteins were detected, 15 of which are potentially secreted or expressed on the surface of the schizont and thus may be targets for host cell kinases. In particular, we describe the cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of two T. annulata surface proteins, TaSP and p104, both of which are highly phosphorylated during host cell S-phase. TaSP and p104 are involved in mediating interactions between the parasite and the host cell cytoskeleton, which is crucial for the persistence of the parasite within the dividing host cell and the maintenance of the transformed state.

### Keywords
Theileria annulata schizont, Phosphorylation, Cell cycle dependent

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology  Institute of Infection and Global Health University of Liverpool
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Dong Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Wastling
Department of Infection Biology  Institute of Infection and Global Health University of Liverpool


