### Accession
PXD034855

### Title
MDA5 signaling in splenic B cells from imiquimod-induced lupus mouse model with proteomics study

### Description
Abstract Introduction Several environmental stimuli may influence lupus, especially viral infection. We utilize an imiquimod-induced lupus mouse model focusing on TLR7 pathway and use proteomics analysis to figure out the specific pathway related to viral infection and its related protein expressions in splenic B cells, hoping to get an insight on B cell responses to viral infection in lupus model. Material and methods. FVB/N wild type mouse was used treated with imiquimod for 8 weeks to induce lupus symptoms and signs, and splenocytes were retrieved, and B cells were selected and conducted proteomic analysis. The B cells were co-cultured with CD40L+ feeder cells for another one week before Western blot analysis. Panther pathway analysis was used to disclose the pathways activated and protein-protein interactome analyzed by STRING database in this lupus murine model. Results. The lupus model is well established and well demonstrated with serology evidence and pathology proof of lupus-mimic organ damage. Proteomics data of splenic B cells revealed the most important pathways activated (fold enrichment >100) were positive regulation of MDA-5 signaling pathway, negative regulation of IP-10 production, negative regulation of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 2 production and positive regulation of RIG-I signaling pathway. A unique protein-protein interactome containing 10 genes was discovered, within which ISG15, IFIH1, IFIT1, DDX60, and DHX58 have been demonstrated to be downstream effectors of MDA5 signaling. Finally, B cells intracellular cytosolic proteins were determined with Western blot experiment and the MDA5-related pathway activation is still evident. Conclusion. In this experiment, we confirmed that the B cells in lupus murine model focusing on TLR7 pathway were activated through MDA5 signaling pathway, an important RNA sensor implicated in the detection of viral infections and autoimmune. The MDA5 agonists/antagonist RNAs and detailed molecular interactions inside B cells are worthy further investigation for lupus therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Splenocyte B cell lysates (50 µg) collected from imiquimod-induced lupus mice on day 28 post-induction were dissolved in urea, reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for one hour, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for three quarters. Subsequently, Trypsin and Lys-C Mix (Promega, USA) were added to the above samples at a ratio of 50:1 (protein/protease, w/w), and incubated at 37°C for another four hours. Protein samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with triethylammonium bicarbonate 50 mM and incubated at 37°C for another seventeen hours. The digested samples were acidified with formic acid to pH=2, desalted with C18 Oasis® PRiME HLB cartridges (Waters, USA), and subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling using TMT6-plexTM reagents (Thermo Scientific, USA). The reagents were dissolved in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile and were added to 100 µg of peptides dissolved in 100 µL of triethylammonium bicarbonate at 50 mM. After another hour of incubation, the reaction was quenched by 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for a quarter at 37°C. Labeled peptides from the samples were combined and desalted with C18 Oasis® PRiME HLB cartridges. The combined TMT-labeled peptides were solubilized in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and separated on an XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 µm, 2.1 × 150 mm, Waters, USA) using an 1100 series HPLC equipped with a UV detector (Agilent, USA). The separation was performed with a fixed 90 gradient, 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (20 mM ammonium formate with 80% acetonitrile, pH 10), a linear increase from 5 to 43% B over 45 min, followed by a linear increase to 100% B over 20 minutes, then isocratic at 100% for 5 minutes before a re-equilibration at 5% B for 15 minutes. The TMT-labeled peptides were dissolved in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution and relatively quantified by LC-MS/MS on an Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Full MS (m/z 350–1600) resolutions were set to 120,000 and MS2 scans were acquired using the settings according to the manual setting.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with ProteomeDiscoverer v.2.4 (Thermo Scientific, USA) for protein identification and TMT-based relative protein quantification. Database search through the Sequest HT against the mouse proteome FASTA files (2020-10, 63,702 entries) downloaded from the UniProt database. The peptide spectrum matches are verified by q-values (1% false discovery rate) from the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer based on a decoy database search. Protein quantification was accomplished by assessing the relative signal-to-noise values of reporter ions extracted from MS2 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lupus, B cell, Imiquimod (imq), Proteomics, Mouse model, Mda5

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Fu-An Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fu-An Li
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica


