### Accession
PXD045496

### Title
Experience-induced remodeling of the hippocampal post-synaptic proteome and phosphoproteome

### Description
The postsynaptic density (PSD) of excitatory synapses contains a highly organized protein network with thousands of proteins and is key node in the regulation of synaptic plasticity. To gain new mechanistic insight into experience-induced changes in the PSD, we examined the global dynamics of the hippocampal PSD proteome and phosphoproteome in mice following 4 different types of experience. Mice were trained using an inhibitory avoidance (IA) task and hippocampal PSD fractions were isolated from individual mice to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying experience-dependent remodeling of synapses. We developed a new strategy to identify and quantify the relatively low level of site-specific phosphorylation of PSD proteome from the hippocampus, by using a modified iTRAQ-based TiSH protocol. In the PSD, we identified 3,938 proteins and 2,761 phosphoproteins in the sequential strategy covering a total of 4,968 unique protein groups (at least 2 peptides including an unique peptide). On the phosphoproteins, we identified a total of 6,188 unambiguous phosphosites (75% site localization probability)

### Sample Protocol
In this study, we used 4 experimental groups: IA-trained animals (IA), a walk-through group that received no shock when crossing from the light to the dark (Walk), unpaired control (Shock-only), and untrained mouse (Naïve) groups. Four biological replicates (Western blot) and three biological replicates (proteomics and phosphoproteomics) were performed per animal condition and experimental analysis. For proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis, each biological replicate consisted of 60 μg of proteins extracted from the PSD fraction of mouse hippocampus from the 4 experimental groups (Naïve, Walk, Shock-only, and IA).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data sets were processed for protein/peptide identification using the Proteome Discoverer (PD, v. 3.0) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of mouse sequences (04/2023, UP000000589, Gene count 21,949, Protein count 55,260) with decoy using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ tags (K, peptide N termini); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y). Data sets with raw MS values were filtered to remove potential errors using several criteria. For relative protein quantification, the output Excel sheet file was exported from PD, and then filtered as follows: each unique protein group contains at least 2 peptides and 1 unique peptide and phosphosite localization probability with high confidence (at least 75%) using ptmRS node in PD.

### Publication Abstract
The postsynaptic density (PSD) of excitatory synapses contains a highly organized protein network with thousands of proteins and is a key node in the regulation of synaptic plasticity. To gain new mechanistic insight into experience-induced changes in the PSD, we examined the global dynamics of the hippocampal PSD proteome and phosphoproteome in mice following four different types of&#xa0;experience. Mice were trained using an inhibitory avoidance (IA) task and hippocampal PSD fractions were isolated from individual mice to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying experience-dependent remodeling of synapses. We developed a new strategy to identify and quantify the relatively low level of site-specific phosphorylation of PSD proteome from the hippocampus, by using a modified iTRAQ-based TiSH protocol. In the PSD, we identified 3938 proteins and 2761 phosphoproteins in the sequential strategy covering a total of 4968 unique protein groups (at least two peptides including a unique peptide). On the phosphoproteins, we identified a total of 6188 unambiguous phosphosites (75%&lt;site-localization probability). Strikingly, of the significantly IA-regulated phosphoproteins, a large fraction of these displayed an overall decrease in phosphorylation level. Bioinformatic analysis of proteins and phosphoproteins that were regulated by IA were annotated for involvement in the regulation of glutamate receptor functionality, RHO GTPase cycle, and synaptic plasticity. We also identified synaptic kinases, phosphatases, and their respective phosphosites regulated by IA training or immediate shock. Furthermore, we found that AMPA receptor surface expression was regulated by Mg2+/Mn2+ dependent protein phosphatase 1H (Ppm1h). Together, these results unravel the dynamic remodeling of&#xa0;the PSD upon IA learning or immediate shock and serve as&#xa0;a resource for elucidating the synaptic proteome dynamics induced by experience-dependent plasticity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Taewook Kang
University of Southern Denmark


