### Accession
PXD003073

### Title
A systems study reveals concurrent activation of AMPK and mTOR by amino acids

### Description
Amino acids (aa) are not only building blocks for proteins, but also signalling molecules, with the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) acting as a key mediator. However, little is known about whether aa, independently of mTORC1, activate other kinases of the mTOR signalling network. To delineate aa-stimulated mTOR network dynamics, we here combine a computational–experimental approach with text mining-enhanced quantitative proteomics. We report that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) are acutely activated by aa-readdition in an mTORC1-independent manner. AMPK activation by aa is mediated by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase β (CaMKKβ). In response, AMPK impinges on the autophagy regulators Unc-51-like kinase-1 (ULK1) and c-Jun. AMPK is widely recognized as an mTORC1 antagonist that is activated by starvation. We find that aa acutely activate AMPK concurrently with mTOR. We show that AMPK under aa sufficiency acts to sustain autophagy. This may be required to maintain protein homoeostasis and deliver metabolite intermediates for biosynthetic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Two triple-SILAC approaches were combined to analyse the phosphoproteome of C2C12 cells upon aa stimulation for 0–30 min. Cells were starved for aa for 16 h, before aa readdition. The first approach covered 0, 5 and 30 min aa stimulation. For the second approach 10, 15 and 30 min time points were chosen. Measurements at the 0 min time point (that is, no aa readdition) were used as a reference point for no induction. The fact that the 30 min time point was used for both settings allowed the normalization to this time point and thus a quantitative phosphoproteome analysis across five time points. C2C12 cells were cultivated in SILAC media containing either non-labelled arginine and lysine (light), 13C6-arginine/D4-lysine (medium) or 13C615N4-arginine/13C615N2-lysine (heavy) for at least five passages (1:10), then starved for aa and growth factors for 16 h followed by a stimulation with aa for five different time points. Cells were lysed in sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer and lysates were mixed 1:1:1 followed by tryptic digestion using a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C for 6 h. After strong cation exchange chromatography, phosphopeptides were enriched with titanium dioxide. Samples were measured with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Further experimental details can be found in Dalle Pezze et al., 2016 (PMID 27869123).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant and the UniProt mouse protein sequence database (details provided in Dalle Pezze et al., 2016; PMID 27869123). Parameters of MaxQuant processing and raw and processed files, as well as a custom Matlab script which we used to process the MaxQuant output files ’modificationSpecificPeptides.txt‘ and ’Phospho(STY)Sites.txt‘, form part of this ProteomeXchange entry.

### Publication Abstract
Amino acids (aa) are not only building blocks for proteins, but also signalling molecules, with the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) acting as a key mediator. However, little is known about whether aa, independently of mTORC1, activate other kinases of the mTOR signalling network. To delineate aa-stimulated mTOR network dynamics, we here combine a computational-experimental approach with text mining-enhanced quantitative proteomics. We report that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) are acutely activated by aa-readdition in an mTORC1-independent manner. AMPK activation by aa is mediated by Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase &#x3b2; (CaMKK&#x3b2;). In response, AMPK impinges on the autophagy regulators Unc-51-like kinase-1 (ULK1) and c-Jun. AMPK is widely recognized as an mTORC1 antagonist that is activated by starvation. We find that aa acutely activate AMPK concurrently with mTOR. We show that AMPK under aa sufficiency acts to sustain autophagy. This may be required to maintain protein homoeostasis and deliver metabolite intermediates for biosynthetic processes.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, System modelling, Ampk, Silac, Mtor

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
Lab for Metabolic Signaling, Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands and School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Thedieck
Lab for Metabolic Signaling, Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands and School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany


