### Accession
PXD022575

### Title
Carnitine O-octanoyltransferase is a novel inducer of vascular calcification via promoting fatty acid metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction

### Description
Objective – Vascular calcification is a critical pathology associated with increased cardiovascular event risk, but there are no FDA-approved anti-calcific therapies. We hypothesized and validated that an unbiased screening approach would identify novel mediators of human vascular calcification.  Approach and Results – We performed an unbiased quantitative proteomics and pathway network analysis that identified increased carnitine O-octanoyltransferase (CROT) in calcifying primary human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Additionally, human carotid artery atherosclerotic plaques contained increased immunoreactive CROT near calcified regions. CROT siRNA reduced fibrocalcific response in calcifying SMCs. In agreement, histidine 327 to alanine point mutation inactivated human CROT fatty acid metabolism enzymatic activity and suppressed SMC calcification. CROT siRNA restored mitochondrial proteome alterations and suppressed mitochondrial fragmentation in calcifying SMCs. Lipidomics analysis of SMCs incubated with CROT siRNA revealed increased eicosapentaenoic acid, a vascular calcification inhibitor. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated Crot deficiency in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice reduced aortic and carotid artery calcification without altering bone density, or liver and plasma cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.  Conclusions – CROT is a novel inducer of vascular calcification via promoting fatty acid metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction, as such CROT inhibition has strong potential as an anti-fibrocalcific therapy.

### Sample Protocol
SMCs tandem mass tagging proteomics  SMCs were harvested using RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#: 89900) containing 1% Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Cat#: 78430) at days 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 7 after switching from SMC growth medium to NM or OM, for a total of six time points per condition per donor requiring four TMT 6-plex experiments. Cells were lysed and the protein was quantified using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#: 23225). 50 g protein was proteolyzed with LysC using the in-solution urea+ RapiGest (Waters) strategy.1 Peptides were labeled with TMT 6-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), combined and desalted using Oasis HLB 1 cc (10 mg) columns (Waters). The peptides were then fractionated into 24 fractions based on their isoelectric focusing point (pH range of 3 to 10) using the OFF-gel system (Agilent). Fractions were dried using a tabletop speed vacuum (Thermo Fisher Scientific), cleaned with Oasis columns, and resuspended in 40 L of 5 % acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific), 0.5 % formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) sample buffer for subsequent analysis by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS).  SMCs label-free proteomics  SMCs incubated with CROT siRNA or scrambled siRNA were harvested from a single well of a 6-well plate, at 0, 6, 12 and 24 hours; and at 3, 7, 14 and 21 days after switching from NM to OM (or NM for controls). Cells were washed with PBS then scraped from wells using 100 L RIPA buffer and sonicated on ice to lyse cells. Proteolysis was performed using the iST kit (PreOmics GmbH) with 20 g protein input with subsequent steps following the manufacturer’s protocol. 1 µg of human recombinant CROT protein (OriGene Technologies, Inc., Cat#: TP307888) was digested also using the iST kit. Peptides were resuspended in 40 L sample buffer. The recombinant CROT standard curve was first prepared in sample buffer for a final 0.1 to 100 pg CROT per injection, or spiked into a SMC peptide pool of the NM sample matrix for a final 1 to 100 pg CROT per injection.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry TMT peptide samples were analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap (Elite model) mass spectrometer fronted with a Nanospray FLEX ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column, 75 m X 20 mm; and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column 75 m X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An analytical gradient was run at 350 nL/min from 10 to 30 % solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid) for 120 minutes, followed by ten minutes of a ‘jigsaw wash’, alternating between 5 and 95 % solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid. All reagents were mass spectrometry-grade. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top 20 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-2000 m/z) were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy 40%, isolation width 3 m/z, dynamic exclusion enabled, starting m/z fixed at 120 m/z, and resolution set to 30 K) for peptide sequencing (MS/MS). For label-free analysis, peptides from silencing experiments were analyzed twice by global proteomics and targeted CROT proteomics, using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fronted with an Easy-Spray ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY-Spray HPLC heated (45 oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nL/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30 % solvent B for 15 minutes, followed by the jigsaw wash. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in a 3 second cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; ion trap scan rate, normal) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (60 seconds). For CROT targeted mass spectrometry using parallel reaction monitoring, CROT peptides (VLNDINQAK, a.a. 376-384; FQSGIGEK, a.a.58-65) and ACTR2 peptides (DLmVGDEASELR, a.a. 54-65, M3 oxidized) were measured. The analytical gradient was run at 300 nL/min from 5 to 21% Solvent B for 20 minutes, 21 to 35% Solvent B for five minutes, followed by the jigsaw wash. The mass spectrometer was operated in the targeted acquisition mode. Precursor m/z values were 507.7824 for VLNDINQAK (charge, 2; time window, 11.0-14.5 min), 433.2246 for FQSGIGEK (charge, 2; time window, 9.0-13.0 min), and 675.8144 for DLmVGDEASELR (charge, 2; time window, 20.0-22.5 min) using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The MS/MS spectra (collision energy, 30% HCD; scan range, 120-1200 m/z) were scanned at 240K resolution (Orbitrap).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiovascular calcification, Crot, Human primary smooth muscle cells

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School/Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Harvard Medical School/Brigham and Women's Hospital


