### Accession
PXD012973

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of heat shock response using tandem mass tags

### Description
Analysis of precision of TMT quantitation at the peptide level using multinotch MS3

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced by incubating with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37°C for 1 hour, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. Sample cleanup was carried out by chloroform methanol extraction.  Samples were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.0 with 1 µg Trypsin per 100 µg protein and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. Peptides were desalted with Sep Pak columns (Waters) according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a Speed Vac. Peptides were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and labeled with TMT 2-plex (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were fractionated on a 100 mm x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 40-min gradient from 99:1 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions (buffer A is 0.05% acetonitrile with 10 mM NH4OH; buffer B is acetonitrile with 10 mM NH4OH). The individual fractions were then consolidated into 24 super-fractions.  Super-fractions were loaded on a Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) on an in-line 150 mm x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides were eluted using a 45-min gradient from 97:3 to 65:35 buffer A:B ratio (buffer A is 0.1% formic acid; buffer B is acetonitrile plus 0.1% formic acid) into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). MS acquisition consisted of a full MS scan at 240,000 resolution in profile mode of scan range 375-1500, maximum injection time of 400 ms, and AGC target of 5 x 105, followed by CID MS/MS scans of the N most abundant fragments within a 3 second duty cycle.  Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 Th isolation window in the quadrupole, fragmented with CID at 35%, and analyzed in the ion trap with a maximum injection time of 35 ms and a scan setting of Rapid.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds with a 10 ppm tolerance. MS2 scans were followed by synchronous precursor selection and HCD (65%) fragmentation of the 10 most abundant fragment ions. MS3 scans were performed at 30,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 200 ms and AGC target of 100,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database search using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) using the Uniprot S. cerevisiae database from October 2014, with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. Mascot searches were performed using the same parameters as above, but with peptide N-terminal fixed modification of TMT 2-plex (+225.16), and variable modifications of methyl (+14.02), acetyl (+42.01), diglycine (+114.04), and TMT 2-plex on lysine residues, phosphorylation (+79.97) of serine and threonine.  Mascot search results were loaded into Scaffold and filtered for protein and peptide false discovery rates of 1%.   Data normalization and analyses were performed using R.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to environmental perturbations and insults through modulating protein abundance and function. However, the majority of studies have focused on changes in RNA abundance because quantitative transcriptomics has historically been more facile than quantitative proteomics. Modern Orbitrap mass spectrometers now provide sensitive and deep proteome coverage, allowing direct, global quantification of not only protein abundance but also post-translational modifications (PTMs) that regulate protein activity. We implemented and validated using the well-characterized heat shock response of budding yeast, a tandem mass tagging (TMT), triple-stage mass spectrometry (MS<sup>3</sup>) strategy to measure global changes in the proteome during the yeast heat shock response over nine time points. We report that basic-pH, ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) fractionation of tryptic peptides yields superfractions of minimal redundancy, a crucial requirement for deep coverage and quantification by subsequent LC-MS<sup>3</sup>. We quantified 2275 proteins across three biological replicates and found that differential expression peaked near 90 min following heat shock (with 868 differentially expressed proteins at 5% false discovery rate). The sensitivity of the approach also allowed us to detect changes in the relative abundance of ubiquitination and phosphorylation PTMs over time. Remarkably, relative quantification of post-translationally modified peptides revealed striking evidence of regulation of the heat shock response by protein PTMs. These data demonstrate that the high precision of TMT-MS<sup>3</sup> enables peptide-level quantification of samples, which can reveal important regulation of protein abundance and regulatory PTMs under various experimental conditions.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, United States of America
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Lewis
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas, United States of America


