### Accession
PXD039335

### Title
Structural and regulatory insights into the glideosome-associated connector from Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
The phylum of Apicomplexa groups intracellular parasites that employ substrate-dependent gliding motility to invade host cells, egress from the infected cells and cross biological barriers. The glideosome associated connector (GAC) is a conserved protein essential to this process. GAC facilitates the association of actin filaments with surface transmembrane adhesins and the efficient transmission of the force generated by myosin translocation of actin to the cell surface substrate. Here, we present the crystal structure of Toxoplasma gondii GAC and reveal a unique, supercoiled armadillo repeat region that adopts a closed ring conformation. Characterisation of the membrane binding interface within the C-terminal PH domain as well as an N-terminal fragment necessary for association with F-actin suggest that GAC adopts multiple conformations. A multi-conformational model for assembly of GAC within the glideosome is proposed

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions were done in 50 μl volumes with a final protein concentration of 2.4 μM of GAC protein. Briefly, 120 picomoles of protein in 10 µl final volume were pre-incubated 5 min at 22 °C before the reaction.  Deuterium exchange reaction was initiated by adding 40 µl of D2O exchange buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8, 15 0mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT in D2O) to the protein-peptide mixture. Reactions were carried-out at room temperature for three incubation times (3 s, 30 s and 300 s) and terminated by the sequential addition of 20 μl of ice-cold quench buffer 1 (4 M  Gdn-HCl, 1 M NaCl,  0.1 M NaH2PO4 pH 2.5, 1 % formic acid (FA), 200 mM TCEP). Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for up to two weeks. All experiments were repeated in triplicate. To quantify deuterium uptake into the protein, samples were thawed and injected in a UPLC system immersed in ice with 0.1 % FA as liquid phase. The protein was digested via two immobilized pepsin columns (Thermo #23131), and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted, and peptides separated with a C18, 300Å, 1.7 μm particle size Fortis Bio 100 x 2.1 mm column over a gradient of 8 – 30 % buffer C over 20 min at 150 μl/min (Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid; buffer C: 100% acetonitrile). Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo), for ions from 400 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at 300 °C, 5 kV of ion spray voltage. Peptides were identified by data-dependent acquisition of a non-deuterated sample after MS/ MS and data were analyzed by Mascot

### Data Protocol
Deuterium incorporation levels were quantified using HD examiner software (Sierra Analytics), and quality of every peptide was checked manually. Results are presented as percentage of maximal deuteration compared to theoretical maximal deuteration. Changes in deuteration level between two states were considered significant if >20% and >1.5 Da and p< 0.01 (unpaired t-test)

### Publication Abstract
The phylum of Apicomplexa groups intracellular parasites that employ substrate-dependent gliding motility to invade host cells, egress from the infected cells, and cross biological barriers. The glideosome-associated connector (GAC) is a conserved protein essential to this process. GAC facilitates the association of actin filaments with surface transmembrane adhesins and the efficient transmission of the force generated by myosin translocation of actin to the cell surface substrate. Here, we present the crystal structure of <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> GAC and reveal a unique, supercoiled armadillo repeat region that adopts a closed ring conformation. Characterisation of the solution properties together with membrane and F-actin binding interfaces suggests that GAC adopts several conformations from closed to open and extended. A multi-conformational model for assembly and regulation of GAC within the glideosome is proposed.

### Keywords
Gliding motility, X-ray crystallography, Apicomplexa, Hdx-ms, Toxoplasma gondii

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Oscar Vadas

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Soldati-Favre
University of Geneva, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine


