### Accession
PXD047172

### Title
Proteomic approach during the induction of somatic embryo-genesis in Coffea canephora

### Description
This research seeks to contribute to our understanding of the primary cellular pathways involved in the induction of SE in C. canephora. The process of our model consists of two stages: 1) preconditioning in MS medium with auxin (NAA) and cytokinin (KIN); and 2) induction in Yasuda liquid medium added with cytokinin (BA). Therefore, in this study, we analyzed different days of the SE induction process using shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics. 1630 proteins were found among different sampling days of the process, of which, the majority were up-accumulated during the induction stage. We found that some of the most enriched pathways during the process were the biosynthesis of amino acids and secondary metabolites. Eighteen proteins were found related to auxin homeostasis and two to cytokinin metabolism, such as ABC, BIG, ILR, LOG, and ARR, among others. Ten proteins and transcription factors related to SE were also identified, like SERK1, SKP1, nuclear transcription factor Y, MADS-box and calreticulin,; and 19 related to other processes of plant development, among which the 14-3-3 and PP2A proteins stand out.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted with the phenol-based method. Then reduced, alylated and digested. The fractionation was carried out off line before LC-MS/MS analysis with High-pH re-versed-phase liquid chromatography spin columns (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Cat No. 84868). Three fractions were obtained after elution with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (15, 17, and 20%). Then, fractions were desalted using ZipTip-C18 tips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY spray” nano ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) and interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used to analyze the samples.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MASCOT (v.2.4.1, Matrix, Sci-ence, Boston, MA) search engine implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The PD parameters were set as follows: viridiplantae Swiss-prot database, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, two missed cleavages allowed, 0.01 FDR, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modification. For label-free quantification, the Minora node was incorporated into the Processing workflow

### Publication Abstract
Plant growth regulators (PGR) are essential for somatic embryogenesis (SE) in different species, and <i>Coffea canephora</i> is no exception. In our study model, previously, we have been able to elucidate the participation of various genes involved in SE by using different strategies; however, until now, we have not used a proteomic approach. This research seeks to contribute to understanding the primary cellular pathways involved in developing SE in <i>C. canephora</i>. The process of our model consists of two stages: (1) preconditioning in MS medium with auxin (NAA) and cytokinin (KIN), and (2) induction in Yasuda liquid medium added with cytokinin (BA). Therefore, in this study, we analyzed different days of the SE induction process using shotgun label-free proteomics. An amount of 1630 proteins was found among different sampling days of the process, of which the majority were accumulated during the induction stage. We found that some of the most enriched pathways during this process were the biosynthesis of amino acids and secondary metabolites. Eighteen proteins were found related to auxin homeostasis and two to cytokinin metabolism, such as ABC, BIG, ILR, LOG, and ARR. Ten proteins and transcription factors related to SE were also identified, like SERK1, SKP1, nuclear transcription factor Y, MADS-box, and calreticulin, and 19 related to other processes of plant development, among which the 14-3-3 and PP2A proteins stand out. This is the first report on the proteomic approach to elucidate the mechanisms that operate during the induction of SE in <i>C. canephora</i>. So, our findings provide the groundwork for future, more in-depth research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047172.

### Keywords
Coffea canephora, Somatic embryogenesis, Plant tissue culture, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centro de Investigacion Cientifica de Yucatan
CICY

### Submitter
ANA QUINTANA

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Manuel Loyola Vargas
Centro de Investigacion Cientifica de Yucatan


