### Accession
PXD039478

### Title
Enhanced Ca2+-channeling complex formation at the ER-mitochondria interface underlies the pathogenesis of alcohol-associated liver disease

### Description
Ca2+ overload-induced mitochondrial dysfunction is considered as a major contributing factor in the pathogenesis of alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD).  However, the initiating factors that drive mitochondrial Ca2+ accumulation in ALD remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate that an aberrant increase in mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs) mediates Ca2+ accumulation-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in ALD via the formation of glucose-regulated protein 75 (GRP75)-mediated MAM Ca2+-channeling (MCC) complex. Unbiased transcriptomic analysis reveals pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) as a prominently inducible MAM kinase in ALD. Additional mass spectrometry analysis unveils the critical role of PDK4 in promoting alcohol-induced MCC complex formation and mitochondrial dysfunction by phosphorylating GRP75. Non-phosphorylatable GRP75 mutation or genetic ablation of PDK4 prevents alcohol-induced mitochondrial Ca2+ accumulation and dysfunction. Conversely, ectopic induction of MAM formation in PDK4-deficient mice abrogate the protective effect in alcohol-induced liver injury. Together, our study defines the mediatory role of PDK4 in promoting mitochondrial dysfunction in ALD.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed after de-stainning and excision of the target protein band from the Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gel as follows. In short, the gel was sectioned into 10 mm sections and in-gel digested with trypsin. The tryptic digest was separated through online reversed-phase chromatography using a reversed-phase peptide trap occlusion PepMap™100 (internal diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analysis column PepMap™RSLCC,1875 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. Samples were eluted with a split gradient of 3-50% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) for 60 min and 50-80% solution B for 10 min and then the columns were washed in 100% solution B for 10 min. The chromatography system coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (375-1500 m/z), an AGC target of 5e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides above the threshold of 5e3 and a charge of 2-7 were selected for fragmentation through dynamic exclusion after 15 second and 10 ppm tolerance.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.4)). Sequest was set up to search Uniprot-human.fasta (unknown version, 42230 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the Uniprot-human database (unknown version, 13300 entries) (only "Mudpit_MyO_G1: MyO_G1") also assuming trypsin and a reverse concatenated subset of the Uniprot-human database (unknown version, 54442 entries) (only "Mudpit_GRP75_1: GRP75_1") also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Met-loss of methionine, glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus and phospho of serine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Met-loss of methionine, met-loss+Acetyl of methionine, deamidated of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus, phospho of serine and GG of lysine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Ca<sup>2+</sup> overload-induced mitochondrial dysfunction is considered as a major contributing factor in the pathogenesis of alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD). However, the initiating factors that drive mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> accumulation in ALD remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate that an aberrant increase in hepatic GRP75-mediated mitochondria-associated ER membrane (MAM) Ca<sup>2+</sup>-channeling (MCC) complex formation promotes mitochondrial dysfunction in vitro and in male mouse model of ALD. Unbiased transcriptomic analysis reveals PDK4 as a prominently inducible MAM kinase in ALD. Analysis of human ALD cohorts further corroborate these findings. Additional mass spectrometry analysis unveils GRP75 as a downstream phosphorylation target of PDK4. Conversely, non-phosphorylatable GRP75 mutation or genetic ablation of PDK4 prevents alcohol-induced MCC complex formation and subsequent mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> accumulation and dysfunction. Finally, ectopic induction of MAM formation reverses the protective effect of PDK4 deficiency in alcohol-induced liver injury. Together, our study defines a mediatory role of PDK4 in promoting mitochondrial dysfunction in ALD.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dysfunction, Ptm, Pdk4, Lc-ms/ms, Grp75, Alcohol-associated liver disease

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Department of Internal Medicine,  School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,  Kyungpook National University Hospital,  Daegu, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr In-Kyu Lee
Department of Internal Medicine,  School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,  Kyungpook National University Hospital,  Daegu, Republic of Korea


