### Accession
PXD045935

### Title
Methylation of Ciliary Dynein Motors Involves the Essential Cytosolic Assembly Factor DNAAF3/PF22

### Description
Axonemal dynein motors drive ciliary motility and can consist of up to twenty distinct components with a combined mass of ~2 MDa. In mammals, failure of dyneins to assemble within the axonemal superstructure leads to primary ciliary dyskinesia. Syndromic phenotypes include infertility, rhinitis, severe bronchial conditions, and situs inversus. Nineteen specific cytosolic factors (DNAAFs) are necessary for axonemal dynein assembly although the detailed mechanisms involved remain very unclear. Here we identify the assembly factor DNAAF3 as a structural ortholog of S-adenosyl methionine-dependent methyltransferases. We further demonstrate that dynein heavy chains, especially those forming the ciliary outer arms, are methylated on key residues within various nucleotide-binding sites and on microtubule-binding domain helices directly involved in the transition to low binding affinity. These variable modifications, which are generally missing in a Chlamydomonas null mutant for the DNAAF3 ortholog PF22 (DAB1), likely impact on motor mechanochemistry fine-tuning the activities of individual dynein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Coomassie blue-stained gel bands  were destained using 40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid in water, diced, equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (1 hr at 37°C) and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (45 min at 37°C in the dark). Gel pieces were dehydrated using acetonitrile, dried in a speedvac concentrator, and then rehydrated in a 12.5 ng/µL trypsin solution (Promega porcine sequencing grade trypsin #V5113) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate or 12.5 ng/µL Endoproteinase AspN (Roche endopeptidase AspN #11054589001V1621). Proteolysis proceeded for 16 hr at 37°C on a shaker. Endoproteinase AspN- and trypsintic-digested peptides were extracted using two sets of alternating washes with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile followed by and atwo sets of alternating washes final wash cycle with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 100% acetonitrile. Peptide extraction solutions were pooled, dried to completion, and peptides resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water. Whole cilia lysates solubilized in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 plus 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were subjected to sample preparation using S-Trap micro columns (Protifi LLC).  An aliquot containing 100 µg of total protein was clarified by centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 5 min and proteins isolated in the supernatant were subjected to Cys reduction and alkylation using 5 mM dithiothreitol and 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr and 30 min in the dark, respectively.  Phosphoric acid was added to yield a final concentration (v/v) of 2.5% after which 6X volume of binding/wash buffer [100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 90% methanol] was added prior to sample loading onto the S-Trap micro column.  The loaded sample was spun at 4,000 rcf for 30 sec and 4 washes using 150 µL binding/wash buffer were performed with individual 4,000 rcf spins for 30 sec each.  Protease (Promega sequencing grade trypsin or Endoproteinase AspN) was added in 0.1 M TEAB to a 1:10 (w/w) ratio and digestion proceeded for 16 hr.  Proteolyzed peptides were eluted in 3 consecutive steps using 40 µL aliquots of the following solutions and 4,000 rcf spins at 30 sec each: 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid in water, and 50% acetonitrile in water.  Eluted peptides were dried in a speedvac concentrator, desalted using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (P/N 87851) according to manufacturer’s instructions, dried to completion, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water.  Resuspended peptides from gelband preparations and proteolyzed whole cilia  were analyzed using nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system and Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm x 25 cm nanoEase m/z Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA), separated using either a 1 hr (gelbands) or 2 hr (whole cilia) reversed-phase UPLC gradient, and directly ionized into the Orbitrap Eclipse using positive mode electrospray ionization. MS/MS data were acquired using a data-dependent Top15 acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched against the Chlamydomonas CC-4532 proteome database (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov) using the Andromeda search engine embedded within MaxQuant v.1.6.10.43. Variable modifications included in various searches were: Met oxidation, protein N-terminal Met removalacetylation, methyl Lys/Arg, dimethyl Lys/Arg, trimethyl Lys, and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation; carbamidomethylation of Cys was included as a fixed modification. Scaffold v5 (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR) was used for visualization and further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Axonemal dynein motors drive ciliary motility and can consist of up to twenty distinct components with a combined mass of ~2 MDa. In mammals, failure of dyneins to assemble within the axonemal superstructure leads to primary ciliary dyskinesia. Syndromic phenotypes include infertility, rhinitis, severe bronchial conditions, and situs inversus. Nineteen specific cytosolic factors (Dynein Axonemal Assembly Factors; DNAAFs) are necessary for axonemal dynein assembly, although the detailed mechanisms involved remain very unclear. Here, we identify the essential assembly factor DNAAF3 as a structural ortholog of S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferases. We demonstrate that dynein heavy chains, especially those forming the ciliary outer arms, are methylated on key residues within various nucleotide-binding sites and on microtubule-binding domain helices directly involved in the transition to low binding affinity. These variable modifications, which are generally missing in a <i>Chlamydomonas</i> null mutant for the DNAAF3 ortholog PF22 (DAB1), likely impact on motor mechanochemistry fine-tuning the activities of individual dynein complexes.

### Keywords
Dynein, Ptm, Methylation, Cilia

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment University of Connecticut Storrs, CT 06269
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy L. Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment University of Connecticut Storrs, CT 06269


