### Accession
PXD045512

### Title
Recognition of highly branched N-glycans of the porcine whipworm by the immune system

### Description
Glycans are key to host-pathogen interactions, whereby recognition by the host and immunomodulation by the pathogen can be mediated by carbohydrate binding proteins, such as lectins of the innate immune system, and their glycoconjugate ligands. Previous studies have shown that excretory-secretory products of the porcine nematode parasite Trichuris suis exert immunomodulatory effects in a glycan-dependent manner. To better understand the mechanisms of these interactions, we prepared N-glycans from T. suis and both analyzed their structures and used them to generate a natural glycan microarray. With this array we explored the interactions of glycans with C-type lectins, C-reactive protein and sera from T. suis infected pigs. Glycans containing LacdiNAc and phosphorylcholine-modified glycans were associated with the highest binding by most of these proteins. In-depth analysis revealed not only fucosylated LacdiNAc motifs with and without phosphorylcholine moieties, but phosphorylcholine-modified mannose and N-acetylhexosaminesubstituted fucose residues, in the context of maximally tetraantennary N-glycan scaffolds. Furthermore, O-glycans also contained fucosylated motifs. In summary, the glycans of T. suis are recognized by both the innate and adaptive immune systems, and also exhibit species-specific features distinguishing its glycome from those of other nematodes.Glycans are key to host-pathogen interactions, whereby recognition by the host and immunomodulation by the pathogen can be mediated by carbohydrate binding proteins, such as lectins of the innate immune system, and their glycoconjugate ligands. Previous studies have shown that excretory-secretory products of the porcine nematode parasite Trichuris suis exert immunomodulatory effects in a glycan-dependent manner. To better understand the mechanisms of these interactions, we prepared N-glycans from T. suis and both analyzed their structures and used them to generate a natural glycan microarray. With this array we explored the interactions of glycans with C-type lectins, C-reactive protein and sera from T. suis infected pigs. Glycans containing LacdiNAc and phosphorylcholine-modified glycans were associated with the highest binding by most of these proteins. In-depth analysis revealed not only fucosylated LacdiNAc motifs with and without phosphorylcholine moieties, but phosphorylcholine-modified mannose and N-acetylhexosaminesubstituted fucose residues, in the context of maximally tetraantennary N-glycan scaffolds. Furthermore, O-glycans also contained fucosylated motifs. In summary, the glycans of T. suis are recognized by both the innate and adaptive immune systems, and also exhibit species-specific features distinguishing its glycome from those of other nematodes.

### Sample Protocol
Selected bands were cut from the SDS-PAGE gel (~15 μg/lane). After washing and destaining proteins were fixed in the gel and reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. In-gel digestion was performed with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison, WI; Trypsin-ultraTM, MS grade NEB) with a final trypsin concentration of 20 ng/μl in 50 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate and 5 mM CaCl2. Digest proceeded for 8 hours or overnight at 37°C. Afterwards, peptides were extracted thrice with 50 μL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% aqueous acetonitrile supported by ultrasonication for 10 min. Extracted peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex). Sample pre-concentration and desalting was accomplished with a 5 mm Acclaim PepMap μ-Precolumn (300 μm inner diameter, 5 μm, 100 A; Dionex). For sample loading and desalting 2% acetonitrile in ultra-pure H2O with 0.05% TFA was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 5 μl/min. Separation of peptides was performed on a 25 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm, 100 A) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient started with 4% B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) for 7 min, increased to 31% in 30 min and to 44% in additional 5 min. It was followed by a washing step with 95% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis the LC was directly coupled to a high-resolution Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 350−2000 with a resolution of 60 000, the maximum injection time (MIT) was 50 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e^6. The top 10 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation over a mass range between m/z 200 and 2000 at a resolution of 15 000 with the intensity threshold at 4e^3. Ions with charge state +1, +7, +8 and >+8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 28. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5e^4 and the MIT was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ion masses over a time window of 30s was used to suppress repeated peak fragmentation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C-reactive protein, Lectins, Phosphorylcholine, Fucose

### Affiliations
Boku University
Universitaet fuer Bodenkultur  - Institute of Biochemistry (BCH)

### Submitter
Jorick Vanbeselaere

### Lab Head
Dr Iain Benedict WILSON
Universitaet fuer Bodenkultur  - Institute of Biochemistry (BCH)


