### Accession
PXD043305

### Title
BioID screen for NRF3 interactors in SCC13 and HaCaT cells

### Description
We identified the transcription factor NRF3 as an important tumor-suppressing protein in the skin. To gain insight into the mechanisms of action of NRF3 in keratinocytes, we searched for NRF3 interactors in the SCC13 skin cancer and the immortalized non-tumorigenic HaCaT cell line using BioID interaction screening.

### Sample Protocol
SCC13 and HaCaT cells with DOX-inducible expression of NRF3-BioID were seeded into 15 cm dishes in DMEM/10% FBS/1% P/S, supplemented with 50 µM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich; B4501) and 1 µg/ml DOX and cultured for 24 h. The following day, cell media were changed, and some samples were additionally treated with the proteasome inhibitor 10 µM MG-132 (Merck; 474790-10MG). Cells were cultured for 6 h, trypsinized, pelleted and stored at -80°C until further use. Cell pellets were thawed and lysed in BioID lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1.5 mM MgCL2, 1 mM EDTA) at a ratio of 4:1 vol:wt. Samples were incubated under rotation at 4 °C for 30 min and then centrifuged for 20 min at 16’100 g at 4 °C. The same volumes of supernatant fractions were incubated with washed Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 65001) under rotation at 4°C overnight. The next day, the beads were washed once in BioID wash buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH7.5), twice in BioID lysis buffer and three times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Biotinylated protein pull-down efficiency was monitored by Western blot. Protein-bound beads were analysed by mass spectrometry at the Functional Genomics Centre Zurich. Overnight on-bead digestion was performed at 37 °C under rotation using 1 µg trypsin in a total volume of 100 µl. The next day, the bead supernatant was collected, and the beads were vortexed in 100 µl Milli Q water. The peptide supernatants were pooled and 50 µl formic acid was added. Following evaporation on a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific; SAVANT SPD121P), peptides were dissolved in 15 µl 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid buffer, vortexed, water-bath sonicated for 3 min and placed on a shaker for 10 min at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
Dissolved peptide samples were transferred to autosampler vials for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. 1 µl was injected on a NanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw files were converted to Mascot Generic File formats (.mgf files) from which they were further analysed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK). For the visualisation of the protein and peptide identification results, Mascot protein identification results were imported into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial skin cancers are extremely common, but the mechanisms underlying their malignant progression are still poorly defined. Here, we identify the NRF3 transcription factor as a tumor suppressor in the skin. NRF3 protein expression is strongly downregulated or even absent in invasively growing cancer cells of patients with basal and squamous cell carcinomas (BCC and SCC). NRF3 deficiency promoted malignant conversion of chemically induced skin tumors in immunocompetent mice, clonogenic growth and migration of human SCC cells, their invasiveness in 3D cultures, and xenograft tumor formation. Mechanistically, the tumor-suppressive effect of NRF3 involves HSPA5, a key regulator of the unfolded protein response, which we identified as a potential NRF3 interactor. HSPA5 levels increased in the absence of NRF3, thereby promoting cancer cell survival and migration. Pharmacological inhibition or knock-down of HSPA5 rescued the malignant features of NRF3-deficient SCC cells in vitro and in preclinical mouse models. Together with the strong expression of HSPA5 in NRF3-deficient cancer cells of SCC patients, these results suggest HSPA5 inhibition as a treatment strategy for these malignancies in stratified cancer patients.

### Keywords
Bioid, Hacat cells, Nrf3, Scc13 cells, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences (IMHS); D-Biol; ETH Zürich
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich

### Submitter
Selina Gurri

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sabine Werner
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences (IMHS); D-Biol; ETH Zürich


