### Accession
PXD009709

### Title
Ultrafiltration and size exclusion chromatography combined with asymmetrical-flow field-flow fractionation for the isolation and characterisation of extracellular vesicles from urine

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have a great potential in clinical applications, however their isolation from different body fluids and their characterisation are not yet optimal or standardised. Here we report the results of examining the performance of ultrafiltration combined with size exclusion chromatography (UF-SEC) to isolate EVs from urine. The results reveal that UF-SEC is a fast method and provides high purity. Furthermore, we introduce asymmetrical-flow field-flow fractionation coupled with a UV detector and multi-angle light-scattering detector (AF4/UV-MALS) as a characterisation method and compare it with the applicabilities and limitations of current methods. We demonstrate that AF4/UV-MALS is a straightforward characterisation method for urinary EVs.

### Sample Protocol
1. Urine collection The human biological material (urine) used in this publication was provided by Biobank@UZA (Antwerp, Belgium; ID: BE71030031000); Belgian Virtual Tumorbank funded by the National Cancer Plan, BBMRI-ERIC. Voided urine was obtained with informed consent (approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of Antwerp and the University Hospital of Antwerp) using the urine vacuette system (Vacuette®, Greiner bio-one, Austria). Healthy individuals (n=2, male, 28 to 52 years old) and proteinuria patients (n=3, 2 males and 1 female, 24 to 71 years old) were included. The samples were stored immediately at -30°C. Based upon literature, samples were thawed and centrifuged at 180 xg for 10 minutes at 4°C and at 1,550 xg for 20 minutes at 4°C and pellets were discarded to prepare CF urine. Samples were subsequently stored at -80°C until further use. 2. Exosome isolation (UF-SEC: ultrafiltration - size exclusion chromatography) Per isolation procedure, 40 to 70 mL of CF urine was thawed and filtered using 100 kDa MWCO Centricon® Plus-70 Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck Millipore Ltd, Ireland) to get rid of the solute and smaller particles and proteins. The filtrate was placed on a qEV column (Izon Science Ltd, New Zealand). 500 µL-fractions were collected, started immediately after placing the sample on the column, with filtered PBS as the elution buffer. The qEV columns are used according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  3.Protein extraction UF-SEC fractions in PBS were vacuum dried in 2 mL Eppendorf protein lobind tubes to obtain a pellet of EVs. A MTBE (tert-butyl methyl ether) lipid extraction method was applied on the samples, based on the procedure described by Matyash et al. (2008) This pellet was suspended in 300 µL methanol and vortexed for 10 seconds. 1 mL of tert-butyl methyl ether (MTBE; Sigma, Belgium) was added and samples were shaken for 1 hour at room temperature. 260 µL water was added for the phase separation. After 10 minutes incubation at room temperature, samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1,000 xg, resulting in a lower hydrophilic and upper lipophilic phase. The upper phase was removed and the hydrophilic and protein layer on the bottom was vacuum dried.   4. In solution digest Fractions in PBS were vacuum dried to obtain a pellet of EVs. The vacuum dried protein pellet was suspended in 75 µL 5M urea. Samples were vortexed and sonicated for 10 minutes. This step was repeated once. Proteins were reduced in a final concentration of 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 minutes. Proteins were alkylated in a final concentration of 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. 680 µl 100 mM AB was added. 1 µg trypsin was added per 40 µg proteins and digestion was carried overnight at 37°C. Digests were desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 5. LC-MS/MS The eluted peptides were vacuum dried and dissolved in mobile phase A, containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 1 µg/µL, and spiked with 20 fmol Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Glu-fib, Protea biosciences, Morgantown, WV). 2 µg protein was loaded on column and the peptide mixture was separated by reversed phase chromatography on a nano acquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) using an nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, 2G, V/M, 1/pkg) (Waters) connected to an ACQUITY UPLC PST C18 nanoACQUITY Column (10K psi, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 100 µm X 100 mm, 1/pkg) (Waters). A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 1 to 45% in 95 minutes followed by a steep increase to 90% mobile phase B in 10 minutes. A steep decrease to 1% mobile phase B is achieved in 5 minutes and 1% mobile phase B is maintained for 5 minutes. The flow rate is 400 nl per minute. Liquid chromatography was followed by tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) and was performed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientific) was used. In the MS/MS mode, full scan spectrum (350 to 1850 m/z, resolution 70,000) was followed by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra with a run time of 1 hour. Peptide ions were selected for further interrogation by tandem MS as the 20 most intense peaks of a full-scan mass spectrum. HCD scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.  Matyash V, Liebisch G, Kurzchalia TV, et al. Lipid extraction by methyl-tert-butyl ether for high-throughput lipidomics. J Lipid Res. 2008 May;49(5):1137-46. doi: 10.1194/jlr.D700041-JLR200. PubMed PMID: 18281723; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2311442.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (2.1) software (Thermo Scientific) was used to perform database searching against the database containing Uniprot Human (Proteome ID: UP000005640, downloaded on the 25th of May 2016), using both Sequest and Mascot algorithms. Searches were performed with the following settings: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Digestion by trypsin and 2 missed cleavage sites are allowed. Carbamidomethyl modifications were defined as fixed modifications and phosphorylations and oxidations were dynamic modifications. The results were filtered with following parameters: only high confident peptides with a global FDR < 1% based on a target-decoy approach and first ranked peptides were included in the results.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have a great potential in clinical applications. However, their isolation from different bodily fluids and their characterisation are currently not optimal or standardised. Here, we report the results of examining the performance of ultrafiltration combined with size exclusion chromatography (UF-SEC) to isolate EVs from urine. The results reveal that UF-SEC is an efficient method and provides high purity. Furthermore, we introduce asymmetrical-flow field-flow fractionation coupled with a UV detector and multi-angle light-scattering detector (AF4/UV-MALS) as a characterisation method and compare it with current methods. We demonstrate that AF4/UV-MALS is a straightforward and reproducible method for determining size, amount and purity of isolated urinary EVs.

### Keywords
Urine, Exosome, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp - VITO
Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO) Boeretang 200 2400 Mol

### Submitter
Kurt Boonen

### Lab Head
Dr Inge Mertens
Flemish Institute for Technological Research (VITO) Boeretang 200 2400 Mol


