### Accession
PXD010902

### Title
Rat white adipose tissue DIGE-LC-MSMS

### Description
White adipose tissue is a central place to energy storage and a major endocrine organ. However, adipose molecular mechanisms have been poorly studied during prolonged fasting. To fill this gap, the aim of this study was to decipher proteomic regulations in rat adipose tissue during phase 2 (lipid mobilization) and phase 3 (protein catabolism) of prolonged fasting compared to the fed state. Specific responses reflecting adipose tissue inflammation, increased fibrinolysis and a possible protein catabolism-related energy saving mechanism were recorded during phase 3. Differences between internal and subcutaneous adipose tissues were essentially related to lipid metabolism, the response to oxidative stress and energy production. These data thus provide a molecular basis of adipose tissue responses according to the fasting stage.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve male Sprague Dawley rats were randomly divided into three groups: ‘fed’, ‘phase 2 of fasting’ and ‘phase 3 of fasting’ (N=4/group). Epididymal (EPI) and inguinal subcutaneous (SC) white adipose tissues were quickly dissected from the freshly killed rats and proteomics analysis was then performed as three different experiments to examine the effects of fasting in EPI and in SC, and to compare protein profiles in EPI and SC control fed animals. After extraction, protein samples were labelled using a CyDye DIGE Fluor Minimal Dye Labeling Kit (GE HealthCare, Uppsala, Sweden). Prior to 2D gel electrophoresis, the multiplexing of samples from the fed, phase 2, and phase 3 groups was randomized to avoid any bias. Following 2D gel electrophoresis, gels were washed with water and gel images were acquired using an Ettan DIGE Imager (GE HealthCare) at 100 μm resolution. Gel images were analysed using the PDQuestTM 2-D gel analysis software (v8.0.1; BioRad). Protein spots were excised using an automated gel cutter (PROTEINEER sp, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin and tryptic peptides were analysed on a 1200 series nanoHPLC-Chip system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) coupled to an HCT™ Plus ion trap (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The Chip system was composed of a 40 nL trapping column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 4 mm, with a 5μm particle size), a separation column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 43 mm × 75μm, 5μm) and a sprayer. The solvent system consisted of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% HCOOH in water (solvent A) and 2% water, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). 6 μL of samples were injected onto the trapping column at a flow rate of 3.75 μL/min with solvent B. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, according to the following gradient: t = 0 min 8% B, t = 7 min 40% B, t = 8 min, 70% B, t = 10 min 70% B. The mass spectrometer was operated with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. The following voltages were set up: -1800 V (inlet), +147.3 V (outlet) and a skimmer voltage of +40 V. For mass spectrometry data acquisition, the scan speed was set at 8100 m/z per sec in the MS mode and 26000 m/z per sec in the MS/MS mode. Mass range was set at 250 - 2000 m/z in the MS mode and 50 - 2800 m/z in the MS/MS mode. The 3 most intense ions (doubly charged) were selected for fragmentation, and exclusion was set at 1 min or 2 spectra. The system was fully controlled by ChemStation (Rev B.01.035R1) and EsquireControl (v5.3) software (Agilent technologies and Bruker Daltonics, respectively).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using the MascotTM search engine (v2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on local server. Spectra were searched against a target-decoy version of the Rattus norvegicus protein database downloaded from Swissprot (January 2016, 16118 target + decoy entries) to which common contaminants (e.g. trypsin and keratins) were automatically added using the MSDA software suite. Mascot search parameters included a mass tolerance of 0.3 Da in MS and MS/MS modes, a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini set as variable modifications. Stringent filtering criteria were applied using Proline software (v1.3; http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) to obtain high confidence identifications (FDR < 1%). Single-peptide-based protein identifications, as well as the identification of common contaminants such as keratin and trypsin, were not considered.

### Publication Abstract
Various pathophysiological situations of negative energy balance involve the intense depletion of the body's energy reserves. White adipose tissue is a central place to store energy and a major endocrine organ. As a model of choice to better understand how the white adipose tissue dynamically responds to changes in substrate availability, we used the prolonged fasting paradigm, which is characterized by successive periods of stimulated (phase 2) and then reduced (phase 3) lipid mobilization/utilization. Using omics analyses, we report a regulatory transcriptional program in rat epididymal (EPI) adipose tissue favoring lipolysis during phase 2 and repressing it during phase 3. Changes in gene expression levels of lipases, lipid droplet-associated factors, and the proteins involved in cAMP-dependent and cAMP-independent regulation of lipolysis are highlighted. The mRNA and circulating levels of adipose-secreted factors were consistent with the repression of insulin signaling during prolonged fasting. Other molecular responses are discussed, including the regulation of leptin and adiponectin levels, the specific changes reflecting an increased fibrinolysis and a possible protein catabolism-related energy saving mechanism in late fasting. Finally, some differences between internal and subcutaneous (SC) adipose tissues are also reported. These data provide a comprehensive molecular basis of adipose tissue responses when facing a major energetic challenge.

### Keywords
Fasting, White adipose tissue, Lc-msms, Rat, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


