### Accession
PXD012644

### Title
Proteomic investigations of human HERC2 mutants: insights into the pathobiology of a neurodevelopmental disorder

### Description
HERC2 is a giant protein with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and other known and suspected functions. Mutations of HERC2 are implicated in the pathogenesis of various cancers and result in various severe neurological conditions in Herc2-mutant mice. Recently, a pleotropic autosomal recessive HERC2-associated syndrome of intellectual disability, autism and variable neurological deficits was described; its pathogenetic basis is largely unknown. Using peripheral  blood-derived lymphoblasts from 3 persons with homozygous HERC2 variants and 14 age- and gender-matched controls, we performed unbiased HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses to provide insights into HERC2-mediated pathobiology. We found that out of 3427 detected proteins, there were 812 differentially expressed proteins between HERC2-cases vs. controls. 184 canonical pathways were enriched after FDR adjustment, including mitochondrial function, energy metabolism, EIF2 signaling, immune functions, ubiquitination and DNA repair. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis® identified 209 upstream regulators that could drive the differential expression, prominent amongst which were neurodegeneration-associated proteins. Differentially expressed protein interaction networks highlighted themes of immune function/dysfunction, regulation of cell cycle/cell death, and energy metabolism. Overall, the analysis of the HERC2-associated proteome revealed striking differential protein expression between cases and controls. The large number of differentially expressed proteins likely reflects HERC2’s multiple domains and numerous interacting proteins. Our canonical pathway and protein interaction network findings suggest derangements of multiple pathways in HERC2-associated disease.

### Sample Protocol
Three patients with known HERC2 mutations and 14 age- and gender-matched controls had blood collected from which were derived EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) and control EBV-transformed LCLs.   LCL samples were rinsed in Tris buffer and then lysed with 2% SDS and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Samples were then sonicated, followed by filter-aided sample preparation detergent clean-up. 10 ug protein of each sample was digested with LysC for 1 hour and trypsin overnight at 37°C. Reverse phase LC-MS/w was performed as described, except that 600 ng of peptide digests was loaded on the HPLC column and the gradient of solvent B ranged from 2% to 40% over 210 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files for each sample were processed using Rosetta Elucidator (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25). Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed as previously described. Briefly, LC-MS/MS raw data were imported, and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC-MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks, and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned. Chromatographic peaks were first aligned by retention time and monoisotopic mass. Peak lists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using Mascot. Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications. The false discovery rate for protein identifications was calculated to be 0.02%. The MS/MS peak lists were searched by Mascot (version 2.4.1) (Matrix Science, London, UK) using the human UniProt database. Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 25 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteines, one missed cleavage and oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
HERC2 is a giant protein with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and other known and suspected functions. Mutations of HERC2 are implicated in the pathogenesis of various cancers and result in severe neurological conditions in Herc2-mutant mice. Recently, a pleotropic autosomal recessive HERC2-associated syndrome of intellectual disability, autism and variable neurological deficits was described; its pathogenetic basis is largely unknown. Using peripheral blood-derived lymphoblasts from 3 persons with homozygous HERC2 variants and 14 age- and gender-matched controls, we performed label-free unbiased HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses to provide insights into HERC2-mediated pathobiology. We found that out of 3427 detected proteins, there were 812 differentially expressed proteins between HERC2-cases vs. controls. 184 canonical pathways were enriched after FDR adjustment, including mitochondrial function, energy metabolism, EIF2 signaling, immune functions, ubiquitination and DNA repair. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis<sup>&#xae;</sup> identified 209 upstream regulators that could drive the differential expression, prominent amongst which were neurodegeneration-associated proteins. Differentially expressed protein interaction networks highlighted themes of immune function/dysfunction, regulation of cell cycle/cell death, and energy metabolism. Overall, the analysis of the HERC2-associated proteome revealed striking differential protein expression between cases and controls. The large number of differentially expressed proteins likely reflects HERC2's multiple domains and numerous interacting proteins. Our canonical pathway and protein interaction network findings suggest derangements of multiple pathways in HERC2-associated disease.

### Keywords
Human, Autism, Herc2, Lymphoblast, Neurodvelopment

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Kathleen Lundberg

### Lab Head
Dr Marvin Natowicz
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic


