### Accession
PXD019241

### Title
TEBP-1 and TEBP-2 are double-stranded telomere binders required for fertility

### Description
Telomeres are the ends of linear chromosomes and consist of repetitive double- and single-stranded DNA sequences. Telomeres are bound by dedicated protein complexes, such as shelterin in mammals. In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a comprehensive understanding of the proteins interacting with the telomere sequence is lacking. Here, we harnessed a quantitative proteomics approach to screen for proteins binding to C. elegans telomeres, and identified TEBP-1 and TEBP-2, two paralogs that associate to telomeres in vitro and in vivo. TEBP-1 and TEBP-2 form a telomeric complex with the known single-stranded telomere-binding proteins POT-1, POT-2, and MRT-1. tebp-1 and tebp-2 mutants display strikingly distinct phenotypes: tebp-1 mutants have longer telomeres than wild-type animals, while tebp 2 mutants display shorter telomeres and a mortal germline, a phenotype characterized by transgenerational germline deterioration. Notably, tebp 1;tebp-2 double mutant animals are synthetic sterile, with germlines showing signs of severe mitotic and meiotic arrest. These results define the first telomere-binding complex of C. elegans, including TEBP-1 and TEBP-2, two double-stranded telomere binders required for fertility.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digest. In-gel digestion was performed as previously described (Kappei et al., 2013; Shevchenko et al., 2007) with the exception of the DML samples (see below). Samples were run on a 10% Bis-Tris gel (NuPAGE; Thermo Scientific, #NP0301) for 10 min (IP samples) or on a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific, #NP0321) for 20 minutes (LFQ-measured telomeric DNA pulldowns) at 180 V in 1x MOPS buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific, #NP0001). Individual lanes were excised and cut to approximately 1 mm x 1 mm pieces with a clean scalpel, and transferred to a 1.5 ml reaction tube. For the LFQ telomeric DNA pulldowns, the lanes were split into four fractions. The gel pieces were destained in destaining buffer (50% 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), 50% ethanol p.a.) at 37°C under rigorous agitation. Next, gel pieces were dehydrated by incubation in 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at 25°C shaking and ultimately dehydrated using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, #5305000304, settings V-AQ). The gel pieces were incubated in reduction buffer (50 mM ABC, 10 mM DTT) at 56°C for 60 min and subsequently incubated in alkylation buffer (50 mM ABC, 50 mM iodoacetamide) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Gel pieces were washed in digestion buffer (50 mM ABC) for 20 min at 25°C. Next, gel pieces were dehydrated again by incubation in 100% acetonitrile and drying in the concentrator. The dried gel pieces were rehydrated in trypsin solution (50 mM ABC, 1 µg trypsin per sample, Sigma-Aldrich, #T6567) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was recovered and combined with additional fractions from treatment with extraction buffer (30% acetonitrile) twice and an additional step with pure acetonitrile for 15 min at 25°C, shaking at 1400 rpm. The sample solution containing the tryptic peptides was reduced to 10% original volume in a Concentrator Plus, to remove the acetonitrile and purified using the stage tip protocol. Dimethyl Labeling. Dimethyl labeling (DML) was done as previously described (Boersema et al., 2009). For DML, the previously described in-gel digest was performed with the exception of exchanging ABC buffer for 50 mM TEAB (Fluka, #17902) after alkylation. The volume of the extracted peptides was reduced in a Concentrator Plus. For labeling, either 4% formaldehyde solution (Sigma-Aldrich, #F8775) for light labeling or 4% formaldehyde-D2 solution (Sigma-Aldrich, #596388) for medium labeling, as well as 0.6 M NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich, #156159) were added to the samples and mixed briefly. The mixture was incubated for 1 h at 20°C, shaking at 1000 rpm and afterwards quenched by addition of a 1% ammonia solution (Sigma-Aldrich, #30501) and acidified with 10% formic acid solution (Merck, #1.00264.1000). After the labeling reaction, the respective light and medium samples were mixed 1:1 (light telomere : medium control; medium telomere : light control) and purified by stage tip purification. Stage tip purification. Stage tip purification was performed as previously described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Desalting tips were prepared by using 2 layers of Empore C18 material (3M, #15334911) stacked in a 200 µl pipet tip. The tips were activated with pure methanol. After two consecutive washes with Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) for 5 min the tryptic peptide samples were applied and afterwards washed once more with Buffer A. Upon usage, peptides were eluted with Buffer B. The samples were centrifuged in a Concentrator Plus for 10 min to evaporate the acetonitrile and adjusted to 14 µl with Buffer A. MS measurement and data analysis. 5 µL of sample was injected. The desalted and eluted peptides were loaded on an in-house packed C18 column (New Objective, 25 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) for reverse-phase chromatography. The EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) was mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 2 h (pulldown) gradient from 2 to 40% MS grade acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 225 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to ten MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the C. elegans Wormbase protein database (Version WS269), as well as the Ensembl Bacteria E. coli REL606 database (version from September 2018) for proteins from the feeding strain OP50. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met) and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For enzyme specificity, trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option were activated in the MaxQuant software. Fractions and conditions were indicated according to each experiment. Data analysis was performed in R using existing libraries (reshape2, dplyr, ggplot2, ggrepel) and in-house scripts. Protein groups reported by MaxQuant were filtered removing known contaminants, protein groups only identified by site and those marked as reverse hits. Missing values were imputed at the lower end of LFQ values using random values from a beta distribution fitted at 0.1-1.5%. For statistical analysis, p-values were calculated using the Welch’s t-test. Enrichment values in the volcano plots represent the mean difference of log2 transformed and imputed LFQ intensities between the telomere and the control enriched proteins. Peptide labels created by the dimethyl labeling reaction were selected in the MaxQuant software as “N-terminal Dimethyl 0” and “Dimethyl 0” for the light samples as well as “N-terminal Dimethyl 4” and “Dimethyl 4” for the heavy labeled samples. The re-quant option was activated. An incorporation check was run additionally to confirm incorporation of the dimethyl labels of at least 95% in each sample. Protein groups resulting from MaxQuant analysis were filtered identically to LFQ. The normalized ratios for each protein were log2 transformed and plotted in the scatterplot. Filtering and analysis were done in R using existing libraries and an in-house script.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


