### Accession
PXD004522

### Title
Identification of human dendricitc cell responses to microfilaria of B. malayi

### Description
Human dendritic cells were unexposed or exposed to the microfilaria of B. malayi for 48hrs. The cells were washed, protein extracted, processed and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
mf-exposed and unexposed DC from four donors were lysed, and protein concentrations were quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Equivalent amounts of proteins from mf-exposed and unexposed DC of each donor were resolved on the same NuPAGE 4 to 12% Bis-Tris precast gel. The set of lanes on the same gel were cut into the same number of gel slices. Gel slices were then distained, digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C, and extracted to be analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry(LC-MS/MS). Each set of peptides extracted from mf-exposed and -unexposedDCgel slices was analyzed using Nanobore reverse-phase liquid chromatography-tandem MS (nanoRPLC-MS/MS) with blanks between each run. NanoRPLC was performed using an Agilent 1100 Nanoflow LC system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) coupled online with a linear ion trap (LIT) MS (LTQ; ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA). NanoRPLC columns were slurry packed in-house with 3-m, 300-Å-pore-size, C18 phase (VYDAC, Hesperia, CA) filters in a 75-m-innerdiameter,10-cm fused silica capillary (Polymicro Technologies, Phoenix, AZ) with a flame-pulled tip. After sample injection, the column was washed for 30 min with 98% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water)at 0.5 l/min, and peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 2%mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 42% mobile phase B in 40 min at 0.25 l/min and then to 98% B for an additional 30 min. The LIT-MS was operated in a data-dependent mode in which each full MS scan was followed by five tandem MS scans where the five most abundant molecular ions were dynamically selected for collision-induced dissociation(CID) using a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the nanoRPLC-MS/MS data using SEQUEST against a UNIPROT-derived human proteome database downloaded from the European Bioinformatics Institue (EBI) and B. malayi RefSeq proteome database (NCBI). Methionine oxidation was included as a dynamic modification in the database search. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two miscleavages that met certain criteria (delta correlation [Cn] of 0.1 and charge state dependent cross correlation [Xcorr] of 1.9 for [M  H]1, 2.2 for [M  2H]2, and 3.5 for [M  3H]3) were considered legitimately identified. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. The relative abundance of the proteins (number of unique peptides) was normalized by normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Brugiai malayi

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA 20892
NIH

### Submitter
Sasisekhar Bennuru

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas B Nutman
Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA 20892


