### Accession
PXD028857

### Title
Evaluate gut microbiome biobanking

### Description
A rapid ex vivo microbiome assay and metaproteomics approach was used for rapid evaluation of the cultivability of bio-banked live microbiota, which shows minimal detrimental influences of long-term freezing in deoxygenated glycerol buffer on the cultivability of fecal microbiota.

### Sample Protocol
Microbiome cells were harvested from culture samples and subjected for protein extraction using 4%SDS/9M urea buffer, precipitation using acetone and in-solution trypsin digestion to generate peptides for bottum-up metaproteomics.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed using MetaLab software tool, a comprehensive platform for metaproteomic data analysis. Human gut microbial gene catalog database (IGC, ~9.9 million proteins) were used for database search and FDR threshold of 0.01 at PSM level was used for filtering the identification results.

### Publication Abstract
Biobanking of live microbiota is becoming indispensable for mechanistic and clinical investigations of drug-microbiome interactions and fecal microbiota transplantation. However, there is a lack of methods to rapidly and systematically evaluate whether the biobanked microbiota maintains their cultivability and functional activity. In this study, we use a rapid <i>ex vivo</i> microbiome assay and metaproteomics to evaluate the cultivability and the functional responses of biobanked microbiota to treatment with a prebiotic (fructo-oligosaccharide, FOS). Our results indicate that the microbiota cultivability and their functional responses to FOS treatment were well maintained by freezing in a deoxygenated glycerol buffer at -80&#xb0;C for 12&#xa0;months. We also demonstrate that the fecal microbiota is functionally stable for 48&#xa0;hours on ice in a deoxygenated glycerol buffer, allowing off-site fecal sample collection and shipping to laboratory for live microbiota biobanking. This study provides a method for rapid evaluation of the cultivability of biobanked live microbiota. Our results show minimal detrimental influences of long-term freezing in deoxygenated glycerol buffer on the cultivability of fecal microbiota.

### Keywords
Biobanking, Metaproteomics, Freezing, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


