### Accession
PXD005434

### Title
mouse liver kidney LC-MS/MS -  Quantitative Proteomics and Targeted Fatty Acids Analysis Reveal the Damage of Triptolide in Liver and Kidney

### Description
Triptolide (TP), the major active component in Tripterygium wilfordii Hook. f. (Tripterygium Glycosides), contributes to treat rheumatoid arthritis and anticancer activities. However, the organ toxicity, especially nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity limit its clinical application. To fully understand the mechanism underlying the triptolide induced toxicity, iTRAQ based proteomics and targeted fatty acids analysis were performed. In the present study, mouse were treated with LD50 dose of triptolide, and plasma, liver and kidney tissues were harvested before drug administration (0 h) and after drug administration (0.5 h, 1 h, 2 h, 8 h, 16 h). The blood biochemical levels (ALT, AST, BUN and CRE) were used to evaluated the toxicity of triptolide. 2D-LC-MS/MS approach was used to compare different proteins among groups 0h, 1h, 2h and 8 h. Functional annotation of different proteins in liver between different groups reveals that the top 3 pathways influenced by the TP were acute phase response signaling, antigen presentation pathway and FXR/RXR activation, the molecular and cellular functions which was mainly effected were lipid metabolism and small molecule biochemistry. In kidney, the pathway including LPS/IL-1 Mediated Inhibition of RXR Function, EIF2 Signaling, acute phase response signaling, and LXR/RXR Activation were mainly affected. The proteomics data implicated that fatty acids (FAs) may involve in the organ toxicity induced by TP. Then targeted fatty acids analysis was carried out to determinate the concentration between the different groups (0.5 h, 1 h, 2 h, 8 h, 16 h) by HPLC-MRM. We found that fatty acids in liver (C17:0, C18:0, C18:2, C18:3, C20:0, C20:3, C20:4, C22:1, C22:2, C22:3, C22:4, C22:5, C22:6, C24:0, C24:1, C24:2, C24:3, C24:4, C24:5, C24:6) show significant difference among groups, while in kidney, FAs (C12:0, C12:1, C14:0, C14:1, C16:1, C16:2) show significant difference. P450 protein family show significant change in different group, protein CYP4A14 demonstrate change in both kidney and liver tissues. By combing proteomics and targeted FAs analysis, we deeply investigated the mechanism underlying the TP induced organ toxicity, and the results may provide deeply insight into prevention or intervention in the TP clinical usage and improving its safety.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Proteomics Analysis The liver and kidney tissue were washed in an ice-cold PBS buffer, and rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen before use. For protein extraction, the frozen tissue samples were homogenized with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2.5 M thiourea, 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 65 mM DTT supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail, 5 µL/mg of tissue). Then the homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min at 4°C, and the supernatant containing proteins was recovered. Protein concentration was measured in each sample by Bradford method(16). After quantification, 500 µg of liver or kidney proteins from each animal of the same group (n=8) were combined to constitute a pool that was submitted to proteomic analysis in triplicate, as described below.  4-plex iTRAQ labeling and HPLC fraction The tissue proteins were digested according to the filter-aided sample preparation method (17). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 20 mM DTT at 50 °C for 1 hour and alkylated in 50 mM IAA in the dark for 30 minutes. Proteins were subsequently washed twice with 8M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, trypsin (1:50) was added to each sample and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptides were then desalted using SPE column (Waters Oasis HLB). The eluted peptides were evaporated to dryness under vacuum system (Eppendorf) tryptic digest peptides were labeled using the 4-plex iTRAQ Reagent kit (AB Sciex) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, 4 individual samples were mixed.  Offline Peptide fractionation The peptide mixtures were fractionated by Agilent 1200 HPLC system with a XBridge 4.6 x 250 mm C18 column (Waters, BEH Technology) and loaded onto the column in buffer A2 (H2O, 5 mM NH4FA, pH = 10). The elution gradient was 5–30% buffer B2 (90% ACN, 5 mM NH4FA, pH = 10; flow rate, 0.8 mL/min) for 60 min. The eluted peptides were collected as one fraction per minute, in total 60 fractions were collected and evaporated to dryness. Prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis, each fraction was re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and pooled into 20 fractions. For example, to generate the first pooled fraction, original fractions 1, 21 and 41 were combined. The remaining 19 fractions were generated by using a similar pooling strategy. Pooled fractions were dried using a concentrator plus system (Eppendorf).  Online LC-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was dissolved in buffer A1 (0.1% TFA with 2% acetonitrile) and separated on a 75 μm × 15 cm reversed-phase column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (200 Å × 3 μM, Dr. Maisch). The elution gradient was 5–30% buffer B1 (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; flow rate, 300 nl/min) for 40 min using ACQUITY UPLC System (Waters). The eluted peptides were analyzed using the TripleTOF 5600 system (ABSciex, Concord, ON). MS data were acquired under high-sensitivity mode using the following parameters: 30 data-dependent MS/MS scans per full scan, full scans acquired at a resolution of 40,000 and Each fraction was analyzed in triplicates. Data was acquired using ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 20 PSI, nebulizer gas of 5 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The MS was operated under high-sensitivity mode using the following parameters: 40,000 FWHM for TOF-MS scans, MS/MS scan range of 100–1,800 m/z at a resolution of 20,000, rolling collision energy, charge-state screening (including precursors with a charge state of +2, +3, +4), dynamic exclusion for ½ of peak width (exclusion duration ~15 s). Each fraction was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data (.wiff) was converted into peak lists (.mgf) with Protein Pilot Software v. 4.0 (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Then the Protein Pilot generated .mgf files were searched against the Swissprot database (taxonomy: Mus musculus, released 2015_08, 16,724 mouse protein entries contained) by Mascot software (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK). The search parameters were set as follows: The parent and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. One maximum missed cleavages were allowed.  For data integration and validation, the searching results were parsed into Scaffold Q+ (version: 4.4.6) software using the standard legacy PeptideProphet scoring system(18). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were both set ≤ 1%, and protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  For quantitation analysis, Scaffold Q+ was used to quantify the isobaric tag peptide and protein identifications. Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run, and intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned proteins. The calculation type was median, the reference type was average protein reference and the normalization between samples was set “on”. The minimum dynamic range was set 1%. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using permutation test analysis and results expressed in log2 ratios. Only proteins with a P value <0.05 and a significant log2 fold-change >0.8 or <−0.8 (for upregulated and downregulated proteins, respectively) were taken into consideration for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Triptolide (TP), the major active component in Tripterygium wilfordii Hook. f., is widely used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and autoimmune diseases. However, organ toxicity, especially hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity, limits its clinical application. To fully understand the mechanism underlying TP toxicity, iTRAQ-based 2D-LC-MS/MS proteomics is used to detect differentially expressed proteins in the livers and kidneys of mice administered the LD50 dose of TP. Functional annotation revealed that multiple pathways are involved in TP toxicity, including acute-phase response signaling, the antigen presentation pathway, FXR/RXR activation, LPS/IL-1-mediated inhibition of RXR function, and EIF2 signaling.&#xa0;Members of the cytochrome&#xa0;P450 protein family that are involved in fatty acid (FA) metabolism, such as CYP2E1, show significant differences in expression among groups. Additionally, the proteomics data suggested that FAs are involved in TP-induced toxicity. FA analysis is conducted using HPLC-MRM to characterize the differences among various groups exposed to TP for different times. It has been found that 20 FAs in the liver show significant differences in abundance among groups, whereas in the kidneys, six FAs show significant differences in abundance. By integrating the proteomic and targeted FA analyses, it has been found that differently expressed proteins and FAs both participate in pathways including cellular lipolytic activity, peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation, and so on. Our data contribute to understanding the mechanisms underlying TP-induced organ toxicity. The results may help to improve the clinical efficacy and safety of TP in the future.

### Keywords
Triptolide; proteomics; kidney; liver; fatty acids; 2d-lc-ms/ms; organ toxicity

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China
Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Menglin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jinlan Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China


