### Accession
PXD001014

### Title
Senescence 3 -  Proteomic analysis reveals a role for Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 and major vault protein in resistance to apoptosis in senescent cells by regulating ERK1/2 activation

### Description
Bag3 and MVP regulate apoptosis resistance in Therapy Induced Senescence (TIS)

### Sample Protocol
Sample were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides separated by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap  interfaced with an Agilent 1100 chromatography system.  The analysis performed was a 9 step Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology ( MudPIT).

### Data Protocol
The sample data files were de novo sequenced and searched against a Human UniProtKB database Release 2013_07, 20,266 entries using the search engine PEAKS Studio 7, for peptides cleaved with trypsin. Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Peaks parameters, i.e. only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤1% were accepted from the Peaks database search. The database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages allowed for full tryptic digestion, and a precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm. A fixed modification of cysteine 57.02146 was included.

### Publication Abstract
Senescence is a prominent solid tumor response to therapy in which cells avoid apoptosis and instead enter into prolonged cell cycle arrest. We applied a quantitative proteomics screen to identify signals that lead to therapy-induced senescence and discovered that Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (Bag3) is up-regulated after adriamycin treatment in MCF7 cells. Bag3 is a member of the BAG family of co-chaperones that interacts with Hsp70. Bag3 also regulates major cell-signaling pathways. Mass spectrometry analysis of the Bag3 Complex revealed a novel interaction between Bag3 and Major Vault Protein (MVP). Silencing of Bag3 or MVP shifts the cellular response to adriamycin to favor apoptosis. We demonstrate that Bag3 and MVP contribute to apoptosis resistance in therapy-induced senescence by increasing the level of activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2). Silencing of either Bag3 or MVP decreased ERK1/2 activation and promoted apoptosis in adriamycin-treated cells. An increase in nuclear accumulation of MVP is observed during therapy-induced senescence and the shift in MVP subcellular localization is Bag3-dependent. We propose a model in which Bag3 binds to MVP and facilitates MVP accumulation in the nucleus, which sustains ERK1/2 activation. We confirmed that silencing of Bag3 or MVP shifts the response toward apoptosis and regulates ERK1/2 activation in a panel of diverse breast cancer cell lines. This study highlights Bag3-MVP as an important complex that regulates a potent prosurvival signaling pathway and contributes to chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Bag3 mvp apoptosis

### Affiliations
ucd
Univeristy College Dublin

### Submitter
judith coppinger

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Coppinger
Univeristy College Dublin


