### Accession
PXD028713

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic of C2C12 myogenesis and MAPK inhibition

### Description
Myogenesis is governed by signalling networks whose regulations are tightly controlled in a time-dependent manner. While different protein kinases have been identified to regulate various aspects of myogenesis, knowledge on the global signalling networks and their downstream substrates during myogenesis remains incomplete. Here, we map the myogenic differentiation of C2C12 cells using mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics and proteomics. From these data, we infer global kinase activity and predict substrates of key kinases that are involved in myogenesis. We found that multiple mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) mark the initial wave of signalling cascades. Further phosphoproteomic and proteomic profiling with MAPK1/3 and MAPK8/9 specific inhibitions unveil their shared and distinctive roles on myogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were rapidly washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and heated at 95°C for 5min. The samples were tip-probe sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min, protein quantified by BCA and normalized to 240 µg. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide at 45°C for 5 min. Samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma) and LysC (Wako, Japan) at 1:100 ratio of protease:protein at 37°C for 16h. Ten micrograms of peptide was removed for total proteome analysis and phosphopeptides enriched from the remainder of the sample using the EasyPhos protocol [PMID: 30190555].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to either an Orbitrap HF-X (temporal analysis of myogenesis) or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (MAPK inhibitor analysis) (Thermo Fischer, USA) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C. Separation was achieved on a 40 cm x 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Germany) over 40 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for phosphoproteomics or over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for proteomics. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3-40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1%v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated with data-dependent acquisition with MS1 spectra was acquired over the mass range 350-1400 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis of the 10 most abundant ions (phosphoproteomics) or 18 most abundant ions (proteomics) via HCD fragmentation (15,000 resolution, 1 x 105 AGC, 50 ms maximum injection time (phosphoproteomics) or 28 ms maximum injection time (proteomics), 1.6 m/z isolation width, 10 ppm dynamic exclusion for 30 s). Raw MS data from phosphoproteome and proteome analysis were processed using MaxQuant (version xxx1.6.12.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) for phosphosite identification and quantification against mouse UniProt Database (XXX August, 2019 release).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mapk, C2c12, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


