### Accession
PXD011666

### Title
Role of Fbxo7 in dopaminergic neurons

### Description
Analysis of a conditional knockout of Fbxo7/Park15 expression in mouse brains.

### Sample Protocol
5 week old mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation, and midbrains were dissected out andlysed in RIPA buffer plus protease inhibitors. Samples run on SDS-PAGE and subject to in gel digestion with trypsin and then processed on the mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the mass spectrometer was searched with mascot and processed further in scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
The field of Parkinson's disease research has been impeded by the absence of animal models that clearly phenocopy the features of this neurodegenerative condition. Mutations in FBXO7/PARK15 are associated with both sporadic Parkinson's disease and a severe form of autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinsonism. Here we report that conditional deletion of Fbxo7 in the midbrain dopamine neurons results in an early reduction in striatal dopamine levels, together with a slow, progressive loss of midbrain dopamine neurons and onset of locomotor defects. Unexpectedly, a later compensatory response led to a near-full restoration of dopaminergic fibre innervation in the striatum, but nigral cell loss was irreversible. Mechanistically, there was increased expression in the dopamine neurons of FBXO7-interacting protein, RPL23, which is a sensor of ribosomal stress that inhibits MDM2, the negative regulator of p53. A corresponding activated p53 transcriptional signature biased towards pro-apoptotic genes was also observed. These data suggest that the neuroprotective role of FBXO7 involves its suppression of the RPL23-MDM2-p53 axis that promotes cell death in dopaminergic midbrain neurons. &#xa9; 2019 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Fbxo7/park15, Parkinson's disease, Dopaminergic

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge Department of Pathology

### Submitter
Heike Laman

### Lab Head
Dr Heike Laman
University of Cambridge Department of Pathology


