### Accession
PXD033164

### Title
Multi-omics approach to characterize sex-specific metabolic alterations in triple-transgenic Alzheimer's mouse brain

### Description
We aimed to characterise alterations in metabolic pathways and proteome composition in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease (AD). We specifically aimed to evaluate how these differences may be sex-specific by integrative multi-omics analysis (metabolites, lipids, proteins).

### Sample Protocol
Male and female 3xTg-AD and WT mice were sacrificed at 8 months of age by decapitation without prior anesthesia to avoid alterations to the metabolic profile. Whole brain was collected and immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C. Analyzed tissue samples consisted of 5 males and 7 females per genotype. Whole brain tissue samples were mechanically homogenized under liquid nitrogen and aliquots were pre-weighed (~50 mg) in lysis tubes (Soft Tissue CK 14 Tubes, Bertin Technologies, US).  Pre-weighed homogenized brain tissue (~50 mg) was first extracted by the addition of 750 µl of methanol:water (4:1, v/v) solution with ceramic beads in the Cryolys Precellys 24 Sample Homogenizer (2 x 20s at 10'000 rpm and <10°C, Bertin Technologies, US). Homogenized lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 21'000 g and 4°C. 80 µl of the supernatant (polar metabolite extract) was collected for polar metabolite analysis. The remaining supernatant was collected and reserved. The residual pellet was re-extracted by the addition of 750 µl of 1-butanol:methanol (1:1, v/v), followed by homogenization and centrifugation as described above.   Remaining protein material after solvent extraction was resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 30mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ) and re-homogenized in a FastPrep system.  Aliquots of samples (100ug at 2 ug/ul)  were Cys-reduced/alkylated and digested following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak et al., 2014),  desalted on a Waters Oasis MCX plate and dried.  For peptide MS2 library construction, samples were mixed to create a pool, which was manually separated into 7 fractions  by off-line basic reversed-phase (bRP) using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).    To profile brain proteomes we applied a Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) strategy. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer interfaced through a nanospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase (custom packed) 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.250 ul/min with a linear 6-45% acetonitrile gradient in 107 min. Identical LC gradients were used for data-dependent and data-independent acquisition (DDA PASEF resp. DIA-PASEF) measurements using standard MS methods as published (Meier et al 2018, Meier et al 2018, 2020).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantitation by DIA, Bruker MS data were processed with Spectronaut 14.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). A library was constructed from the DDA data for the basic RP fractions by searching the reference mouse proteome (RefProt, www.UNIPROT.org) (55485 sequences). The library contained 7951 protein groups. Peptide-centric analysis of DIA data with Spectronaut used the library described above and standard Spectronaut parameters, leading to identification and quantitation of 6742 protein groups. Exported protein group intensities normalized by Spectronaut were further analysed with Perseus (Tyanova  et al 2016). Only protein groups quantitated by on average 3 precursors were kept (5115 proteins). Intensities were log2-transformed and Welch t-tests were computed to compare all conditions. The difference of means from the test were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotation as described (Cox and Mann, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Metabolomics, Proteomics, Tgad mouse, Alzheimer's disease, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne Metabolomics Platform (MEP) Quartier UNIL-CHUV Rue du Bugnon 19 CH-1005 Lausanne

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Julijana Ivanisevic
University of Lausanne Metabolomics Platform (MEP) Quartier UNIL-CHUV Rue du Bugnon 19 CH-1005 Lausanne


