### Accession
PXD007567

### Title
Combined proteomics/genomics approach reveals proteomic changes of mature virions as a novel poxvirus adaption mechanism

### Description
DNA viruses, like poxviruses, possess a highly stable genome, suggesting adaption of virus particles to specific cell types is not restricted to genomic changes. Cowpox viruses (CPXV) are zoonotic poxviruses with an extraordinary broad host range, demonstrating their adaptive potential in vivo. To elucidate novel adaption mechanisms of poxviruses, we isolated CPXV particles from a rat and passaged them five times in a human (HEp-2) and a rat (Rat-2) cell line. Subsequently, we purified mature virions and compared the proteome of the non-passaged virions and each passage.

### Sample Protocol
Purified CPXV mature virion particles were pelleted in 500 µl of 10 mM Tris pH 9.0 at 25,000 × g and 4°C for 30 min. Virus pellets were lysed in 30 μL lysis buffer (4 % SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 40mM CAA in 100 mM Tris pH 7.6) by heating at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysates were sonicated for 1 min, clarified at 16,000 × g for 5 min, and prepared for MS analysis using a modified FASP method. Briefly, 30 µl lysate (<200 µg protein) were filled up with 200 µl of 8M Urea in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 (UA) and loaded onto a Microcon Centrifugal Filter Unit with 30 kDa MWCO. SDS was removed by washing thrice with 200 μL UA. Urea was replaced by washing thrice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C in a wet chamber with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix in 40 µl ABC using a protein:enzyme ratio of 25:1. Tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation and eluted twice with 40 μL ABC. Peptides were desalted with 3M Mili-SPE Extraction Disc Cartridges (C18-SD) or 200 μL StageTips with two Empore™ SPE Disks C18 and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Concentrated peptides (2 µg in 4 µl in 0.1 % FA) were subjected to shotgun proteome analysis using an EASY-nanoLC (Proxeon) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer. Peptides from the crust were measured in technical triplicates, while biological triplicates of passages were measured in single run. Peptides were separated over a Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 300 mm x 75 μm column applying a gradient of 0-29 % B in 4 h (solvent A: 0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in H2O, solvent B: 0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in ACN). The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the capillary temperature to 275 °C. An ABIRD device was used for background ion reduction. MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30,000 in the orbitrap (mass range 400-1400 m/z). The top 7 ions (charge state +2 and +3) were fragmented in the iontrap using normalized collision energy of 35 % for CID. Max. ion accumulation time was set to 500 ms for full scan and 100 ms fragment spectra.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label free quantification (LFQ) was done in MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 computational proteomics platform. All RAW files were searched against the human and rat (rattus norvegicus) reference proteome from UniProt, the CPXV Hei database and a contaminant database. The viral database contained isoforms, which had been identified by genome analysis. Trypsin/P was specified as enzyme (specific digestion mode) allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and diGly(K) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Parent ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm and fragment ions with a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. The peptide FDR was set to 0.05 and the protein FDR to 0.01. The match between runs algorithm was used to transfer identifications between samples within a match time window of 2.5 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
DNA viruses, like poxviruses, possess a highly stable genome, suggesting that adaptation of virus particles to specific cell types is not restricted to genomic changes. Cowpox viruses are zoonotic poxviruses with an extraordinarily broad host range, demonstrating their adaptive potential in vivo. To elucidate adaptation mechanisms of poxviruses, we isolated cowpox virus particles from a rat and passaged them five times in a human and a rat cell line. Subsequently, we analyzed the proteome and genome of the non-passaged virions and each passage. While the overall viral genome sequence was stable during passaging, proteomics revealed multiple changes in the virion composition. Interestingly, an increased viral fitness in human cells was observed in the presence of increased immunomodulatory protein amounts. As the only minor variant with increasing frequency during passaging was located in a viral RNA polymerase subunit and, moreover, most minor variants were found in transcription-associated genes, protein amounts were presumably regulated at transcription level. This study is the first comparative proteome analysis of virus particles before and after cell culture propagation, revealing proteomic changes as a novel poxvirus adaptation mechanism.

### Keywords
Poxvirus, Adaption, Lc-ms/ms, Cowpox virus

### Affiliations
Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens (ZBS1), Berlin, Germany
Robert Koch Institute

### Submitter
Marica Grossegesse

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Nitsche
Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens (ZBS1), Berlin, Germany


