### Accession
PXD003321

### Title
Monitoring global protein thiol-oxidation and protein S-mycothiolation in Corynebacterium diphtheriae under hypochlorite stress

### Description
Mycothiol (AcCys-GlcN-Ins, MSH) is the major thiol-redox buffer in Actinomycetes, including Mycobacterium and Corynebacterium species. Protein S-mycothiolation controls the activities of several redox enzymes that function in detoxification of ROS and methionine sulfoxides, including the thiol peroxidase Tpx, the mycothiol peroxidase Mpx and the methionine sulfoxide reductase MsrA. Here we investigated the level of protein S-mycothiolation in Corynebacterium diphtheriae DSM43989 under oxidative stress as well as its NaOCl stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Corynebacterium diphtheriae DSM43989 cells were grown in Heart infusion medium for 4hours at 37C, then transferred into Belitzki minimal medium and incubated for 1hour. Stress was applied at OD(500nm) ~ 1 and cells were treated with 400 µM NaOCl. For post-translational modifications : After 30 min incubation, cells were harvested, then washed and resuspended in Tris-EDTA containing NEM (50mM) to alkylate reduced thiol groups. Cells were then disrupted with a Precellys24 Ribolyzer (Bertin Technologies). Protein concentration was determined using Roti Nanoquant (Roth). NEM-alkylated cell extracts were separated by 15% non-reducing SDS-PAGE and tryptic in-gel digested as described in [Chi et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 10: M111 009506, 2011]. For OxICAT : After 30 min incubation, cells were harvested (corresponding to about 100 µg) and ICAT labelling was done as described in the NOxICAT method ( C. Lindemann, L. I. Leichert (2012)10.1007/978-1-61779-885-6_24). All Tryptic peptides were subjected to a reversed phase column chromatography and MS and MS/MS data were acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source as described in [Chi et al. Mol Cell Proteomics 10: M111 009506, 2011].

### Data Protocol
For PTMs :  Post-translational thiol-modifications of proteins were identified by searching all MS/MS spectra in “dta” format against Corynebacterium diphtheriae target-decoy protein sequence database using Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev. 11, Thermo Electron including Scaffold 4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). The Sequest search was carried out with the following parameter: parent ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance 1.00 Da. Two tryptic miscleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), cysteine alkylation (+125.04767 Da for NEM), S-cysteinylations (+119.004099 Da for C3H7NO2S), S-mycothiolations (+484.13627Da for MSH) and Disulfides (-2.01564 for Cys-2H) were set as variable post-translational modifications in the Sequest search. Sequest identifications required ΔCn scores of > 0.10 and XCorr scores of > 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Neutral loss precursor ions characteristic for the loss of inositol (-180 Da) served for verification of the S-mycothiolated peptides. For OxICAT : Raw files for each LC-MS/MS run were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) to determine the ratio of heavy over light OxICAT-labelled peptides in our experiments. As possible modifications, besides the labelling of cysteine residues with light or heavy ICAT label, only methionine oxidation was included and two possible missed cleavages were allowed in the MaxQuant search parameters. A FASTA file containing all protein sequences associated with C.diphtheriae was set as a reference sequence database. This reference sequence database was used by the search engine Andromeda associated with MaxQuant to identify peptides detected during the LC-MS/MS run.

### Publication Abstract
Mycothiol (MSH) is the major low molecular weight (LMW) thiol in Actinomycetes and functions in post-translational thiol-modification by protein S-mycothiolation as emerging thiol-protection and redox-regulatory mechanism. Here, we have used shotgun-proteomics to identify 26 S-mycothiolated proteins in the pathogen Corynebacterium diphtheriae DSM43989 under hypochlorite stress that are involved in energy metabolism, amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis, antioxidant functions and translation. The glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GapDH) represents the most abundant S-mycothiolated protein that was modified at its active site Cys153 in vivo. Exposure of purified GapDH to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and NaOCl resulted in irreversible inactivation due to overoxidation of the active site in vitro. Treatment of GapDH with H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> or NaOCl in the presence of MSH resulted in S-mycothiolation and reversible GapDH inactivation in vitro which was faster compared to the overoxidation pathway. Reactivation of S-mycothiolated GapDH could be catalyzed by both, the Trx and the Mrx1 pathways in vitro, but demycothiolation by Mrx1 was faster compared to Trx. In summary, we show here that S-mycothiolation can function in redox-regulation and protection of the GapDH active site against overoxidation in C. diphtheriae which can be reversed by both, the Mrx1 and Trx pathways.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mycothiol, Corynebacterium diphtheria, S-mycothiolation, Bacteria, Oxicat

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany

### Submitter
Melanie Hillion

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany


