### Accession
PXD026695

### Title
Inhibition of the mitochondrial disulfide relay system impairs liver cancer cell proliferation

### Description
Augmenter of liver regeneration (ALR) is a critical multi-isoform protein with its longer isoform, located in the mitochondrial intermembrane space, being part of the mitochondrial disulfide relay system (DRS). Upregulation of ALR was observed in multiple forms of cancer, among them hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To shed light into the ALR role in the DRS in HCC, we thus pharmacologically inhibited ALR, resulting in profound mitochondrial impairment and cancer cell proliferation deficits. These effects were mostly reversed by supplementation with bioavailable hemin b, linking the DRS, and specifically ALR function, to mitochondrial iron homeostasis. Since tumor cells are known for their increased iron demand and since increased iron levels in cancer are associated with poor clinical outcome, these results help to further advance the intricate relation between iron and mitochondria in liver cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation 10 µg of purified mitochondria were subjected to a tryptic digest applying a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (Grosche et al., 2016, Wisniewski et al., 2009). After protein reduction and alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, samples were denatured in UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged on a 30kDa cut-off filter device (PALL or Sartorius) and washed thrice with UA buffer and twice with 50mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Proteins were proteolysed for 2h at room temperature using 0.5µg Lys-C (Wako) and subsequently for 16h at 37°C using 1µg trypsin (Promega). Peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Mass spectrometric measurements LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). For subsequent analysis on the Q-Exactive HF, tryptic peptides were accumulated on a nano trap column (300 µm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5  µm, 100 Å; LC Packings) and then separated by reversed phase chromatography (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm; Waters) in a 80 minutes non-linear gradient from 3 to 40% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analysed by the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-flex ionization source. Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1500) and MSMS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 or 15000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. The up to ten most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity (TOP10 method). Target peptides already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for label-free quantification Spectra were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label-free quantification as previously described (Grosche et al., 2016). All features were exported as Mascot generic file (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.4) in the Ensembl Rat database (Release 2014.02, 28611 sequences). Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of < 1%. Mitominer analysis Mitochondrial assignment of proteins was assessed using Mitominer 4.0. Analysis was performed based on mouse gene symbols.

### Publication Abstract
Augmenter of liver regeneration (ALR) is a critical multi-isoform protein with its longer isoform, located in the mitochondrial intermembrane space, being part of the mitochondrial disulfide relay system (DRS). Upregulation of <i>ALR</i> was observed in multiple forms of cancer, among them hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To shed light into ALR function in HCC, we used MitoBloCK-6 to pharmacologically inhibit ALR, resulting in profound mitochondrial impairment and cancer cell proliferation deficits. These effects were mostly reversed by supplementation with bioavailable hemin b, linking ALR function to mitochondrial iron homeostasis. Since many tumor cells are known for their increased iron demand and since increased iron levels in cancer are associated with poor clinical outcome, these results help to further advance the intricate relation between iron and mitochondrial homeostasis in liver cancer.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Disulfide relay, Heme, Hcc, Iron

### Affiliations
Institute of Toxicology and Environmental Hygiene, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany
HMGU Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Ann-Christine König

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Zischka
Institute of Toxicology and Environmental Hygiene, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany


