### Accession
PXD011908

### Title
Multiple solvent elution, a method to counter the effects of Co-Elution and Ion Suppression of peptides in LC-MS analysis.

### Description
The abundance of proteins in the cellular proteome ranges from millions of copies to one copy per cell. This wide dynamic range represents a major challenge in proteomic analysis. On average, any human cell type expresses up to approximately 10.000 different protein coding genes that are used to synthesize all the different molecular forms of the protein product from each gene. In a typical shotgun bottom up proteomic approach, all proteins are cleaved enzymatically into peptides which leads to a very complex sample, containing many 100000s of different peptides. These are typically analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in a data dependent analysis (DDA). One of the consequences of the high complexity of the samples is that co-elution of peptides cannot be avoided. Due to ion-suppression effects and the semi-stochastic nature of the precursor selection in data-dependent shotgun proteomics analysis, low abundant peptides are not easily identified [2, 4]. A commonly used strategy to increase the peptide coverage is to reduce the likelihood of co-elution of peptides by using extra-long gradients on nano-LC columns of 50 cm or longer and/or make use of multidimensional separations. In the current study we applied a different method that can noticeably improve the identification of co- eluting peptides. Peptides from a HeLa cell digest were eluted using three different elution solvents (acetonitrile, methanol and acetone) in reverse phase LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics analysis. Results were compared with three replicates of the same solvent, common practice in shotgun proteomics. In total, we see up to a respectively 10 % and 30% increase in protein and unique peptide combined identifications from the multiple solvent elution when compared to the combined identifications from the three replicates of the same solvent. In addition, the overlap of unique peptide identifications common over the three runs in the new approach is only 23% respectively compared to 50% in the replicates of the same solvent. The presented method thus provides an easy to implement method to significantly improve the protein coverage in shotgun proteomics without the need to use complex pre fractionation coupled to multidimensional LC set-ups.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. A commercial HeLa digest standard (ThermoFisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) was used in our LC-MS analysis to check the elution pattern of these peptides in all the solvents. 10 µL of 0.1 µg/µL HeLa digest dissolved in solvent A (98% water, 2% elution solvent and 0.1% of formic acid) was used for all the runs in LC-MS/MS.   Liquid chromatography. The peptide mixture was separated by reversed phased chromatography on a Waters (Milford, Massachusetts, United States) nanoacquity UPLC system using a Trap column of 5 um C18 silica beads, ,100 A pores 2 cm length, 180 µm diameter. And an Analytical column of 1.7 um C18 silica beads, 130 A pores, 10 cm length, 100 µm diameter. The sample was run for 120 min at 400nl min-1 and 35°C in an optimized gradient elution pattern. The same gradient was used for all the three solvents. In the gradient elution, the flow started with a linear gradient of 98% MA, 1 % MB. The gradient profile was: 0−30 min, 5% MB; 30−90 min, 20 %MB; 90−110 min, 40 % MB, 110−117 min, 70 %MB; 117−120 min, 95 % MP B. mobile phase A (MA):98% of water, 1.9% elution solvent and 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase B (MB): 98% elution solvent (respectively, acetonitrile, methanol and acetone), 1.9% water, 0.1% formic acid, (all Biosolve, Nl). The nano-LC was coupled online with a mass spectrometer using an Picotip emitter (new objective, USA) in nanospray configuration. Mass spectrometry. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350–5000 m/z, resolution 60 000) was followed by a maximum of ten Collision- induced dissociation (CID) tandem mass spectra (100 to 2000 m/z). Peptide ions were selected as the 10 most intense peaks of the MS1 scan. CID scans were acquired in the linear ion trap part of the mass spectrometer. The normalized collision energy used was 35% in CID with dynamic exclusion time of   30 seconds. Three replicates of 3 sets of analysis were performed: 3 replicates of the LC MS analysis with acetonitrile, methanol and acetone as hydrophobic solvent in MB and 3 replicates of 3 LC MS analysis with only one solvent as hydrophobic solvent in MB.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. The peptides and protein identifications of all the LC-MS runs were identified by matching with NCBI databases with Mascot (version 2.5.1, http://www.matrixscience.com/) through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (https://www.thermofisher.com,Thermo scientific). The peptides are searched against Homo sapiens SwissProt reference proteome database (version downloaded on 20150702) with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Trypsin is specified as the protease by allowing maximum of two missed cleavages with cysteine-carbamidomethylation as static modification and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Result peptide filters were set as 1) Only peptides with rank 1 were selected and 2) only peptides identified with at least medium confidence of 5% false decoy rate (FDR) are considered as confident identifications.

### Publication Abstract
On average a human cell type expresses around 10,000 different protein coding genes synthesizing all the different molecular forms of the protein product (proteoforms) found in a cell. In a typical shotgun bottom up proteomic approach, the proteins are enzymatically cleaved, producing several 100,000&#x202f;s of different peptides that are analyzed with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS). One of the major consequences of this high sample complexity is that coelution of peptides cannot be avoided. Moreover, low abundant peptides are difficult to identify as they have a lower chance of being selected for fragmentation due to ion-suppression effects and the semi-stochastic nature of the precursor selection in data-dependent shotgun proteomic analysis where peptides are selected for fragmentation analysis one-by-one as they elute from the column. In the current study we explore a simple novel approach that has the potential to counter some of the effect of coelution of peptides and improves the number of peptide identifications in a bottom-up proteomic analysis. In this method, peptides from a HeLa cell digest were eluted from the reverse phase column using three different elution solvents (acetonitrile, methanol and acetone) in three replicate reversed phase LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomic analysis. Results were compared with three technical replicates using the same solvent, which is common practice in proteomic analysis. In total, we see an increase of up to 10% in unique protein and up to 30% in unique peptide identifications from the combined analysis using different elution solvents when compared to the combined identifications from the three replicates of the same solvent. In addition, the overlap of unique peptide identifications common in all three LC-MS analyses in our approach is only 23% compared to 50% in the replicates using the same solvent. The method presented here thus provides an easy to implement method to significantly reduce the effects of coelution and ion suppression of peptides and improve protein coverage in shotgun proteomics. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011908.

### Keywords
Co-elution, Lc-ms, Solvents, Ion suppression, Proteomics, Proteome coverage

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp
Centre for proteomics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium

### Submitter
Harshavardhan Budamgunta

### Lab Head
Dr Geert Baggerman
Centre for proteomics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium


