### Accession
PXD001213

### Title
Tissue Engineered Rat Lung Proteomics

### Description
The goal of this project was to develop a method to fully characterize the proteome of native and decellularized rat lungs. In short, we show that chemical digestion is necessary yield the full complement of the insoluble proteins that make up decellularized scaffolds, a step that is generally ignored in the literature, but necessary to attain a representative readout of the tissue proteome

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were pulverized, and sequentially extracted with CHAPS, Urea, and digested with CNBr. All samples were trypsin digested, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were converted to peak lists, then searched against the IPI_Rat (in house annotated_final release) database with MASCOT. Result files were then compiled into scaffold, filtered for proteins represented by 2 peptides at a 99% confidence interval, then exported for manually analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The use of extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffolds, derived from decellularized tissues for engineered organ generation, holds enormous potential in the field of regenerative medicine. To support organ engineering efforts, we developed a targeted proteomics method to extract and quantify extracellular matrix components from tissues. Our method provides more complete and accurate protein characterization than traditional approaches. This is accomplished through the analysis of both the chaotrope-soluble and -insoluble protein fractions and using recombinantly generated stable isotope labeled peptides for endogenous protein quantification. Using this approach, we have generated 74 peptides, representing 56 proteins to quantify protein in native (nondecellularized) and decellularized lung matrices. We have focused on proteins of the ECM and additional intracellular proteins that are challenging to remove during the decellularization procedure. Results indicate that the acellular lung scaffold is predominantly composed of structural collagens, with the majority of these proteins found in the insoluble ECM, a fraction that is often discarded using widely accepted proteomic methods. The decellularization procedure removes over 98% of intracellular proteins evaluated and retains, to varying degrees, proteoglycans and glycoproteins of the ECM. Accurate characterization of ECM proteins from tissue samples will help advance organ engineering efforts by generating a molecular readout that can be correlated with functional outcome to drive the next generation of engineered organs.

### Keywords
Rat, Lung, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Cnbr, Qconcat, Srm

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA

### Submitter
Ryan Hill

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Hansen
Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado-Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA


