### Accession
PXD016522

### Title
A draft genome sequence of the elusive giant squid, Architeuthis dux

### Description
We present a draft genome assembly that includes 200 Gb of Illumina reads, 4 Gb of Moleculo synthetic long-reads and 108 Gb of Chicago libraries, with a final size matching the estimated genome size of 2.7 Gb, and a scaffold N50 of 4.8 Mb. We also present an alternative assembly including 27 Gb raw reads generated using the Pacific Biosciences platform. In addition, we sequenced the proteome of the same individual and RNA from three different tissue types from three other species of squid species (Onychoteuthis banksii, Dosidicus gigas, and Sthenoteuthis oualaniensis) to assist genome annotation. We annotated 33,406 protein coding genes supported by evidence and the genome completeness estimated by BUSCO reached 92%. Repetitive regions cover 49.17% of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilised from a giant squid mantle tissue sample according to the procedure described by Kleffmann et al. [1] and employing the following buffers: (1) 40 mM Tris–HCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT, pH 8.5; (2) 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris, 5 mM MgCl 2 and 20 mM DTT; (3) 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM Tris, 40 mM DTT, 2% CHAPS (w ⁄ v) and 1% Triton X-100 (v ⁄ v) and (4) 40 mM Tris, 4% SDS (w ⁄ v) and 40 mm DTT. All buffers were augmented with protease inhibitors (Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, EDTA-Free, Thermo Scientific). Tissue samples were ground in liquid nitrogen before homogenization, or homogenized directly with ultrasound (probe sonication at 60 Hz, for 3 min) in buffer 1. Solubilised proteins were collected by ultracentrifugation at 100,000xg and 4 ºC. Each extraction was performed in duplicate for each specific buffer and extracts were pooled. Protein extracts were subsequently stored at -20 ºC. Total protein content was estimated according to the Bradford (1976) method [2].   Protein separation by 1D SDS-PAGE electrophoresis was carried out as described in Santos et al. [3] . 53 µL of sample (39 µg protein) was diluted in 72 µL of Loading Buffer (0.01% bromophenol blue, 2% SDS (Sodium-DodecylSulfate), 20% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol (w/v/v) in 62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8). The resulting solution was heated for 3 min at 99°C. Proteins were separated by SDS–PAGE with 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels. Electrophoresis was carried out using the mini Protean Cell (BioRad) at a constant voltage of 150 V. The separated proteins were visualized by staining with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CCB) [4] , and lanes were cut into 15 gel sections for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. All samples were analysed with the Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected online to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source  (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were loaded in a fused silica column (75 µm inner diameter) packed with C18 resin (3-µm beads, Reprosil, Dr. Maisch), with solvent A (0.5% acetic acid). They were then eluted with a 120 minute gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) with a constant flow of 250 nL/min. The Q exactive was operated in positive mode with a capillary temperature of 250 °C, using the data dependent acquisition method, which switches from full MS scans to MS/MS scans for the 12 most intense ions. Fragmentation was achieved by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 25. Full MS ranged from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms, whereas MS/MS events were scanned at a resolution of 35,000, an AGC of 1e5, maximum injection time of 124 ms, isolation windows of 2 m/z and an exclusion window of 45 seconds.  1. Kleffmann T, Russenberger D, von Zychlinski A, Christopher W, Sjölander K, Gruissem W, et al. The Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplast proteome reveals pathway abundance and novel protein functions. Curr. Biol. [Internet]. 2004 [cited 2014 Aug 23];14:354–62. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15028209  2. Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding.  Anal. Biochem. [Internet]. 1976 [cited 2019 Mar 28];72:248–54. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/942051  3. Santos R, da Costa G, Franco C, Gomes-Alves P, Flammang P, Coelho A V. First Insights into the Biochemistry of Tube Foot Adhesive from the Sea Urchin Paracentrotus lividus (Echinoidea, Echinodermata).  Mar. Biotechnol. [Internet]. 2009 [cited 2019 Mar 28];11:686–98. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19221839  4. Neuhoff V, Arold N, Taube D, Ehrhardt W. Improved staining of proteins in polyacrylamide gels including isoelectric focusing gels with clear background at nanogram sensitivity using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 and R-250.  Electrophoresis [Internet]. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd; 1988 [cited 2019 Mar 28];9:255–62. Available from: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/elps.1150090603

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were read using Thermo Fisher MSRawFileReader 2.2 library and imported into PEAKS Studio 7.0 and subsequently preprocessed for precursor mass and charge correction, MS/MS de-isotoping, and deconvolution. PEAKS de novo sequencing was performed on each refined MS/MS spectrum with a precursor and fragment ion error tolerance of 7 ppm and 0.02 da respectively. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (Met) and N-terminal Acetylation as variable modifications. At most, five variable modifications per peptide were allowed. For each tandem spectrum, five de novo candidates were reported along with their Local Confidence Scores (the likelihood of each amino acid assignment in a de novo candidate peptide). This score was used to determine the accuracy of the de novo peptide sequences. The top de novo peptide for each spectrum was determined by the highest Average Local Confidence score (ALC) among the candidates for that spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Invertebrate, Genome assembly, Cephalopod

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Center for Macroecology, Evolution and Climate, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. The Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Submitter
Mohammad Rahman

### Lab Head
Dr Rute R. da Fonseca
Center for Macroecology, Evolution and Climate, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. The Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


