### Accession
PXD021689

### Title
Fibrinogen-like protein 1 is a novel biomarker for predicting disease activity and prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis

### Description
A total of 762 proteins were identified from 35 pooled rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients with moderate to high disease activity and 60 pooled healthy serum samples. Among them, 142 proteins including 68 up-regulation and 74 down-regulation were identified in RA compared to healthy subjects.

### Sample Protocol
A portion (0.1 mL) of serum was used for protein extraction. Firstly, the high abundant proteins in the serum samples were removed using ProteoMinerTM protein enrichment kit (Bio-Rad). After treatment, the equal volume of 50 mM Tris-phenol (pH 8.0) were added into the mixture and kept at 4°C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 5000 xg for 30 min at 4°C, the phenol supernatant was collected. Five-fold volume of 0.1M ammonium acetate in methanol was added into the collected supernatant and stored at -20°C for 18 h. Then protein was precipitated through centrifugation at 12000 xg for 10 min at 4°C and the resulting precipitate was collected. The crude precipitated protein was washed using fivefold volume of ice-cold methanol through centrifugation at 12000 xg for 10 min at 4°C. The wash step was repeated twice using ice-cold acetone to remove methanol. The washed protein was dried and dissolved in lysis buffer which consisted of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 8 M Urea and 0.2% SDS. The dissolved protein solution was centrifuged again at 12000 xg for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected as final protein sample. Purified proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetic acid for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then the alkylated protein sample was enriched with 10k ultrafiltration tube and digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. After 16 h of digestion at 37°C, peptides were desalted with C18 cartridge to remove the high urea, and desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against uniprot-Homo sapiens database (82616 sequences) by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus and TMT of lysine were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 miscleavage sites were allowed. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Reporter Quantification (TMT) was used for TMT quantification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, the significant ratios, defined as p < 0.05 and |log2FC| >*(ratio > * or ratio < * [fold change, FC]), were used to screen the differentially expressed proteins (DEP).

### Publication Abstract
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), afflicting over 1% of the population, is an inflammatory joint disease leading to cartilage damage and ultimately impaired joint function. Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs are considered as the first-line treatment to inhibit the progression of RA, and the treatment depends on the disease status assessment. The disease activity score 28 as clinical gold standard is extensively used for RA assessment, but it has the limitations of delayed assessment and the need for specialized expertise. It is necessary to discover biomarkers that can precisely monitor disease activity, and provide optimized treatment for RA patients. A total of 1,244 participants from two independent centers were divided into five cohorts. Cohorts 1-4 constituted sera samples of moderate to high active RA, low active RA, RA in remission and healthy subjects. Cohort 5 consisted of sera of RA, osteoarthritis (OA), ankylosing spondylitis (AS), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) and healthy subjects. Biomarkers were found from cohorts 1-2 (screening sets), cohort 3 (discovery and external validation sets), cohort 4 (drug intervention set) and cohort 5 (biomarker-specific evaluation set). We found 68 upregulated and 74 downregulated proteins by TMT-labeled proteomics in cohort 1, and fibrinogen-like protein 1 (FGL1) had the highest area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) values in cohort 2. In cohort 3, in cross-comparison among moderate/high active RA, low active RA, RA in remission and healthy subjects, FGL1 had AUC values of approximately 0.9000 and predictive values of 90%. Additionally, FGL1 had a predictive value of 91.46% for moderate/high active RA vs. remission/low active RA and 80.77% for RA in remission vs. low active RA in cohort 4. Importantly, FGL1 levels had no significant difference in OA and AS compared with healthy persons. The concentrations in SLE and pSS were improved, but approximately 3-fold lower than that in active RA in cohort 5. In summary, FGL1 is a novel and specific biomarker that could be clinically useful for predicting progression of RA.

### Keywords
Biomarke, Rheumatoid arthritis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China

### Submitter
zhou wei

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Zhou
State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, School of Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China


