### Accession
PXD030819

### Title
Protein-based engineering of the initial acquired enamel pellicle in vivo: proteomic evaluation

### Description
Objective: To study the proteomic alterations in the initial AEP after rinsing with CaneCPI-5, StN15 or Hb or their combination.

### Sample Protocol
Individual samples were extracted with a solution containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. The samples were vortexed at 4 °C for 10 min, sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. This step was repeated once more. The supernatant was then collected and transferred to a new tube. This procedure was repeated once more for a good recovery of the samples. Thus, the papers were pooled in their respective groups and placed in tube filters (Corning Costar®Spin-X® Plastic Centrifuge Tube Filters, Sigma-Aldrich, New York, USA) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was recovered and added to that previously collected. The sampleswere then concentrated to 150 μL using Falcon Amicon tubes (Merck Millipore®, Tullagreen, Ireland). After concentration, the samples were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol) for 40 min at 37°C and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide) for 30 min in the dark. Then 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added, and digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight by adding 2% (w/w) trypsin (Promega®, Madison, USA). Ten microliters of 5% formic acid was added and the samples were purified and desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific®, Rockford, IL, USA). A 1-µL aliquot was removed for protein quantification, performed by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad®, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were resuspended in a solution containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by mass spectrometry (MS.

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC-Xevo QTof MS system (Waters, Manchester, UK). For label-free quantitative proteome, 9 MS raw files from each pooled group were analyzed using Protein Lynx Global Service (PLGS, v.3.0; Waters Manchester, UK) software, as previously described [22]. All the proteins identified with a score with confidence greater than 95% were included in the quantitative analysis. Identical peptides from each triplicate by sample were grouped based on mass accuracy (<10 ppm) and on a time of retention tolerance <0.25 min, using the clustering software embedded in the PLGS. Search results were filtered for a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. The research was done on the Homo sapiens database (reviewed only, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) downloaded in December 2020 from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/). The difference in expression between the groups was analyzed by t-test (p<0.05), using the PLGS software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Canecpi-5; statherin; hemoglobin; acquired enamel pellicle; proteomics

### Affiliations
PhD student
Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil

### Submitter
Tamara Araújo

### Lab Head
Dr Tamara Teodoro Araujo
Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil


