### Accession
PXD021172

### Title
In vivo dynamics of Iron Starvation Induced Proteins under variable iron supplementation regimes suggest an iron processing organelle in Phaeodactylum tricornutum.

### Description
The model pennate diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum is able to assimilate a range of iron sources. It therefore provides a platform to study different mechanisms of iron processing concomitantly in the same cell. In this study we follow the localisation of three iron starvation induced proteins (ISIPs) in vivo, driven by their native promoters and tagged by fluorophores in an engineered line of P. tricornutum. In a proteomic analysis, we identify that the cell engages the endocytosis machinery involved in the vesicular trafficking as a response to siderophore molecules, even when these are not bound to iron. We find that the localisation patterns of ISIPs are dynamic and variable depending on the overall iron status of the cell and the source of iron it is exposed to. Notwithstanding, a common destination of the proteins is a globular compartment in the vicinity of the chloroplast, consistent with our proteomic findings,  which point to the engagement of the cell’s vesicular network. We propose that this may be a dedicated iron processing site inside the periplastidial compartment of diatoms.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics analyses For global proteomic analyses, the cells were grown for one week in Mf medium containing 0.1 µM iron (as ferric EDTA, Fe′), and then transferred either into iron-deficient Mf medium or into iron-deficient Mf medium containing 1 µM Ga(III)-DFCH. After 3 days, the cells were harvested and cell extracts were prepared by sonication in the presence of 0.1% digitonin, and the protein content of the samples was measured, in order to quantify the amount of proteins to be precipitated with acetone.  LC-MS/MS acquisition Protein extracts (40 µg) were precipitated with acetone at -20 °C (4 vol/vol sample). The pellet of proteins was collected by centrifugation. The acetone supernatant was carefully removed and the protein pellet was heated for 20 minutes at 95 °C and then cooled on ice for 20 minutes. It was resuspended in 20 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/ml, Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) and analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an Easy Spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), LC EASY-Spray™ C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm bead size, 100 Å pore size) operated at 55 °C, 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 97 min, followed by a column regeneration for 23 min, giving a total run time of 2 hrs. Peptides were analysed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3x106. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in Top20 mode, at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 2x105, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. MS/MS of most intense precursor were acquired first. Peptides with unassigned charge state or singly charged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis in label-free experiments  Label-free quantification in-between subject analysis was performed on raw data with Progenesis-Qi software 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K.) using the following procedure: (i) chromatograms alignment, (ii) peptide abundances normalisation, (iii) statistical analyses of features, and (iv) peptides identification using the Mascot server through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). A decoy search was performed and the significance threshold was fixed to 0.01. The resulting files were imported into Progenesis-LC software. Normalised abundances of proteins from trypsin digests with similar normalised abundance variations of the corresponding peptides (ANOVA p value < 0.05) were classified together by the AutoClass Bayesian clustering system (Achcar et al., 2009) and visualised with Javatreeview (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Siderophores, Fluorescent proteins, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Proteome, Iron, Iron starvation induced proteins, Diatoms

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod - CNRS & Université de Paris
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Institut Jacques Monod - CNRS & Université de Paris


