### Accession
PXD024981

### Title
Structural characterization of Sgl1

### Description
This project is trying to map the disordered regions of the CN and AF Sgl1 constrcuts to optimize x-ray crystallography.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS reactions were performed in a similar manner as is outlined in previous publications. (PMID: 29632185) In brief: HDX reactions were conducted in a final reaction volume of 50µL with a SGL1 final molar amount of 24pmol. D2O buffer (100mM NaCl, (20mM pH6.0 Bis-Tris (AF_SGL1) or 20mM pH 7.5 HEPES(CN_SGL1)), 90.5%D2O (V/V)) was added and the reaction allowed to proceed for 3s at 4oC before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guandine-HCl and 0.9% FA post quench. Both conditions were created and run in triplicate. Fully deuterated samples were made in the same method as the above samples with the exception of 1:1 (V/V) incubation with 2M Guanidine for 5 minutes prior to incubation with D2O. D20 incubation was allowed to proceed for 5 minutes prior to quenching and flash freezing in LN2. Reaction %D2O differences caused by the addition of guanidine compensated for in other samples by the addition of H2O prior to starting the RXN. Samples were flash frozen and stored at -80°C until injection onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system kept in a cold box at 2°C. The protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Porosyme 2-3131-00) and the peptides were collected onto a VanGuard Precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5%-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. MS experiments were performed on an Impact QTOF (Bruker) and peptide identification was done by running tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments run in data-dependent acquisition mode. The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS) and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Differences in exchange were in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: > 4% change in exchange, > 0.3 Da difference in exchange, and a p-value < 0.01 using a two-tailed Student’s t-test. All compared samples were set within the same experiment

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Sgl1

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


