### Accession
PXD009652

### Title
LC-MS/MS characterization of xyloside-primed glycosaminoglycans with cell-specific cytotoxic properties reveals structural diversity and novel glycan modifications

### Description
Structural characterization of glycosaminoglycans remains a challenge and is essential for determining not only structure-function relationships between glycosaminoglycans and the biomolecules with which they interact, but also to gain insight into the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans. We have recently reported cytotoxic effects of xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate derived from a human breast carcinoma cell line, HCC70, and shown that it differs in disaccharide composition from non-toxic chondroitin/dermatan sulfate derived from a human breast fibroblast cell line, CCD-1095Sk. To further investigate the structural requirements for the cytotoxic effect, we have here developed a novel LC-MS/MS approach based on dibutylamine ion-pairing reversed-phase chromatography and negative mode higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and used it in combination with cell growth studies and disaccharide fingerprinting. This allowed for detailed structural characterization of linkage regions, internal oligosaccharides, and non-reducing ends, showing not only differences between xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells and CCD-1095Sk cells, but also in sialylation of the linkage region as well as previously undescribed methylation and sulfation of the non-reducing ends. Although the xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells was less complex in terms of presence and distribution of iduronic acid than that from CCD-1095Sk cells, both glucuronic acid and iduronic acid appeared essential for the cytotoxic effect. Our data have moved us one step closer to understanding the structure of the cytotoxic chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells primed on xylosides, and demonstrate the suitability of the LC-MS/MS approach for structural characterization of glycosaminoglycans.

### Sample Protocol
The disaccharide standards were purchased from Iduron (Alderley Park, UK). Approximately 10 ug of XylNap- and XylNap-d7-primed GAGs were degraded using either chondroitinase ABC (EC 4.2.2.20) (Seikagaku), chondroitinase AC-I and -II (EC 4.2.2.5) (Seikagaku), chondroitinase B (EC 4.2.2.19) (R&D Systems), or heparinase II (no EC number) and heparinase III (EC 4.2.2.8) (from Flavobacterium heparinum overexpressed in Escherichia coli, a gift from Prof. Jian Liu, University of North Carolina).  Chondroitinase ABC degradations were performed in 100 µL of 50 mM NH4OAc, pH 8.0 containing 100 mU of enzyme at 37°C for 16 h. Chondroitinase AC-I and -II degradations were performed in 100 µL of 50 mM NH4OAc, pH 8.0 containing 10 mU of each enzyme at 37°C for 16 h. Chondroitinase B degradations were performed in 100 µL of 50 mM NH4OAc, 4 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4 containing 50 mU of enzyme at 37°C for 16 h. Heparinase II and III degradations were performed in 100 µL of 50 mM NH4OAc, 4 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4 containing 50 mU of each enzyme at 37°C for 16 h. After degradation, the samples were boiled for 10 min and centrifuged at 10000 x g before the supernatants were dried by centrifugal evaporation. Commercially available CS A, CS B, and heparin (all from Sigma-Aldrich) were included as controls. LC-MS/MS setup consisted of the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) equipped with the in-house made flow split and coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Glacial AcOH (for analysis) and LC-MS grade MeOH were purchased from Merck (Darmstad, Germany), HPLC-grade di-n-butylamine was purchased from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). Water was deionized. Dried samples were reconstituted in 30 µl of H2O. Two to six µl of the sample was injected onto the Acquity BEH C18 column (300 Å pore size, 1.7 um particle size, 300 um x 150 mm column dimensions) purchased from Waters Corporation (Milford, USA). Solvent A was 5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in H2O, solvent B was 5 mM di-n-butylamine and 8 mM AcOH in 70% methanol. All methods used stepwise isocratic elution at approximately 2 µL/min flow on column. The products were eluted at 100% A for 13 min, at 30% B for 15 min, then at 60% B for 10 min, and at 100% B for 19 min. The electrospray source was operated in negative ionization mode at 3.5 kV. Precursor ion mass spectra were recorded at 60 000 resolution in the m/z range 350-2000. The 10 most intense precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 5.0 Th without a dynamic exclusion, fragmented using HCD at the normalized collision energy of 70% or 80% and the MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15 000 with the first mass 100; precursors with unassigned charge states were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Data was assessed manualy using the Xcalibur 3 software (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Structural characterization of glycosaminoglycans remains a challenge but is essential for determining structure-function relationships between glycosaminoglycans and the biomolecules with which they interact and for gaining insight into the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans. We have recently reported that xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate derived from a human breast carcinoma cell line, HCC70, has cytotoxic effects and shown that it differs in disaccharide composition from nontoxic chondroitin/dermatan sulfate derived from a human breast fibroblast cell line, CCD-1095Sk. To further investigate the structural requirements for the cytotoxic effect, we developed a novel LC-MS/MS approach based on reversed-phase dibutylamine ion-pairing chromatography and negative-mode higher-energy collision dissociation and used it in combination with cell growth studies and disaccharide fingerprinting. This strategy enabled detailed structural characterization of linkage regions, internal oligosaccharides, and nonreducing ends, revealing not only differences between xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells and CCD-1095Sk cells, but also sialylation of the linkage region and previously undescribed methylation and sulfation of the nonreducing ends. Although the xyloside-primed chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells was less complex in terms of presence and distribution of iduronic acid than that from CCD-1095Sk cells, both glucuronic acid and iduronic acid appeared to be essential for the cytotoxic effect. Our data have moved us one step closer to understanding the structure of the cytotoxic chondroitin/dermatan sulfate from HCC70 cells primed on xylosides and demonstrate the suitability of the LC-MS/MS approach for structural characterization of glycosaminoglycans.

### Keywords
Glycosaminoglycan; glycomics; reversed-phase chromatography; ion-pairing chromatography; lc-ms/ms; hcd; negative mode electrospray;

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine at Institute of Biomedicine, SU Sahlgrenska  413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Göran Larson
Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine at Institute of Biomedicine, SU Sahlgrenska  413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden


