### Accession
PXD035301

### Title
Comparative analyses of the N-glycoproteomes in HCT116 cancer cells and their non-tumorigenic DNMT1/3b double knockout (DKO1) cells and insight into the Mannose-6-phosphate pathway

### Description
N-glycoproteomic analyses provide valuable resources for investigation of cancer mechanisms, biomarkers, and therapeutic targets.  Here, we mapped and compared the site-specific N-glycoproteomes of colon cancer HCT116 cells and isogenic non-tumorigenic DNMT1/3b double knockout (DKO1) cells using Fbs1-GYR N-glycopeptide enrichment technology and trapped ion mobility spectrometry.  Many significant changes in site-specific N-glycosylation were revealed, providing a molecular basis for further elucidation of the role of N-glycosylation in protein function.  HCT116 cells display hypersialylation especially in cell surface membrane proteins. Both HCT116 and DKO1 show an abundance of paucimannose and 80% of paucimannose-rich proteins are annotated to reside in exosomes.  The most striking N-glycosylation alteration was the degree of mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) modification.  N-glycoproteomic analyses revealed that HCT116 display hyper-M6P modification, which was orthogonally validated by M6P immunodetection.  Significant observed differences in N-glycosylation patterns of the major M6P receptor, CI-MPR in HCT116 and DKO1 may contribute to the hyper-M6P phenotype of HCT116 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptide preparation from cell lysates.  HCT116 and DKO1 cells were serum-starved for two days in order to reduce N-glycomolecule contamination from bovine serum.  Tryptic peptides from the serum-starved cells were prepared using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described previously10 with adjustments for protein release of whole cell samples. Briefly, around 50 µl of pelleted cells (approximately from a 15 cm cell culture plate) were lysed with 800 µl of lysis buffer containing 1% SDS and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5 and were sonicated for 2 min (Qsonica sonicator, 4-tip horn, 30% energy output) to shear the genomic DNA.  The cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 15000 x g for 10 min to remove cell debris, and the protein concentration of the cell lysates was then determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit from ThermoFisher (#23225). After 100 mM DTT was added, the cell lysates were then denatured and reduced at 95 ℃ for 3 min.  400 µl of cell lysates containing 300- 400 µg proteins were transferred to a filter unit (Ultracel YM-30, MRCF0R030, MilliporeSigma), and concentrated to around 100 µl.  DTT and SDS were then removed, free thiol groups were alkylated by iodoacetamide (IAA), and tryptic peptides were generated using Trypsin-Ultra (P8101S, NEB) following the protocol described previously2. The tryptic peptides were lyophilized and dissolved in LC MS grade water.  The concentrations of tryptic peptides were determined by a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher) at A280 with the sample type option set to 1 Abs = 1 mg/ml. N-glycopeptide enrichment by Fbs1-GYR.   The enrichment was performed using the N-glyco-FASP protocol described by Zielinska et al.10.  300 µg tryptic peptides (300 µl in 100 mM NH4HCO3) prepared from cell lysate were incubated with 100 µg purified Fbs1-GYR in a Ultracel YM-30 filter unit (30 kDa cutoff, MRCF0R030, MilliporeSigma) at 4 °C for one hour. The filter units were then centrifuged to remove unbound peptides at 14,000 x g for 10-15 min at 4 °C. To wash away non-specific binding peptides, the peptides/Fbs1-GYR the filter units were then mixed with 300 µl 100 mM NH4HCO3, incubated at 4 °C for 5 min, then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10-15 min at 4 °C (discard the flow-through). The washing step was repeated two more times. The peptides retained in the filter units were eluted with 3 × 200 μl 50% formic acid.  In the elution step, the peptides/Fbs1-GYR in the filter units were incubated with 200 μl 50% formic acid for 5 min at room temperature, and then was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10-15 min.  The flow-through containing the enriched N-glycopeptides was collected.  Repeat this elution step for two more times.   All the three elution from the same sample was combined and lyophilized overnight to remove formic aid and residual NH4HCO3.  The enriched N-glycopeptides were reconstituted in LC MS grade water with 0.1% Formic Acid, and the concentrations were measured using a Nanodrop Spectrophotometer at A280 with the sample type option set to 1 Abs = 1 mg/ml. These Fbs1-GYR enriched peptides were then subjected to timsTOF (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
timsTOF mass spectrometry analysis.  The pre-enriched tryptic peptides and Fbs1-GYR enriched samples were submitted to MS/MS analysis using a NanoElute system (Bruker) coupled online to a hybrid TIMS-quadrupole TOF mass spectrometer11 (timsTOF Pro, Bruker) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker) operating with 3 L/min dry gas at 180 °C and a capillary voltage of 1700 V. Approximately 400 ng of peptides or glycopeptides were separated on an Aurora column 25 cm × 75 µm ID, reversed-phase column (IonOpticks, Australia) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min in an oven compartment heated to 50 °C. The column was equilibrated using 5 volumes of water containing 0.1% formic acid. Two gradients with a linear increase starting from 2% to 37% of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid over either 90 min or 45min were used in these experiments. For the MS/MS runs with a 45 min LC gradient and a 90 min LC gradient, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent PASEF12 mode with 1 survey TIMS-MS/6 PASEF MS/MS and 1 survey TIMS-MS/10 PASEF MS/MS scans per acquisition cycle, respectively.  Ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 to 0.6 Vs cm-2 using equal ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer of 100 ms each. MS spectra were acquired within a mass range of m/z 100–3000. Suitable precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in a window of 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700 by rapidly switching the quadrupole position in sync with the elution of precursors from the TIMS device. We made use of the m/z and ion mobility information to exclude singly charged precursor ions with a polygon filter mask and further used ‘dynamic exclusion’ to avoid re-sequencing of precursors that reached a ‘target value’ of 40,000 a.u (45 min LC gradient) or 100,000 a. u (90 min LC gradient). The ion mobility dimension was calibrated linearly using three ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix (m/z, 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848 Vs cm-2; 922.0097, 1.1895 Vs cm-2; and 1221.9906, 1.3820 Vs cm-2). As a simultaneous acquisition of MS spectra at lower and higher collision energies (collision energy stepping CID) is the ideal approach for selectively yielding fragment ions covering both the glycan and the peptide moieties of glycopeptides, a basic stepping mode with optimized fragmentation and fragment transferring conditions were applied for the tandem MS acquisitions13. Thus, each precursor was fragmented with 2 different energies and collision cell tuning to obtain maximum information. For the 45 min gradient runs, collision energies were set as a linear curve in a mobility dependent manner ranging from 32 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 to 64 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6, with collision cell radiofrequency operating at 1300 V, transfer time of 90 µs and pre-pulse storage of 8 µs (step 1). During step 2, collision energies were set ranging from 40 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 to 100 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6, with collision cell radiofrequency operating at 1600 V, transfer time of 64 µs and pre-pulse storage of 10 µs.   For the 90 min gradient runs, collision energies ranged from 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 to 75 eV at 1/K0 to 1.6, with collision cell radiofrequency operating at 700 V, transfer time of 25 µs and pre-pulse storage of 8 µs (step 1) and from 35 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 to 100 eV at 1/K0 to 1.6, with collision cell radiofrequency operating at 2000 V, transfer time of 100 µs and pre-pulse storage of 13 µs (step 2). Each MS spectrum was acquired with 50% of time for each defined step and these parameters were applied for all charge states inside the polygon filter mask. Byonic search. N-glycopeptide spectra were searched using Bruker raw data (.d) on Byonic (embedded in PMI-Byos, Protein Metrics Inc., Cupertino, CA) against Uniprot Human Database (UP000005640) and a human N-glycan database containing 132 N-glycan structures (provided by Byonic). Search parameters were set as precursor tolerance to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragments, fully specific trypsin digestion, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation and pyro-Glu as variable modifications and cysteine. The number of peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were used for glycosylation quantification/comparison.  All searches considered only fully tryptic peptides and FDR was adjusted to 1%. PivotTable from Microsoft Excel was used to organize and compare the N-glycoproteomes.

### Publication Abstract
N-glycosylation is implicated in cancers and aberrant N-glycosylation is recognized as a hallmark of cancer. Here, we mapped and compared the site-specific N-glycoproteomes of colon cancer HCT116 cells and isogenic non-tumorigenic DNMT1/3b double knockout (DKO1) cells using Fbs1-GYR N-glycopeptide enrichment technology and trapped ion mobility spectrometry. Many significant changes in site-specific N-glycosylation were revealed, providing a molecular basis for further elucidation of the role of N-glycosylation in protein function. HCT116 cells display hypersialylation especially in cell surface membrane proteins. Both HCT116 and DKO1 show an abundance of paucimannose and 80% of paucimannose-rich proteins are annotated to reside in exosomes. The most striking N-glycosylation alteration was the degree of mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) modification. N-glycoproteomic analyses revealed that HCT116 displays hyper-M6P modification, which was orthogonally validated by M6P immunodetection. Significant observed differences in N-glycosylation patterns of the major M6P receptor, CI-MPR in HCT116 and DKO1 may contribute to the hyper-M6P phenotype of HCT116 cells. This comparative site-specific N-glycoproteome analysis provides a pool of potential N-glycosylation-related cancer biomarkers, but also gives insights into the M6P pathway in cancer.

### Keywords
Mannose-6-phosphate (m6p), Fbs1-gyr, N-glycoproteome, N-glycosylation, Paucimannose

### Affiliations
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
Minyong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Minyong Chen
New England Biolabs


