### Accession
PXD008160

### Title
Multi-laboratory analysis of sample stability for proteomics following non-cooled international transport

### Description
As international collaborative research grows there is increasing desire to transport specimens around the globe. Transporting biological samples such as cells or tissues is complicated by the need to maintain integrity and minimise modification and degradation, but this is economically costly as the samples must be shipped in a frozen state. This multi-laboratory study investigated whether non-cooled transport of dried peptide samples maintained stability for proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. Human cancer cell lysates were proteolysed and dried in Australia and shipped by air to Europe and China for label free mass spectrometry using similar LC-MS systems. Preparation and analysis of the specimens in this manner resulted in only minor differences in protein identification and high quantitative reproducibility amongst the participating laboratories. We examined any impact on peptide chemical modification and report no discrepancies compared to the starting, non-shipped sample. We conclude that the transport of non-cooled, dried peptides has little to no effect on sample integrity for downstream LC-MS analysis and therefore represents a cost-effective option to facilitate international proteomic collaborations.

### Sample Protocol
In this study SW480 colon cancer cells were proteolytically digested in the laboratory at Macquarie University, as described previously [7]. Briefly, cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer, reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) and cysteines were blocked using 2-iodoacetamide (IAA). Digestion was carried out overnight using trypsin. Peptides were desalted using a reversed phase column (SepPak C18 cartridge, Waters) and aliquoted to 100 µg/tube. Peptides were lyophilized using a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac, Labconco).

### Data Protocol
The resulting 12 data files were processed together using the MaxQuant software [8] version 1.5.8.3. Spectra were searched against a human database, obtained in October 2014 from UniProt containing 20193 entries, and a contamination database provided by MaxQuant. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminus and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamic acid (pyro-glu), which may be favoured during elevated temperatures [9], were set as variable modification. The maximum amount of modifications per peptide was set to 5 and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was chosen. Trypsin was selected as specific enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide and protein identification were filtered to a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Orbitrap was set as instrument type, the first search was conducted with 20 ppm tolerance and the main with 4.5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 10 ppm for de novo matching. LFQ option was activated using the Fast LFQ algorithm and an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2 was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Transporting biological samples such as cells or tissues is complicated by the need to maintain integrity and minimise modification and degradation, but this is economically costly as the samples must be shipped in a frozen state. This multi-laboratory study investigated sample variability introduced by non-cooled transport of dried peptide samples for proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. Human cancer cell tryptic lysates were proteolysed and dried in Australia and shipped by air to Europe and China. Samples were measured using label free mass spectrometry on similar LC-MS systems at all three sites. Preparation and analysis of the specimens in this manner resulted in only minor differences in protein identification and showed high quantitative reproducibility amongst the participating laboratories. We examined any impact on peptide chemical modification and report no discrepancies compared to the starting, non-shipped sample. We conclude that transport of non-cooled, dried peptides has negligible effect on sample integrity for downstream LC-MS analysis and therefore represents a cost-effective option to facilitate international proteomic collaborations. Data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008160.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Stability, Peptides, Proteomics, Multi-laboratory

### Affiliations
University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany
Macquarie University/ APAF Sydney, Australia
Institute of Clinical Chemistry/Central Laboratories, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf

### Submitter
Pascal Steffen

### Lab Head
Dr Hartmut Schlueter
Institute of Clinical Chemistry/Central Laboratories, Mass Spectrometric Proteomics, University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf


