### Accession
PXD046203

### Title
quantitative proteomics analysis of Styxl1-/- mouse sperm

### Description
In order to investigate the molecular mechanism of Styxl1 in the regulation of sperm flagella, sperm from Styxl1+/+ and Styxl1-/- mice were collected for quantitative proteomics analysis using TMT-based liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach. A total of 6429 proteins were quantified, and 1517 proteins (p < 0.05, Foldchange > 2) were differentially expressed. Among these differential proteins, 986 proteins were downregulated (65%) and 531 proteins were upregulated (35%) in Styxl1-/- sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Epididymal sperm protein were extracted with urea lysis buffer, and subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and TMT labelling. High-pH reverse phase fractionation using XbridgeTM BEH C18 Column (300 μm × 150 mm, 1.7 μm; Waters) was performed to generate a total 30 fractions. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed with an analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 95 min linear gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 sec, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34 min and 50 sec, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 38% to 100% buffer B for 5 sec, 100% buffer B for 8min) at 300 nl/min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was configured with a resolution of 60K for MS1 and 15K for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched with MaxQuant software (Version 2.2.0.0) using mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource database (UniProt, release 2022_09). Both the protein and peptide FDR cut-off was set to 0.01. Full cleavage by trypsin, and the number of maximal miscleavage sites was permitted to two. Carbamidomethylation (C) on cysteine was considered as fixed modifications. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. For TMT experiment settings, reporter ion MS2 type and 6plex TMT isobaric labels were selected. The corrected TMT reporter intensities were used for TMT-based protein quantification. Statistical significance was determined using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test. A protein with p value < 0.05 and foldchange greater than 2 was considered significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Sperm, Styxl1, Tmt

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health,Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Yueshuai Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine and Offspring Health,Nanjing Medical University


