### Accession
PXD031601

### Title
APEX2 labeling of Sec bodies in S2 cells

### Description
APEX2 was tagged to Sec24AB protein in S2 cells. Biotinylation was triggeredin resting cells and amino acid starved cells for comparative analyses of Sec24AB interactome. Sec24AB is localised to Sec bodies during starvation, thereby allowing the identification of protein components in Sec bodies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in non-denaturing conditions for pulldown with streptavidin beads. Biotinylated proteins were digested with Lys C and Trypsin for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Maxquant and LFQ comparisons were further filtered by Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Sec bodies are membraneless stress-induced assemblies that form by the coalescence of endoplasmic reticulum exit sites (ERES). Through APEX2 tagging of Sec24AB, we biotinylated and identified the full complement of Sec body proteins. In the presence of biotin-phenol and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> (APEX on), APEX2 facilitates the transfer of a biotin moiety to nearby interactors of chimeric Sec24AB. Using this unbiased approach comparing APEX on and off (-H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) conditions, we identified 52 proteins specifically enriched in Sec bodies. These include a large proportion of ER and Golgi proteins, packaged without defined stoichiometry, which we could selectively verify by imaging. Interestingly, Sec body components are neither transcriptionally nor translationally regulated under the conditions that induce Sec body formation, suggesting that incorporation of these proteins into granules may be driven instead by the aggregation of nucleating proteins with a high content of intrinsically disordered regions. This reinforces the notion that Sec bodies may act as storage for ERES, ER and Golgi components during stress.

### Keywords
Proximity labeling; biotinylation; apex2; mass spectrometry; sec bodies; granules

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
wei wu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Utrecht University


