### Accession
PXD041036

### Title
Interaction of TiO2 nanoparticles with lung fluid proteins and the resulting macrophage inflammatory response

### Description
Inhalation is a major nanoparticle exposure pathway. Following inhalation, nanoparticles first interact with the lung lining fluid, a complex mixture of proteins, lipids, and mucins. We measure the concentration and composition of lung fluid proteins adsorbed on the surface of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles. Using proteomics, we find that lung fluid results in a unique protein corona on the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles.

### Sample Protocol
A protein corona was formed by incubating TiO2 NPs (1 mg/mL) in BALF diluted in PBS. Initial incubation protein concentrations for BALF was 0.017 mg/mL. The incubations were performed at room temperature on an orbital shaker for 30 minutes. To remove unbound proteins, the NPs were “washed” with PBS. Each wash step consisted of a centrifugation cycle (18,000 rcf, 15 mins), removal of the supernatant, and then resuspension in an equal volume of PBS. The hard corona is defined as the protein that remains bound to the NPs with no unbound protein detected in the supernatant. Proteins were removed from the NP surface by resuspending in 5% SDS buffer, sonicating to reduce aggregates followed by incubating at 95 °C for 15 minutes. Samples were pooled to load a minimum of 5 µg of protein on each S-Trap. Two modifications were made to the S-trap protocol: dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide were used as the reducer (20 mM) and alkylator (40 mM), respectively. DTT and IAM are commonly used for proteomics and are recommended substitutions. Following the completion of the S-trap protocol, the resulting digested proteins were lyophilized and stored at -20 °C until proteomic analysis.  Proteomic analysis was carried out in the Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, part of the Duke Center for Genomics and Computational Biology, as previously described. In brief, digested samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS with ≤ 5 µg of digested protein injected. NanoFlow LC was performed with an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, 75 µm x 250 mm, nanoAcquity, Waters Corporation; 400 nL/min) column and a 60 minute total elution time. The column was run with an acetonitrile gradient (5-40%) with 0.1% formic acid. Peptide fragments were analyzed using in-line tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the LC-MS/MS data using MaxQuant (v2.1.0, Max Plank Institute, Munich, Germany), an open-source software designed to analyze mass spectrometry data qualitatively and quantitatively. The raw LC-MS/MS spectra were searched, using their integrated Andromeda search engine, against the Swiss-Prot murine canonical protein database from UniProt, accessed on June 6th, 2022. A custom contaminants file was used while searching, which contained a relevant subset of the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database. For protein and peptide quantification and identification, default MaxQuant parameters were used including a 0.01 false discovery rate, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a maximum peptide length of 25 amino acids, oxidation and acetyl groups as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification. The proteins were quantified by their summed intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Inhalation is a major exposure route to nanoparticles. Following inhalation, nanoparticles first interact with the lung lining fluid, a complex mixture of proteins, lipids, and mucins. We measure the concentration and composition of lung fluid proteins adsorbed on the surface of titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>) nanoparticles. Using proteomics, we find that lung fluid results in a unique protein corona on the surface of the TiO<sub>2</sub> nanoparticles. We then measure the expression of three cytokines (interleukin 6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;), and macrophage inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2)) associated with lung inflammation. We find that the corona formed from lung fluid leads to elevated expression of these cytokines in comparison to bare TiO<sub>2</sub> nanoparticles or coronas formed from serum or albumin. These experiments show that understanding the concentration and composition of the protein corona is essential for understanding the pulmonary response associated with human exposure to nanoparticles.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Titanium dioxide, Murine, Protein corona, Inhalation

### Affiliations
Duke University
Principal Investigator

### Submitter
Karsten Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Payne
Principal Investigator


### SDRF
- organism: Mus Musculus
- disease: healthy
- cell type: no cells,biofluid
- organism part: Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap

