### Accession
PXD001565

### Title
Evaluation of phospho-tyrosine antibodies for label-free phosphoproteomics

### Description
In the past decade multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been implemented in standard treatment regimens for patients with cancer. Unfortunately the majority of patients develops resistance to these drugs. Reliable tools for analysis of pharmacodynamic effects and drug resistance mechanisms are therefore warranted. Phosphoproteomics has meanwhile emerged as tool for the analysis of tyrosine protein phosphorylation. These studies rely on antibodies for enrichment of tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides. Here we compared two commercially available phosphotyrosine antibodies and show that P-Tyr-1000 yields 64% more phosphopeptides than the 4G10 antibody. To investigate performance of P-Tyr-1000 in a label-free comparative phosphoproteomics analysis, a commonly used cell culture model was employed. U87 glioma cells with or without EGFRvIII mutation, lacking the extracellular ligand binding domains (exon 2 - 7) and displaying constitutive signaling activity, were analyzed with the workflow described above. U87 cells and the isogenic version with EGFRvIII were both treated with or without the TKI Erlotinib. In total 1330 phosphopeptides were detected derived from 683 phosphorylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment HCT116 colorectal cancer cells (80% confluent) were lysed (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M Urea, 1 mM sodium vanadate), reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:40 protein ratio). Peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 columns, eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) and lyophilized. Subsequently, this sample was divided into 6 aliquots of 10 mg protein for direct comparison of the immunoprecipitation procedure (N=3 replicates per antibody). Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched using P-Tyr-1000 (Cell signaling Technology, Rabbit mAb-agarose conjugate, #8803) and 4G10 (Millipore, 4G10 mouse mAb-agarose conjugate #16-101) agarose conjugate. Agarose bead conjugates were washed wit 4 x 1 ml cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The peptides were dissolved in 700 µl immunoaffinity (IP) buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) at room temperature for 10 min and were , after cooling, incubated with 40 µl 50% (vol/vol) bead slurry  of pTYR-1000 or 4G10 agarose beads, respectively,  at 4 ºC for 2 hours in a head-over-tail rotation wheel. The beads were washed  with 2 x 1 ml  IP buffer followed by 3 x 1 ml MQ, and were collected by centrifugation (2000 x g, 30 sec). Peptides were eluted in 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in two steps of 30 µl and 25 µl, respectively, which were pooled. Peptides were  , desalted using 20 µl C18 StageTips (Thermo #SP201), eluted in 20 µl 80% ACN in 0.1% TFA, speed-vac dried and dissolved in 35 ul loading solvent (4% ACN in 0.5% TFA). Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched from U87 glioblastoma cells using the same protocol  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 × 105 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA files release February 2013 (antibody comparison), and release January 2014 (U87 analysis) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified peptides (from the MaxQuant Evidence table) in the sample (‘normalised intensity’). Kinase activation status was approximated by summing all identified kinase phosphopeptide MS/MS spectra i.e. phospho spectral-counting

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, U87, Glioblastoma, Phosphotyrosine, Ptyr ip, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


