### Accession
PXD030889

### Title
Translation rescue by targeting Ppp1r15a upstream open reading frame in vivo

### Description
The eIF2 initiation complex is central to maintaining a functional translation machinery. Extreme stress such as life-threatening sepsis exposes vulnerabilities in this tightly regulated system, resulting in an imbalance between the opposing actions of kinases and phosphatases on the main regulatory subunit eIF2α. Here, we report that translation shutdown is a hallmark of established sepsis-induced kidney injury brought about by excessive eIF2α phosphorylation and sustained by blunted expression of the counterregulatory phosphatase subunit Ppp1r15a. We determined that the blunted Ppp1r15a expression persists because of the presence of an upstream open reading frame (uORF). Overcoming this barrier with genetic approaches enabled the depression of Ppp1r15a, salvaged translation and improved kidney function in an endotoxemia model. We also found that the loss of this uORF has broad effects on the composition and phosphorylation status of the immunopeptidome that extended beyond the eIF2α axis. Collectively, our findings define the breadth and potency of the highly conserved Ppp1r15a uORF and provide a paradigm for the design of uORF-based translation rheostat strategies. The ability to accurately control the dynamics of translation during sepsis will open new paths for the development of therapies at codon level precision.

### Sample Protocol
See Methods doc Related to 2021_05_130, 2021_06_149, and 2021_10_256 Cells were lysed in 20 mM Tris pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM MgCl2, DNase I, Benzonase, protease inhibitors, and phosStop inhibitor. For Protein Phosphatase 1/PP1 immunoprecipitation, supernatants were incubated with anti-PP1 antibody conjugated to agarose or control IgG for 3 hrs at 4 °C (E-9, sc-7482 AC, 25% agarose, Santa Cruz). Samples were washed with washing buffer 5 times (20 mM Tris pH 8, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1% TritonX 100 and 2 mM MgCl2). In a separate experiment (without immunoprecipitation), cells were transfected with poly(I:C) (1.5 µg/mL for 4 hrs; lipofectamine 2000) and a combination of proteasome inhibitor (Bortezomib, 2 µM) and prolyl endopeptidase inhibitors (Pramiracetam 10 uM; Baicalein, 10 uM; Berberine Chloride) for 4 hrs before cell lysis.   Related to 2021_06_168 Mouse kidney tissues were lysed using Minilys with the following buffer: 20 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 60 mM Octyl Glucoside, 2 mM MgCl2, DNase I, Benzonase, 10 mM chloroacetamide, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, and phosStop inhibitor. The supernatant was incubated with crosslinked Y-3 antibody for 2 hrs at 4 °C. The resin was washed with 10 column volume wash buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% Triton X-100), 10 column volume 10 mM Tris (pH 8), followed by water.   Related to 2021_10_267 Frozen kidney tissues were submitted as is.

### Data Protocol
See Methods doc.  IP and TMT samples were processed in Proteome Discoverer and MHC experiments  were processed in MSFragpipe

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ppp1r15a, Translation, Phoshporylation, Uorf, Lcmsmsi, Eif2 initation complex, Kidney

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
IU School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Takashi Hato, MD
IU School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology


