### Accession
PXD000036

### Title
Albuminome from human serum and CSF

### Description
Albuminome from human serum was isolated using ProteaPrep HSA affinity spin columns and Vivapure anti-HSA spin columns.   Albuminome from CSF was isolated using ProteaPrep HSA affinity spin columns.  Isolated albuminome was trypsin digested and  analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine serum and CSF albuminome proteins. All raw MS/MS data originating from the Orbitrap Elite were batch searched based on albuminome isolation method (ProteaPrep vs. Vivapure).  A total of 9 files were acquired for each albuminome analyzed (3 technical reps x 3 MS technical reps).  All data were searched using the Sorcerer 2TM-SEQUEST algorithm (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA, USA) using default peak extraction parameters. Data were searched against the Human Uniprot database (July 2012) with an Xcorr cutoff of 1.7 using the following criteria: Fixed modification: +57 on C (carbamidomethyl); Variable modification: +16 on M (oxidation); Enzyme: Trypsin with 2 max missed cleavages; Parent Tolerance: 50 ppm; Fragment tolerance: 1.00 Da.  Post-search analysis was performed using Scaffold 3 version 3.6.2  (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, USA) with protein and peptide probability thresholds set to 95% and 90%, respectively, and one peptide required for identification. Protein and peptide false discovery rates were calculated automatically using Scaffold’s probabilistic method and were equal to or less than 0.5 % for all samples using the above thresholds. Data were imported in Protein Center (Proxeon/ThermoFisher) and all data were clustered by indistinguishable proteins to remove protein redundancy within data sets. Only proteins that were observed in all three technical replicates were included in the final protein list, although proteins observed it at least two technical replicates were included in the on-line supplement for reference.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of serum and plasma proteomes is a common approach for biomarker discovery, and the removal of high-abundant proteins, such as albumin and immunoglobins, is usually the first step in the analysis. However, albumin binds peptides and proteins, which raises concerns as to how the removal of albumin could impact the outcome of the biomarker study while ignoring the possibility that this could be a biomarker subproteome itself. The first goal of this study was to test a new commercially available affinity capture reagent from Protea Biosciences and to compare the efficiency and reproducibility to four other commercially available albumin depletion methods. The second goal of this study was to determine if there is a highly efficient albumin depletion/isolation system that minimizes sample handling and would be suitable for large numbers of samples. Two of the methods tested (Sigma and ProteaPrep) showed an albumin depletion efficiency of 97% or greater for both serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Isolated serum and CSF albuminomes from ProteaPrep spin columns were analyzed directly by LC-MS/MS, identifying 128 serum (45 not previously reported) and 94 CSF albuminome proteins (17 unique to the CSF albuminome). Serum albuminome was also isolated using Vivapure anti-HSA columns for comparison, identifying 105 proteins, 81 of which overlapped with the ProteaPrep method.

### Keywords
Csf, Albumin, Serum, Cerebrospinal fluid, Albuminome

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Ronald Holewinski

### Lab Head


