### Accession
PXD017214

### Title
S-Trap eliminates Pluronic F68 and cell culture media polymers for effective proteomic analysis of mammalian cell bioreactor supernatants

### Description
Proteomic analysis of bioreactor supernatants can inform on cellular metabolic status, viability, and productivity, as well as product quality, which can in turn help optimize bioreactor operation. Incubating mammalian cells in bioreactors requires the addition of polymeric surfactants such as Pluronic F68, which reduce the sheer stress caused by agitation. However, these surfactants are incompatible with mass spectrometry proteomics and must be eliminated during sample preparation. Here, we compared four different sample preparation methods to eliminate Pluronic F68 from filtered bioreactor supernatant samples: organic solvent precipitation; filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP); S-Trap; and single-pot, solid-phase, sample preparation (SP3). We found that SP3 and S-Trap substantially reduced or eliminated the polymer(s), but S-Trap provided the most robust clean-up and highest quality data. Additionally, we observed that SP3 sample preparation of our samples and in other published datasets was associated with partial alkylation of cysteines, which could impact the confidence and robustness of protein identification and quantification. Finally, we observed that several commercial mammalian cell culture media and media supplements also contained polymers with a similar mass spectrometry profile to Pluronic F68, and we suggest that proteomic analyses in these media will also benefit from the use of S-Trap sample preparation.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation Four different sample preparation techniques were used to prepare the samples: organic solvent precipitation with 1:1 methanol:acetone, Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) using 0.5 mL 10 kDa or 30 kDa cut-off Amicon columns (UFC503024 and UFC503096, Millipore), S-Trap columns (S-Trap C02-mini, Protifi) following manufacturer’s protocol, and Single-Pot Solid-Phase enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) using paramagnetic beads (GEHE45152105050250 Sera-Mag SpeedBead Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (Hydrophilic, GE Healthcare) and GEHE65152105050250 Sera-Mag SpeedBead Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (Hydrophobic, GE Healthcare)) following Moggridge et al 2018 protocol. Mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis Desalted peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) using a Prominence nanoLC system (Shimadzu) and a TripleTof 5600 mass spectrometer with a Nanospray III interface (SCIEX) essentially as described [52, 53]. Samples were desalted on an Agilent C18 trap (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min for 3 min, followed by separation on a Vydac Everest C18 (300 Å, 5 µm, 150 mm x 150 µm) column at a flow rate of 1 µL/min. A gradient of 10-60% buffer B over 45 min where buffer A = 1 % ACN / 0.1% FA and buffer B = 80% ACN / 0.1% FA was used to separate peptides. Gas and voltage settings were adjusted as required. An MS TOF scan across 350-1800 m/z was performed for 0.5 s followed by data dependent acquisition (DDA) of up to 20 peptides with intensity greater than 100 counts, across 100-1800 m/z (0.05 s per spectra) using a collision energy (CE) of 40 +/- 15 V.

### Data Protocol
DDA data was analyzed using ProteinPilot v5.0.1 (SCIEX) and Preview (v2.13.17, Protein Metrics). The following parameters were used to search in ProteinPilot: Sample type: identification; cysteine alkylation: acrylamide; digestion: trypsin; instrument: TripleTOF 5600; ID focus: biological modifications; search effort: thorough; FDR analysis: 1% global. The search database included the entire Cricetulus griseus proteome (UP000001075 downloaded from Uniprot on May 14th 2017 containing a total of 23,884 proteins) and human Coagulation Factor IX wild-type amino acid sequence (P00740, UniprotKB). The following parameters were used to search in Preview: Modifications: Cysteine fixed +71.037114 (propionamide), +57.021464 (carbamidomethylation), or unknown; Cleavage site: RK, C-terminal; Initial search specificity: fully specific (fastest); Fragmentation type: CID/HCD; Protein database: the Cricetulus griseus proteome UP000001075 downloaded from Uniprot on April 20th 2018 containing a total of 23884 proteins, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C proteome (UP000002311 downloaded on April 20th 2018 containing a total of 6,049 proteins), or the Homo sapiens proteome (UP000005640 downloaded on April 20th 2018 containing a total of 20,303 proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of bioreactor supernatants can inform on cellular metabolic status, viability, and productivity, as well as product quality, which can in turn help optimize bioreactor operation. Incubating mammalian cells in bioreactors requires the addition of polymeric surfactants such as Pluronic F68, which reduce the sheer stress caused by agitation. However, these surfactants are incompatible with mass spectrometry proteomics and must be eliminated during sample preparation. Here, we compared four different sample preparation methods to eliminate polymeric surfactants from filtered bioreactor supernatant samples: organic solvent precipitation; filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP); S-Trap; and single-pot, solid-phase, sample preparation (SP3). We found that SP3 and S-Trap substantially reduced or eliminated the polymer(s), but S-Trap provided the most robust cleanup and highest quality data. Additionally, we observed that SP3 sample preparation of our samples and in other published data sets was associated with partial alkylation of cysteines, which could impact the confidence and robustness of protein identification and quantification. Finally, we observed that several commercial mammalian cell culture media and media supplements also contained polymers with similar mass spectrometry profiles, and we suggest that proteomic analyses in these media will also benefit from the use of S-Trap sample preparation.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, S-trap, Bioreactor samples, Sp3, Polymer contaminants, Mass spectrometry, Alkylation, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Lucia Zacchi

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland


