### Accession
PXD028498

### Title
Identification of proline to serine mistranslation in Drosophila melanogaster pupae

### Description
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are the adaptor molecules required for reading of the genetic code and the accurate production of proteins. tRNA variants can lead to genome-wide mistranslation, the misincorporation of amino acids not specified by the standard genetic code, into nascent proteins. While genome sequencing has identified putative mistranslating tRNA variants in human populations, little is known regarding how mistranslation affects multicellular organisms. Here, we create a Drosophila melanogaster model for mistranslation by integrating a serine tRNA variant that mistranslates serine for proline (tRNA(Ser)[UGG, G26A]) into the fly genome. Using mass spectrometry, we find that tRNA(Ser)[UGG, G26A] misincorporates serine for proline at a frequency of ~ 0.6% per codon. This model will enable studies into the synergistic effects of mistranslating tRNA variants and disease-causing alleles.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty Drosophila melanogaster pupae were resuspended in a denaturing lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl) and by grinding with a pestle and with glass beads at 4°C. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, and the alkylation was quenched with additional 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at room temperature. Robotic purification and digestion of proteins into peptides were performed on the KingFisher Flex using LysC and the R2-P1 method as described in Leutert et al. (2019). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were resuspended in 4% acetonitrile, 3% formic acid and loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse‐phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) housed into a column heater set at 50°. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at 400 nL/min over 95 minutes, with a total 120 minute acquisition time. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a defined cycle time of 3 seconds. For each cycle one full mass spectrometry scan was acquired from 350 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and automated calculation of injection time. The most abundant ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 2 m/z precursor isolation window and beam‐type collisional‐activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution by setting the AGC target to standard and injection time to automated mode. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the D. melanogaster protein sequence database (downloaded from Uniprot in 2016) using Comet (release 2015.01; Eng et al. 2013). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) and proline to serine (-10.0207 Da) were used for all searches. A maximum of two for each variable modifications were allowed per peptide. Search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Pupae, Trna variants, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Science, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Matthew Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Science, University of Washington, Seattle, USA


