### Accession
PXD025097

### Title
Mouse liver proteome fractionation using leptin-based cartridges.

### Description
This study is aimed at the evaluation of leptin-based cartridges fractionation for glycoprotein enrichment of mouse liver protein shotgun proteomic profile.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were homogenized with TissueRuptor® for 30s at the lowest speed, followed by for 15 min at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged at 10000×g for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. Lysate was transferred to a spin column and processed according to the manufacturer instructions to obtain non glycosylated protein in flow through solution (F1) and the enriched glycosylated protein fraction (F2). The protein content was measured, and cold acetone added to samples in proportion 4:1 (v/v) with subsequent incubation for 15 min in ice. Samples were then centrifuged (12000 g, 10 min at 4°C), supernatants discarded, and the protein pellets resuspended in urea 8.0 M solution and 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5). An additional Lowry protein assay was done to confirm protein content. Samples were then dried completely using a vacuum concentrator (45°C, 45 min) and resuspended in 5.0 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium carbonate buffer (30 min at 50°C under mechanical agitation). After cooling down to room temperature, alkylation was performed by addition of 150 mM iodoacetamide in ammonium carbonate buffer 50 mM (15 mM final concentration) and incubated in the dark for 20 min at RT. Trypsin was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:20 and the digestion was performed overnight at 37°C, under mechanical agitation (600 rpm, pH range 8-8.5 PH units). Digestion was stopped by sample acidification with 50% trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration: 1% TFA). Final protein concentration was 0.33 μg/μL. The proteolytic peptide mixtures were purified by C18 pipette tips (ZipTip) and analysed in duplicate by nLC-MS/MS. The proteolytic peptide mixtures were purified by C18 pipette tips (ZipTip) and analysed in duplicate by nLC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and equipped with a nESI ion source. Peptide mixtures were pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm ID x 2 cm (Thermo Scientific) and separated at 35°C on a EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm ID × 15 cm; Thermo Scientific). Elutions were run in gradient mode from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile. Total gradient: 110 min. Flow rate: 300 nL/min. Total run time: 144 min. MS acquisition was done in in positive ion mode over an m/z range of 375 – 1500 Da at 120000 resolution in the data dependent mode, cycle time 3 s between master scans. MS/MS spectra were collected in centroid mode. Higher collision decomposition (HCD) energy: 35 eV. Analyses were done in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were converted from raw to mzML format in centroid mode using the MSconvert tool of the software ProteoWizard (version 3.0.1957). The mzML files were analyzed using a pipeline adapted from Weisser et al. (2013) [38], built using OpenMS (version 2.5.0) operating within the open-source software platform KNIME® (version 4.1.3). Spectral search with SpectraST was run using the NIST_mouse_IT_2012-04-21_7AA.splib, NIST_human_IT_2012-05-30_7AA.splib and NIST_yeast_IT_2012-04-06_7AA.splib files were appropriate and downloaded at the URL http://www.peptideatlas.org/speclib/. Human and yeast spectral libraries were concatenated in a single consensus library using the specific command lines in available in SpectraST. Peptide identification was done using a multiple search engine pipeline combining X!Tandem algorithm [11], (XTandemAdapter node), MSGF+, Novor (for peptide de novo identification) and the MS/MS spectral search tool SpectraST (SpectraSTSearchAdapter node). X!Tandem, MSGF+ search and peptide indexing were done against a mouse FASTA Swiss-Prot reviewed protein sequence database (uniprot-filtered-organism_Mus.musculus-(Mouse)-[10090] (n=17046 entries), downloaded at www.uniprot.org (October 2020), including in the protein database a list of common contaminant proteins (n=179, https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities/blob/master/Thermo_contams.fasta). To this database, for subsequent FDR computation, a decoy reverse sequence database was appended by application of the DecoySequence OpenMS node.  For all search engines except SpectraST, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification.  Fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da and precursor mass tolerance at 5.0 ppm. Peptide sequences were indexed through the OpenMS Peptide Indexer node, setting leucine/isoleucine equivalence. Protein inference was carried out using the Protein Inference Algorithms (PIA, version 1.3.11) node. Protein abundance estimates were calculated with prior generation of spectral features by the node FeatureFinderIdentification (FFid) followed by PIA-assisted FDR estimation and filtering at PSM level (PSM combined FDR score > 0.01, equivalent to FDR<1%), their ID mapping and combination with peptide IDs, their subsequent grouping and normalization (e.g. FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT and ConsensusmapNormalizer nodes). Proteins and peptides label free quantification (LFQ) was then computed with the OpenMS ProteinQuantifier node based on intensities of all quantitative proteotypic peptide intensities (quantitative peptide number equal/greater than n=2). The relative output files, read as tables of the CSVreader node output, exported in Microsoft Office Excel 2016 for further formatting and statistical elaboration. Detailed pipeline parameters are shown in appendix 1 of the supplementary material file.

### Publication Abstract
In this study we investigated the performance of a computational pipeline for protein identification and label free quantification (LFQ) of LC-MS/MS data sets from experimental animal tissue samples, as well as the impact of its specific peptide search combinatorial approach. The full pipeline workflow was composed of peptide search engine adapters based on different identification algorithms, in the frame of the open-source OpenMS software running within the KNIME analytics platform. Two different in silico tryptic digestion, database-search assisted approaches (X!Tandem and MS-GF+), de novo peptide sequencing based on Novor and consensus library search (SpectraST), were tested for the processing of LC-MS/MS raw data files obtained from proteomic LC-MS experiments done on proteolytic extracts from mouse ex vivo liver samples. The results from proteomic LFQ were compared to those based on the application of the two software tools MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer for protein inference and label-free data analysis in shotgun proteomics. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025097.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Fractionation, Mouse, Liver, Glycoproteins

### Affiliations
Department of environmental science and policy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Department of environmental science and policy

### Submitter
Giangiacomo Beretta

### Lab Head
Dr Giangiacomo Beretta
Department of environmental science and policy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy


