### Accession
PXD021561

### Title
Venom profiling of the insular species Bothrops alcatraz: characterization of proteome, glycoproteome, and N-terminome using Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates.

### Description
In this study we applied mass spectrometric approaches to characterize the proteome and glycoproteome of B. alcatraz venom, and to show for the first time the use of the TAILS method to profile a snake venom N-terminome.

### Sample Protocol
• Proteomic analysis of snake venom: venom samples were submitted to protein quantification by the Bradford assay and submitted to trypsin digestion. The protocol used guanidine hydrochloride for protein denaturation step and dithiothreitol (DTT) for disulfide bonds reduction and iodoacetamide (IAA) for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. • Glycoproteomic analysis of B. alcatraz venom: Glycoprotein enrichment was performed by lectin-affinity chromatography using three different resins: Concanavalin A-Sepharose (ConA), Wheat Germ Agglutinin-agarose (WGA) and Peanut Agglutinin-agarose (PNA). For glycoprotein elution, we used carbohydrate solutions, according to each lectin specificity. A second round of elution was performed using an acidic solution to elute the retained proteins. The bound fractions were cleaned up and submitted to trypsin digestion using guanidine hydrochloride as denaturing agent.  • N-terminomic analysis of B. alcatraz venom: For the analysis of the protein N-terminal sequences, the first steps involved denaturation of venom proteins by guanidine hydrochloride, reduction by DTT and carbamidomethylation using IAA. After these steps, the proteins were submitted to a dimethylation reaction using formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride. Then, the proteins were cleaved by trypsin to generate peptides for LC-MS/MS. To perform the depletion of the tryptic peptides, the samples were applied to an aldehyde-activated crosslinked 4% beaded agarose resin and the natural N-terminal peptides were collected from the flow through fraction since they did not bind to the resin due their dimethylated N-termini. • Peptide desalting and fractionation: Peptide samples were desalted and/or fractionated by stage tip with the membrane set C18-SCX-C18. • LC-MS/MS: All LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in an EASY II-nanoLC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected in a 3 cm C18 trap column (100 μm I.D. × 360 μm O.D.) and the chromatographic peptide separations were performed on 10 cm long columns (75 μm I.D. x 360 μm O.D.) packed in-house with 5 μm Aqua C-18 beads (Phenomenex).

### Data Protocol
All data analyses were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) and Perseus (version 1.6.10.45).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bothrops alcatraz</i>, a species endemic to Alcatrazes Islands, is regarded as critically endangered due to its small area of occurrence and the declining quality of its habitat. We recently reported the identification of N-glycans attached to toxins of <i>Bothrops</i> species, showing similar compositions in venoms of the <i>B. jararaca</i> complex (<i>B. jararaca</i>, <i>B. insularis</i>, and <i>B. alcatraz</i>). Here, we characterized <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom using electrophoretic, proteomic, and glycoproteomic approaches. Electrophoresis showed that <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom differs from <i>B. jararaca</i> and <i>B. insularis</i>; however, N-glycan removal revealed similarities between them, indicating that the occupation of N-glycosylation sites contributes to interspecies variability in the <i>B. jararaca</i> complex. Metalloproteinase was the major toxin class identified in the <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom proteome followed by serine proteinase and C-type lectin, and overall, the adult <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom resembles that of <i>B. jararaca</i> juvenile specimens. The comparative glycoproteomic analysis of <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom with <i>B. jararaca</i> and <i>B. insularis</i> indicated that there may be differences in the utilization of N-glycosylation motifs among their different toxin classes. Furthermore, we prospected for the first time the N-terminome of a snake venom using the terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) approach and report the presence of &#x223c;30% of N-termini corresponding to truncated toxin forms and &#x223c;37% N-terminal sequences blocked by pyroglutamic acid in <i>B. alcatraz</i> venom. These findings underscore a low correlation between venom gland transcriptomes and proteomes and support the view that post-translational processes play a major role in shaping venom phenotypes.

### Keywords
Bothrops alcatraz; snake venom; proteome; glycoproteome; n-terminome; proteolytic processing

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS) Instituto Butantan Av. Vital Brasil 1500  05503-000 São Paulo-SP Brazil Phones: (55 11) 2627-9731; 2627-9732
Instituto Butantan

### Submitter
Debora Andrade Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Solange Maria de Toledo Serrano
Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS) Instituto Butantan Av. Vital Brasil 1500  05503-000 São Paulo-SP Brazil Phones: (55 11) 2627-9731; 2627-9732


