### Accession
PXD014286

### Title
Idiopathic epiretinal membrane compared with inner limiting membrane

### Description
We compared the proteome of epiretinal membrane of iERM with the proteome of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) of idiopathic macular hole (iMH). Twelve epiretinal membrane samples from iERM were compared with twelve ILM samples obtained from from iMH. Proteomic analysis was conducted with LFQ nLC-MS/MS. Discovery data were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database using MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
For discovery proteomics the balanced salt solution (BSS) was withdrawn, the sample washed in PBS, then lysed in 5% SDC, 100 mM DTT, 20 mM TEAB and sonicated on ice and incubated at 99°C for 5 min. with agitation. The sample was centrifuged and 50 µL of the supernatant transferred to Microcon 30K centrifugal filter device (Merck Milipore Ltd., Tullagreen, IRL). Two hundred µL digestion buffer (0.5% SDC, 20 mM TEAB) was added and the filter unit centrifuged. This step was repeated with the final 50 µL sample and 200 µL digestion buffer. Two hundred µL digestion buffer was added to the filter and after centrifugation 100 µL of 50 mM IAA was added, mixed at 600 rpm for 1 min. and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. in the dark. The filter was centrifuged, 100 µL digestion buffer added and centrifuged. Another wash with 100 µL digestion buffer was performed and 35 µL digestion buffer was added together with 0.5 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C in a wet chamber. Fifty µL of digestion buffer was added and the filter unit was centrifuged with new collection tubes. TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.5% and an equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, shaken for 1 min. and centrifuged at maximum speed for 2 min. The lower phase was saved by removal of the upper phase. This was repeated two times. The sample was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-suspended in 0.1% FA and analysed in duplicate or triplicate by LFQ nLC-MS/MS. The peptide mixtures were separated using an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). A µ-Precolumn (300µm x 5mm, C18 PepMap100, 5µm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) was used to trap peptides. An analytical column (EASY-Spray Column, 500 mm x 75 µm, PepMap RSCL, C18, 2 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) was used to separate peptides. The peptides were eluted with a flow of 300 nL/min. using a 60 min. gradient by mixing buffer A (0.1% FA) with buffer B (80% ACN, 20% water, 0.1% FA) with increasing concentrations of buffer B from 6% to 90%. The universal method setting was used for mass spectrometry detection with full Orbitrap scans (m/z 400-1500) at a resolution of 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The cycle time was 3 sec. The most intense precursors with a charge state 2-7 and an intensity threshold of 5 x 103 were selected. Data dependent mode was top speed. The universal method balances injection times and scan rate. MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap in auto scan range mode with collision-induced dissociation energy at 35%, an AGC target of 2 x 103 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole set with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were used to search the human database from Uniprot downloaded on the 25th of August 2016 and using MaxQuant (v 1.5.5.1) for LFQ analysis. Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate for PSM, protein and site were each set at 1%. The LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1. MS/MS was required for LFQ comparisons. Unique and razor peptides, unmodified and modified with oxidation (M) or acetyl (protein N-terminal), were used for protein quantification. The match between runs function was used. Revert sequences were used for decoy search. Contaminant sequences were included in the search.

### Publication Abstract
Few data exist regarding the protein composition of idiopathic epiretinal membrane (iERM). In the present study we compared the proteome of epiretinal membrane of iERM with the proteome of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) of idiopathic macular hole (iMH). Twelve epiretinal membrane samples were obtained from patients with iERM undergoing therapeutic vitrectomy. Twelve ILM samples from patients with iMH were used as controls. Proteomic analysis was conducted with discovery-based label-free quantitative nano-liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LFQ nLC-MS/MS). Verification of results was performed with targeted MS using selected reaction monitoring on a different set of samples. Discovery data were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database using MaxQuant Software. Identified proteins were filtered with Perseus software. Bioinformatic analysis of the differences in protein expression between epiretinal membrane from iERM and ILM from iMH was performed using STRING. A total of 2,183 different proteins were identified. 357 proteins were found to be present in all samples. The protein profile of iERM was highly different from iMH with 62 proteins found at significantly higher levels in iERM. The proteins upregulated more than 10-fold in iERM were: fibrillin-1, tenascin, prolargin, biglycan, opticin, collagen alpha-1(II) chain, protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 2, fibronectin, filamin-A, collagen alpha-2(IX) chain, spectrin alpha chain, transforming growth factor beta induced protein ig-h3, dihydropyrimidinase - related protein 3, endoplasmin and glutamate dehydrogenase 1. Proteins with high level in iERM consisted of proteins that especially localized to the actin cytoskeleton, the extracellular matrix and the mitochondrion. Analysis of all proteins indicated that the disease process in iERM at least in part can be characterized as skin formation with perturbation of nucleotide metabolism. Our study identified proteins that have not earlier been associated with iERM. Fifteen proteins are found at very high concentration, 10-fold or more, and amongst these four proteins, fibrillin-1, tenascin, prolargin and biglycan were found at more than a 100-fold higher content compared to ILM of iMH. These proteins may be potential therapeutic targets. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014286.

### Keywords
Macular hole, Lc-ms/ms, : epiretinal membrane, Internal limiting membrane

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Aarhus Denmark

### Submitter
Bent Honoré

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Honoré
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Aarhus Denmark


