### Accession
PXD015387

### Title
Metaproteomic datasets of wheat rhizosphere from saline and non-saline soils

### Description
We present metaproteome data from wheat rhizosphere from saline and non-saline soil. For collection and acquisition of metaproteome from wheat rhizosphere under saline and normal conditions, a survey was conducted in regions of Haryana, India. Samples from 65 days old plants (wheat var HD2967) were collected and pooled and based on EC,saline (NBAIM B; EC 6mS cm-1; pH 9.0; Bhaupur 2, Haryana, INDIA; 29째19'8"N;76째48'53"E) and normal soil samples (NBAIM C; EC 200 uS cm-1; pH 7.2; Near Nainform, Haryana, INDIA; 29째19'8"N;76째48'53"E)  were selected for isolation of proteome with the standardized protocol at our laboratory followed by metaproteome analysis with the standardized pipepline.  In total 1538 and 891 proteins were obtained from wheat rhizosphere from saline and non-saline respectively with the given parameters and software.  Among 1410 proteins unique for saline soil, proteins responsible for glycine, serine and threonine metabolism and arginine and proline biosynthesis were found in saline and absent in non-saline. The present study extends knowledge about the physiology and adaptations of the wheat rhizosphere associated microbiota under saline soil.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of metaproteome from pooled wheat rhizospheric soil samples from saline and normal soil was with the standardized protocol at our laboratory. The protein after 1D-SDS-PAGE evaluation was quantified, trypsinized and analyzed with LC/MS MS. The mass spectra were searched against the NCBInr and analysis was done with the standardized pipepline.

### Data Protocol
Chromatograms of the MS/MS spectra were analyzed. The raw data was processed by MassLynx 4.1 WATER software. Mascot Generic File (MGF) was generated against individual spectra. MGF file was used to search in database for protein identification on MASCOT server. Search parameters were as follows: taxonomy, all entries; fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation; enzyme, trypsin; maximum number of missed cleavages, 1; peptide tolerance, 50 ppm; and MS/MS tolerance, 100 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiota, Soil microbial proteins, Normal soil, Wheat rhizosphere, Lc msms, Metaproteome, Saline soil

### Affiliations
ICAR-National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms, Kushmaur, Maunath Bhanjan, Mau-274103, Uttar Pradesh, INDIA
ICAR-NBAIM

### Submitter
Renu S

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Renu
ICAR-National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms, Kushmaur, Maunath Bhanjan, Mau-274103, Uttar Pradesh, INDIA


