### Accession
PXD022294

### Title
Hakai is required for stabilization of core components of the m6A mRNA methylation machinery

### Description
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most abundant internal modification on mRNA which influences most steps of mRNA metabolism and is involved in several biological functions. The E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai was previously found in complex with components of the m6A methylation machinery in plants and mammalian cells but its precise function remained to be investigated. Here we show that Hakai is a conserved component of the methyltransferase complex in Drosophila and human cells. In Drosophila, its depletion results in reduced m6A levels and altered m6A-dependent functions including sex determination. We show that its ubiquitination domain is required for dimerisation and interaction with other members of the m6A machinery, while its catalytic activity is dispensable. Finally, we demonstrate that the loss of Hakai destabilizes several subunits of the methyltransferase complex, resulting in impaired m6A deposition. Our work adds new functional and molecular insights into the mechanism of the m6A mRNA writer complex.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) For SILAC experiments (ubiquitinome and proteome of Hakai depleted cells), S2R+ cells were grown in Schneider medium (Dundee Cell) supplemented with either heavy (Arg10, Lys8) or light amino acids (Arg0, Lys0) (Sigma) for 6-8 passages and successful incorporation was confirmed by LC-MS/MS. Ubiquitylome and proteome analysis in S2R+ cells  Ubiquitylome and proteome analysis of control and Hakai depleted SILAC S2R+ cells or Fl(2)d/Vir depleted S2R+ cells was performed as described previously (Schunter et al. 2017; Heidelberger et al. 2018). Following modifications were made: S2R+ cells were grown in Schneider medium (Dundee Cell) supplemented with either heavy (Arg10, Lys8) or light amino acids (Arg0, Lys0) (Sigma) or without supplement for the label-free proteomes (Fl(2)d and Vir KD). Depletion of the different factors was performed with corresponding double stranded RNA three times during 6 days and scaled up to obtain 50 mg of proteins per replicate (8-10, 15-cm cell culture dishes). 6 h prior to cell lysis, the MG132 proteasome inhibitor was added to a final concentration of 15 M. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % NP-40, 0,1 % Na-deoxycholate) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5 mM -glycerophosphate, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM Na-orthovanadate, 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. 1,5 mL of buffer was used per each 15-cm dish. All lysates of the same transfection were combined in a falcon and protein concentrations were measured by Bradford. 100 g of each protein sample were collected for WB analysis. For ubiquitylome and proteome analysis 25 mg of heavy and 25 mg of light labelled protein lysates were joined in a 1:1 ratio as follows: for forward experiment heavy labelled lysates with Hakai KD and light labelled lysates with control KD were joined, and vice versa for reverse experiment. 50 g were then collected for proteome analysis. Finally, ice-cold acetone was added to 80 % final conc. (4xV) and precipitated O/N at -20 °C and subjected to MS. Label free proteomes  15 X 106 S2R+ cells were transfected with Myc-GFP-tagged HAKAI-long isoform in a 10-cm cell culture dish. In parallel, cells were transfected with Myc-GFP as negative control. After 72 h the cells were harvested and washed with cold PBS. Cells were lysed with 1 mL of NET buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % Triton and 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0) and supplemented with 10% Glycerol and Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were sonicated for 3 cycles of 30 sec at high power setting followed by incubation with RNAse A on ice for 30 min. Lysate was centrifuged at 15,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The cleared lysates were incubated with GFP-magnetic beads on a head to toe rotary mixer at 4°C for 2 h. The beads were washed three times for 15 min with NET buffer, and proteins were eluted by incubating at 70°C in Nu-PAGE buffer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome and ubiquitylome analyses MS sample preparation, proteome analysis, MS, and peptide identification were performed as described previously in (Heidelberger et al. 2018). For peptide identification in SILAC samples, raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) to calculate the ratios between the different conditions (Cox and Mann 2008). For the MaxQuant analysis we used different parameter groups to define group-specific parameters to invert the SILAC ratios in replicate 2 (Reverse). As result of these settings H/L in both experiments represents HAKAI KD/Non-targeting control. The tables with all quantified ubiquitylation sites (di-glycine sites) and protein groups are provided as Supplementary_Table_3 (ubiquitylome analysis) and Supplementary_Table 4 (proteome analysis). Analysis of label free samples was performed using default setting for the LFQ analysis in MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) and the Perseus software version 1.5.6.0 to perform calculation of p-value and Student’s T-Test (Tyanova et al. 2016). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing Drosophila melanogaster protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in May 2016 using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011).

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is the most abundant internal modification on mRNA which influences most steps of mRNA metabolism and is involved in several biological functions. The E3 ubiquitin ligase Hakai was previously found in complex with components of the m<sup>6</sup>A methylation machinery in plants and mammalian cells but its precise function remained to be investigated. Here we show that Hakai is a conserved component of the methyltransferase complex in Drosophila and human cells. In Drosophila, its depletion results in reduced m<sup>6</sup>A levels and altered m<sup>6</sup>A-dependent functions including sex determination. We show that its ubiquitination domain is required for dimerization and interaction with other members of the m<sup>6</sup>A machinery, while its catalytic activity is dispensable. Finally, we demonstrate that the loss of Hakai destabilizes several subunits of the methyltransferase complex, resulting in impaired m<sup>6</sup>A deposition. Our work adds functional and molecular insights into the mechanism of the m<sup>6</sup>A mRNA writer complex.

### Keywords
Sex determination, M6a, Rna modification, Hakai

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


