### Accession
PXD022952

### Title
Protein profiling reveals the characteristic changes of complement cascade pathway in the tissues of gastric signet ring cell carcinoma

### Description
Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is a histological subtype of gastric cancer with distinct features in multiple aspects compared to adenocarcinomas (ACs). Lacking of systematically molecular overview to this disease made a slow progress in its clinical practice. In the present proteomics study, gastric tissues were collected from tumor and adjacency including 14 SRCCs and 34 ACs, and laser capture microdissection (LCM) was employed to eradicate cellular heterogeneity of the tissues. Proteome of tissues were profiled by data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). Based on the over 6 000 proteins quantified. Univariate analysis and pathway enrichment revealed that some proteins and pathways bared the differences between SRCC and ACs. Importantly, the up regulation for a majority of complement-related proteins were iconic for SRCC but not for AC. A hypothesis, based on the proteomics evidence, was proposed that the complement cascade was evoked in the SRCC microenvironment upon infiltration, while the SRCC cells survived the complement cytotoxicity by secreting endogenous negative regulators. Moreover, an attempt was made to seek appropriate cell models for gastric SRCC, through proteomic comparison of the 15 gastric cell lines and the gastric tumors. The prediction of supervised classifier suggested none of these gastric cell lines qualified in mimicking SRCC. This study discovered that complement cascade is activated at a higher level in gastric SRCC than AC.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were obtained from the specimen library of digestive diseases in Xijing Hospital, China. LCM was employed to purify cancer cells and adjacent epithelial cells from tissues. LCM samples were lysis by ultrasonication. Protein were digested with trypsin. The resulted peptides were desalted with self-packed tip columns with OLIGO R3 reverse-phase resin. Since the DIA analysis depends on DDA data derived spectral library, one tenth of each tumor and adjacent peptide sample was aliquoted and pooled for generation of DDA. The pooled peptides were fractionated to 10 fractions with self-packed tip columns using high-pH Xtimate C18 resin (01710-01100, Welch, China). The peptides were quantitated with Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay kit (23290, Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides in the cell lines were processed through the similar preparation procedure. DIA and DDA analysis were performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). For DDA runs, precursor ions were scanned with orbitrap analyzer at 60 000 resolution then top 30 most intensive ions were selected for fragmentation. The fragmented ions were scanned with orbitrap analyzer at 15 000 resolution. AGC was set to targets of 1e5 (MS) and 2e4 (MS/MS) with max accumulation time of 50 ms. For DIA runs, precursor ions in sequential windows of 25 m/z were fragmented and scanned in orbitrap analyzer at 30 000 resolution. AGC was set to target of 5e4 and max accumulation time 54 ms. DIA samples were analyzed with duplicates, and in random order to avoid potential batch effect.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data were searched against Swiss-Prot human proteome (20 381 entries, September 2017) by DDA search engine operated in Spectronaut Pulsar X 12.0 (BIOGNOSIS, Switzerland) with setting at most 3 missed cleavage(s) for tryptic peptides, most 5 top variable modifications, and at tryptic specificity. FDR was controlled during the construction of ion library to less than 0.01 at either peptide or protein level, with the target/decoy strategy. The DIA data were treated with DIA search engine against the ion library self-built in the same software following the parameters recommended by the vendor. Briefly, the mass tolerance was automatically dynamic. A group of at least 3 peaks for each peptide was taken for peptide identification. Range of peak m/z was set to 300-1800 and intensity threshold was set at 5% (relative intensity). Mass tolerance for precursor or fragment ions in database search were set at automatically adjusted mode featured by Spectronaut software.

### Publication Abstract
Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is a histological subtype of gastric cancer with distinct features in multiple aspects compared with adenocarcinomas (ACs). The lack of a systematic molecular overview of this disease has led to slow progress in its clinical practice. In the present proteomics study, gastric tissues were collected from tumors and adjacent tissues, including 14 SRCCs and 34&#xa0;ACs, and laser capture microdissection (LCM) was employed to eradicate the cellular heterogeneity of the tissues. The proteomes of tissues were profiled by data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). Based on the over 6000 proteins quantified, univariate analysis and pathway enrichment revealed that some proteins and pathways demonstrated differences between SRCC and ACs. Importantly, the upregulation of a majority of complement-related proteins was notable for SRCC but not for ACs. A hypothesis, based on the proteomics evidence, was proposed that the complement cascade was evoked in the SRCC microenvironment upon infiltration, and the SRCC cells survived the complement cytotoxicity by secreting endogenous negative regulators. Moreover, an attempt was made to establish appropriate cell models for gastric SRCC through proteomic comparison of the 15 gastric cell lines and gastric tumors. The predictions of a supervised classifier suggested that none of these gastric cell lines qualified to mimic SRCC. This study discovered that the complement cascade is activated at a higher level in gastric SRCC than in ACs.

### Keywords
Signet ring cell, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Complement system proteins, Stomach neoplasms

### Affiliations
Clinical Laboratory of BGI Health, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China
BGI

### Submitter
Yuting Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Ren
Clinical Laboratory of BGI Health, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China


