### Accession
PXD001107

### Title
Detection of Dichlorvos Aducts in Hepatocyte Cell Line LC-MS/MS

### Description
Toxicity of dichlorvos (DDVP), an organophosphate (OP) pesticide, classically results from modification of the serine in the active sites of cholinesterases. However, DDVP also forms adducts on unrelated targets such as transferrin and albumin, suggesting that DDVP causes cellular perturbation by modifying non-cholinesterase targets. Here, we identify novel DDVP-modified targets in lysates of a human hepatocyte-like cell line (HepaRG) using a direct LC-MS assay of DDVP exposed lysates or using a competitive pull-down experiments with a biotin-linked organophosphorus compound (10-fluoroethoxyphosphinyl-N-biotinamidopentyldecanamide; FP-biotin), which competes with DDVP for similar binding sites. Using these strategies, we show that DDVP forms adduct to several proteins important to the cellular metabolic pathways and cellular differentiation, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and actin. We validated the results using purified proteins and enzymatic assays. The study not only identified novel DDVP-modified targets but also suggested that the modification directly inhibits the enzymes. The current approach provides information for future hypothesis studies to understand the underlying mechanism of toxicity of DDVP in non-neuronal tissues.

### Sample Protocol
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture and Survival Assay HepaRG cells and cultured media and supplements were obtained from Life Technologies (Calsbad, CA). Cells were cultured as per the manufacturing protocols. Range-finding was conducted by cell viability using CellTiter Fluor Cell Viability Assay (Promega, WI) to determine desired exposure concentrations. Briefly, HepaRG cells were exposed to different concentration (5 µM-300 mM) of DDVP for 24 hours. Hydrogen peroxide (Life Technologies) was used as a positive control. Percent survival was calculated versus untreated controls.  Cell lysates and DDVP exposure Whole cell lysates were generated by hypotonic buffer lysis (20 mM Tris. HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, and 100 mM KCl, pH 7.5) followed by probe sonication with 3 cycles of 15 seconds on and 5 seconds off at 20% power using Vibra Cell (Sonics & Materials Inc., Danbury, CT).  Soluble fractions were collected by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 16,000 × g. Cell lysates were incubated with different final concentrations of DDVP (50, 500, or 5000 µM) in binding buffer (100 mM KCl, NH4HCO3, and 3% Glycerol, pH 7.5) for 2 hours. Treated lysates were either subjected to FP-Biotin-pull down assay or were directly digested with trypsin followed by MS/MS analysis.  FP-Biotin Cell lysates were subjected to competitive pull-down experiments using FP-Biotin method.   Standard conditions for FP-Biotin-pull down assay were as follows. Untreated lysates or DDVP-treated lysates (1 mg) were incubated with 10 µg of FP-Biotin (Toronto Research, ON, Canada) in binding buffer (final volume of 1 mL) for 1 hour at 37 °C. FP-Biotin-bound proteins were then extracted by agarose avidin beads (Life Sciences.  Bound proteins were eluted in 1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 95 °C and subjected to mass spectral analysis.  Purified proteins Human glyceralaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, human erythrocytes (GAPDH, G6019) was obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MS), human actin gamma recombinant protein (ACTG1, H00000071), lactate dehydrogenase A recombinant protein (LDH, H00003939), and enolase 1 recombinant protein (H00002023) were from Novus Biologicals LLC, Littleton, CO. Purified proteins (up to 10 µg) were incubated with DDVP (5 mM) in binding buffer for 2 hours. The reactions were quenched by 1 % heated RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 65 °C. Treated proteins were subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Culture and Survival Assay HepaRG cells and cultured media and supplements were obtained from Life Technologies (Calsbad, CA). Cells were cultured as per the manufacturing protocols. Range-finding was conducted by cell viability using CellTiter Fluor Cell Viability Assay (Promega, WI) to determine desired exposure concentrations. Briefly, HepaRG cells were exposed to different concentration (5 µM-300 mM) of DDVP for 24 hours. Hydrogen peroxide (Life Technologies) was used as a positive control. Percent survival was calculated versus untreated controls.  Cell lysates and DDVP exposure Whole cell lysates were generated by hypotonic buffer lysis (20 mM Tris. HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, and 100 mM KCl, pH 7.5) followed by probe sonication with 3 cycles of 15 seconds on and 5 seconds off at 20% power using Vibra Cell (Sonics & Materials Inc., Danbury, CT).  Soluble fractions were collected by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 16,000 × g. Cell lysates were incubated with different final concentrations of DDVP (50, 500, or 5000 µM) in binding buffer (100 mM KCl, NH4HCO3, and 3% Glycerol, pH 7.5) for 2 hours. Treated lysates were either subjected to FP-Biotin-pull down assay or were directly digested with trypsin followed by MS/MS analysis.  FP-Biotin Cell lysates were subjected to competitive pull-down experiments using FP-Biotin method.   Standard conditions for FP-Biotin-pull down assay were as follows. Untreated lysates or DDVP-treated lysates (1 mg) were incubated with 10 µg of FP-Biotin (Toronto Research, ON, Canada) in binding buffer (final volume of 1 mL) for 1 hour at 37 °C. FP-Biotin-bound proteins were then extracted by agarose avidin beads (Life Sciences.  Bound proteins were eluted in 1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 95 °C and subjected to mass spectral analysis.  Purified proteins Human glyceralaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, human erythrocytes (GAPDH, G6019) was obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MS), human actin gamma recombinant protein (ACTG1, H00000071), lactate dehydrogenase A recombinant protein (LDH, H00003939), and enolase 1 recombinant protein (H00002023) were from Novus Biologicals LLC, Littleton, CO. Purified proteins (up to 10 µg) were incubated with DDVP (5 mM) in binding buffer for 2 hours. The reactions were quenched by 1 % heated RapiGest in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 65 °C. Treated proteins were subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
The toxicity of dichlorvos (DDVP), an organophosphate (OP) pesticide, classically results from modification of the serine in the active sites of cholinesterases. However, DDVP also forms adducts on unrelated targets such as transferrin and albumin, suggesting that DDVP could cause perturbations in cellular processes by modifying noncholinesterase targets. Here we identify novel DDVP-modified targets in lysed human hepatocyte-like cells (HepaRG) using a direct liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) assay of cell lysates incubated with DDVP or using a competitive pull-down experiments with a biotin-linked organophosphorus compound (10-fluoroethoxyphosphinyl-N-biotinamidopentyldecanamide; FP-biotin), which competes with DDVP for similar binding sites. We show that DDVP forms adducts to several proteins important for the cellular metabolic pathways and differentiation, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and actin. We validated the results using purified proteins and enzymatic assays. The study not only identified novel DDVP-modified targets but also suggested that the modification directly inhibits the enzymes. The current approach provides information for future hypothesis-based studies to understand the underlying mechanism of toxicity of DDVP in non-neuronal tissues. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001107.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte cell line, Dichorvos, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
USACEHR

### Submitter
William Dennis

### Lab Head
Dr John A Lewis
USACEHR


