### Accession
PXD032975

### Title
dCas9 targeted chromatin and histone enrichment for mass spectrometry (Catchet-MS) identifies IKZF1 as a novel target for HIV-1 latency reversal

### Description
HIV-1 infected patients virally suppressed by antiviral treatment harbor a persistent reservoir of replication competent latent HIV-1 infected cells, which constitute the main roadblock to a cure. A main strategy for HIV cure aims to stimulate viral gene expression in latently infected cells so that they can be cleared. Crucial for the design of drugs referred to as “latency-reversing agents” (LRAs) is the identification of molecular targets for latency reversal. The regulatory factors physically associated with and repressing the latent HIV-1 promoter or 5’LTR would provide ideal putative molecular targets for latency reversal. However, due to technical limitations, the comprehensive and unbiased identification of host proteins associated with the latent or active integrated HIV LTR in infected cells not been possible. Here we use dCas9 targeted chromatin and histone enrichment strategy coupled to mass spectrometry (Catchet-MS), to purify the locus-associated dCas9 bait, guided downstream of the HIV-1 transcriptional start site (TSS) in latent and activated HIV-1 infected T cells to identify the 5’LTR bound latent and active regulatory complexes. Catchet-MS identified both previously described as well as novel host factors distinctly associated with the latent versus transcriptionally active HIV-1 5’LTR. Within the identified factors we find the transcription factor IKZF1 to be a novel repressor of the HIV-1 promoter required for maintenance of latency, and thus a molecular target for latency reversal. Finally, we identify the FDA approved drug, Iberdomide, which targets IKZF1 for degradation to be a novel LRA, which reversed latency in latent ex vivo HIV-1 infected primary CD4+ T cells and in cells isolated from HIV-1 infected, aviremic participants.

### Sample Protocol
dCas9 enrichment Per each condition, dCas9 containing complexes were isolated from the sonicated chromatin using 500uls (a total of 5 reaction where 100uls of affinity beads were used to purify 10ml of chromatin) of Anti-V5 Agarose Affinity Gel and then washed two times per each buffer (5minutes, 15rpm vertical rotation washes) with buffer 1 (0.1% SDS, 0.1% DOC, 1% triton x-100, 150mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EGTA, 20mM HEPES pH8.0.), buffer 2 (500mM NaCl: 0.1% SDS, 0.1% DOC, 1% triton x-100, 500mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.5mM EGTA, 20mM HEPES pH8.0), buffer 3 (0.25M LiCL, 0.5%DOC, 0.5% NP-40, 1mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.5mM EGTA pH 8.0, 20mM HEPES pH 8.0), buffer 4 (1mM EDTA pH8.0, 0.5mM EGTA pH 8.0, 20mM HEPES pH 8.0) to remove unspecific binding and eluted in a total volume of 1 ml elution buffer 1% SDS, 0.1M NaHCO3 per each condition. At this stage a 50ul aliquot of the eluate was taken to be analyzed by qPCR as quality control for dCas9 enrichment over the chromatin input at the desired chromatin locus.  Locus enrichment The eluate was then diluted 10 times in ChIP incubation buffer without SDS (1% trition x-100, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, ph 8.0, 0.5 mM EGTA, 20mM HEPES pH 7.6, protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (EDTA-free) (Roche)) and immunopurified again in a single reaction with 100uls of a mix of Protein G and A SepharoseTM 4 Fast flow (GE Healthcare) preconjugated with histone H3 and histone H2B antibodies in order to specifically enrich for chromatin associated dCas9 complexes and eliminate from the purification unspecific non-chromatin associated dCas9 complexes.  The immunopurified material, bound to the beads,  was then washed again 2 times per each buffer with buffer1, buffer 2, buffer 3 and buffer 4 to remove unspecific binding and the protein complexes bound to the beads were finally eluted and decrosslinked by boiling the sample for 30min in 100uls of 4x sodium sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-loading buffer, containing 0.1M DTT.  Mass spectrometry  The proteins were resolved in a 15% polyacrilammide SDS-PAGE gel, visualized by Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (ThermoFisher) and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and protein were subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (TPCK Trypsin, ThermoScientific, Rockford, IL, USA), as described previously (Schwertman et al., 2012). Peptides were extracted from the gel blocks in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.5 % formic acid (both from Biosolve, Valkenswaard, NL) and desalted on a C18 solid phase extraction column (in-house fabricated from a 15G punch from Empore Octadecyl C18 47 mm extraction disks, 3M, Bellefonte, PA, USA) and peptides. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a 20 cm x 100 µm C18 column (BEH C18, 130 Å, 3.5 µm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) after trapping on a nanoAcquity UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column (Waters, 100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) on an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), essentially as described in Sap et al. [Sap et al. (2017) J Proteome Res 16(8):2848-2862].

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the Mascot software suite (Daemon version 2.3.2 and Distiller version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) within the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, ThermoFisher Scientific) framework. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot database (version April 2017) concatenated with a fasta database containing amino acid sequences of the triple tagged dCas9 (HA, V5, 3xFLAG) construct. Protein Mascot scores and peptide numbers were taken directly from the Mascot output and reported. The same procedure was used to analyse input samples for the protocol characterization (Supplementary Figure 3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ikzf1, Hiv-1 latency reversal, Catchet-ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam


