### Accession
PXD044700

### Title
The screening of cross-reactive targets of recombinant anti-collagen antibody R69-4

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease affecting approximately 0.5% of the global population. Despite its prevalence, there is no known cure, underscoring the persistent need for novel therapeutic strategies. In previous studies, we identified a specific subset of antibodies that target an epitope (F4) on type-II collagen (COL2), which seemed to offer protection against arthritis. Leveraging these findings, we have engineered a range of recombinant antibodies against this epitope. Notably, one such antibody, R69-4, has shown significant potential in suppressing arthritis. Here, we aim to identify potential cross-reactive targets of R69-4 to better understand its mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were collected by centrifugating (8,000 x g) full mouse blood taken under general anesthesia. Synovial fluid samples were collected from the bilateral knee joints after mice been sacrificed. Cells from synovial fluids (SF) were separated from supernatants by centrifugation at 400 x g. Concentrated protein extracts from cells of synovial fluids were collected by lysing samples using Pierce RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific). In terms of immunoprecipitation, concentrated protein extracts were collected by lysing synovial fluid samples (containing cells) using Pierce RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific) for 5 min on ice. Protein-G superparamagnetic beads (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific) were pre-saturated by R69-4 or isotype (R69-18) and then incubated with the protein extracts for 10 min. The beads and supernatants (unbound molecules) were separated using a magnetic rack. Proteins bound to R69-4 beads were finally eluted with 1 M acetic acid after adequate wash. All samples (sera, SF, SF cells, and bound and unbound proteins from the IP experiments), were kept under -80 °C prior to proteomic analysis. Samples were reduced in 8 mM dithiothreitol (55 °C, 45 min) and alkylated in 25 mM iodoacetamide (25 °C, 30 min in darkness). Protein precipitation was then performed using sample:cold acetone in a volume ratio of 1:6 at -20 °C overnight. The precipitates were collected and washed with acetone by centrifugation (10 min, 10,000 g). Each dry pellet was then resuspended in 15 μL of 8 M urea in 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinepropanesulfonic acid (EPPS) buffer. To the protein elutes from the IP experiment, 500 mL of 20 mM EPPS buffer (pH 8.2) was then added, and the samples underwent two additional buffer exchange filtration steps (14,000 g, RT, 30 min, Amicon Ultra 0.5 centrifugal filters, 3 kDa) to remove the Tris buffer. For the other samples 15 μL of 20 mM EPPS buffer containing 0.67 μg LysC enzyme (Wako, USA) was added (pH 8.2). The protein elutes were adjusted to contain half the final concentration of LysC but in the same sample volume (30 µL) as the other samples. The digestion with LysC was performed at 30 °C for 8 h. 90 μL of EPPS buffer containing 0.5 μg (protein elutes) or 1 μg (other samples) of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) was then added to the samples. The samples were then digested overnight at 37 °C. Approximately 2/3 of each sample was then labeled using TMT10 and TMT16 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) labelling sets.  Exp 1: A) SF (TMT10), B) SF cells (TMT10), and C) serum (TMT10), as well as Exp 2:  two TMT16 samples (A and B) containing the bound and unbound proteins from the IP experiment. See sample code document for more details.  Sample desalting and cleaning was performed using C18 (Sep-Pak, C18, Vac 1 cm3 535 , 50 mg, Waters, USA). High pH reversed phase fractionation was then performed on samples A and B (Exp 1 and Exp 2) to separate the peptides using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific, Germany) on a Xbridge Peptide BEH C18 column (length, 25 cm; inner diameter, 2.1 mm; particle size, 3.5 μm; pore size, 300 Å; Waters) with a flow rate of 200 μL/min. Fractionation was applied using a binary solvent system consisting of 20 mM NH4OH in H2O (solvent A) and 20 mM NH4OH in acetonitrile (solvent B). Proteins were eluted with a gradient from 2% to 23% B in 42 min, to 52% B in 4 min, to 63% B in 2 min, and then at 63% B for 5 min. The elution was monitored measuring UV absorbance at 214 nm. A total of 96 fractions of 100 μL each were collected and concatenated into 6 (Exp 1) or 8 (Exp 2) fractions/sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant software. The Uniprot Mus musculus database was used as proteome reference for matching MS/MS spectra. TMT quantification of peptide and protein abundances was selected. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation as well as arginine, and asparagine deamidation were used as variable modifications for both identification and quantification. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter. After removing contaminants, only proteins with at least two peptides were included in the final data set. Protein abundances were normalized to the summed abundance of proteins quantified in all fractions for respective sample. This allows better comparison of the proteins in the bound vs unbound samples, since the protein content in the bound samples was less complex. For exp 2, following the normalization step, protein abundance was further normalized by the corresponding abundance in the linker sample which was used to correct for the instrumental drift between the analyses of the two TMT sets.

### Publication Abstract
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) involves several classes of pathogenic autoantibodies, some of which react with type-II collagen (COL2) in articular cartilage. We previously described a subset of COL2 antibodies targeting the F4 epitope (ERGLKGHRGFT) that could be regulatory. Here, using phage display, we developed recombinant antibodies against this epitope and examined the underlying mechanism of action. One of these antibodies, R69-4, protected against cartilage antibody- and collagen-induced arthritis in mice, but not autoimmune disease models independent of arthritogenic autoantibodies. R69-4 was further shown to cross-react with a large range of proteins within the inflamed synovial fluid, such as the complement protein C1q. Complexed R69-4 inhibited neutrophil FCGR3 signaling, thereby impairing downstream IL-1&#x3b2; secretion and neutrophil self-orchestrated recruitment. Likewise, human isotypes of R69-4 protected against arthritis with comparable efficiency. We conclude that R69-4 abrogates autoantibody-mediated arthritis mainly by hindering FCGR3 signaling, highlighting its potential clinical utility in acute RA.

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis, Antibodies

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Division of chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Susanna Lundström

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Division of chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet


