### Accession
PXD042993

### Title
Nardilysin-Regulated Scission Mechanism Activates Polo-like Kinase 3 to Suppress the Development of Pancreatic Cancer

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) develops through step-wise genetic and molecular alterations including Kras mutation and inactivation of apoptotic pathways. Here, we find that development of anoikis resistance and metastasis of KrasG12D-driven PDAC in mice is accelerated by deleting Plk3, explaining the often reduced Plk3 expression in human PDAC. Importantly, a 41 kDa Plk3 (p41Plk3) that contained the entire kinase domain at the N-terminus (1-353 aa) is activated by scission of the precursor p72Plk3 at Arg354 by metalloendopeptidase Nardilysin (NRDC), and the resulting p32Plk3 C-terminal Polo-box domain (PBD) was quickly removed by proteasome degradation preventing the p41Plk3 inhibition by PBD. We found that p41Plk3 is the activated form of Plk3 that regulates a feedforward mechanism to promote anoikis and suppress PDAC and metastasis. p41Plk3 phosphorylates c-Fos on Thr164, which in turn, induces expression of Plk3 and pro-apoptotic genes. These findings uncovered an NRDC-regulated post-translational mechanism (PTM) that activates Plk3, establishing a prototypic regulation by scission mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing for Supplementary Fig. 3h and 4. MALDI-mass spectrometric analysis of NRDC cleavage of Plk3 and Plk1 peptides.  The synthetic Plk3-P21 peptide (WT P21, 345-365 aa [AKVTKSLFGRKKKSKNHAQER]; from the predicted NRDC binding and processing region), a mutated peptide (P21mt [AKVTKSLFGMMMMSKNHAQER]), Plk1 peptide (WT: [SLDPSNRKPLTVLNKGLE]; from the predicted NRDC binding and processing region) and a mutated peptide (mt: [SLDPSNGKPLTVLNKGLE]) were used in an NRDC cleavage assay. Dynorphin A (Sigma-Aldrich) was used as a cleavage-positive control. Enzymatic assays were carried out via incubation at 37 °C for 10 min of an aliquot of the enzyme preparation with Plk3-peptide or positive control dynorphin A (12 M) in 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0) in 100 l of a reaction volume. The reaction was terminated by adding 10 l of acetic acid. Samples from cleavage reactions were diluted at 1:100 in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water, and the dilution was mixed at 1:1 with a matrix solution and spotted onto a stainless steel MALDI target plate. Samples were spotted near calibration standard spots to facilitate close external calibration. The matrix employed was -cyanohydroxycinnamic acid obtained in solution from Agilent Technologies. Mass spectra were acquired via a MALDI–time-of-flight Voyager DE-Pro instrument (PE PerSeptive Biosystems) using the matrix 3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). The major and minor peaks in MALDI-mass spectrometric analysis and corresponding cleaved peptide sequences were identified. Sample processing for Supplementary Fig. 7a In vitro kinase assay showing Plk3-mediated phosphorylation of c-Fos caused c-Fos migration to a higher molecular weight position (Fig. 6g). Shifted and unshifted c-Fos bands (Lane 3) with (Lane 4) or without (Lane 3) Plk inhibitor treatment are analyzed by mass-spec to deduce phosphorylation sites. c-Fos alone (Lane 2) was analyzed by mass-spec to exclude the c-Fos auto-phosphorylation.

### Data Protocol
MALDI methods Mass spectra were acquired using a Voyager DE-STR MALDI–time-of-flight mass spectrometer (software version 5.1; Applied Biosystems) in reflector mode. Typically, 200 laser shots were summed per acquisition, with 2-5 acquisitions added to provide the final spectra. Supplementary Fig. 7a. Identification of Plk3 phosphorylation sites on c-Fos. Annotated MS/MS spectrum assigned to the c-Fos peptide sequence: ELTD[pT164]LQAETDQLEDEK, T5-Phospho (79.96633 Da), identified with: Mascot (v1.30); IonScore:59, Exp Value:8.9E-005, ions matched by search engine:11/178, fragments used for search: b; b-H₂O; b-NH₃; y; y-H₂O; y-NH₃; Sequence: AQ[pS122]IGRR, S3-Phospho (79.96633 Da), charge: +2, monoisotopic m/z:434.21347 Da (-0.01 mmu/-0.02 ppm), MH+: 867.41966 Da, RT: 9.57 min, IonScore:32, Exp Value:9.8E-003, ions matched by search engine: 5/58; Sequence: SIS[pS261]MELKTEPFDDFLFPASSRPSGSETAR, S3-Phospho (79.96633 Da), charge: +3, monoisotopic m/z:1123.85022 Da (+0.49 mmu/+0.43 ppm), MH+: 3369.53611 Da, RT: 81.56 min, IonScore:70, Exp Value:1.1E-005, ions matched by search engine: 14/330; Sequence: G[pS362]SSNEPSSDSLSSP[pT376]LLAL, S2-Phospho (79.96633 Da), T16-Phospho (79.96633 Da), charge: +2, monoisotopic m/z:1054.93677 Da (-0.53 mmu/-0.5 ppm), MH+: 2108.86626 Da, RT: 19.60 min, IonScore:37, Exp Value:1.2E-002, ions matched by search engine: 8/180. All peptides are identified with: Mascot (v1.30); Fragment match tolerance used for search: 0.8 Da; Fragments used for search: b; b-H₂O; b-NH₃; y; y-H₂O; y-NH₃.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational mechanism (ptm), Plk3, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (pdac), Plk1, Nardilysin (nrdc) metalloendopeptidase cleavage, C-fos, Anoikis, Genetically engineered mouse models (gemms), Metastasis, Kinase activation

### Affiliations
The University of Texas
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX USA

### Submitter
Paul Chiao

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J Chiao
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX USA


