### Accession
PXD043837

### Title
The self-association equilibrium of DNAJA2 regulates its interaction with unfolded substrate proteins and with Hsc70

### Description
J-domain proteins tune the specificity of Hsp70s, engaging them in precise functions. Despite their essential role, the structure and function of many J-domain proteins remain largely unknown. We explore human DNAJA2, a class A J-domain protein, finding that it reversibly oligomerises into highly-ordered, tubular structures that can be dissociated by Hsc70, the constitutively expressed Hsp70 isoform. Cryoelectron microscopy and mutational studies reveal that multivalent interactions between different domains are involved in self-association. Oligomer dissociation into dimers potentiates its interaction with unfolded client proteins. Closely spaced J domains in the tubular structure could allow transfer of several Hsc70 molecules to cooperatively remodel the unfolded substrate, explaining the efficient recovery of DNAJA2-bound clients. The disordered C-terminal domain, comprising the last 52 residues, regulates its holding activity and productive interaction with Hsc70. These in vitro findings suggest that the association equilibrium of DNAJA2 could regulate its interaction with client proteins and Hsc70.

### Sample Protocol
50 μg of DNAJA2 and DNAJA2G/FR were first subjected to chemical crosslinking by incubation with 2 mM BS3 in 50 mM Na-Hepes pH 7.0, 20 mM NaCl for 40 min at RT with 600 rpm shaking. The reactions were quenched for 15 min at RT by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0. Purified BS3-crosslinked DNAJA2 or DNAJA2G/FR were incubated in Laemmli sample buffer (0.02% [w/v] bromophenol blue, 2% [w/v] SDS, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8) for 5 min at 96 °C and loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. The gel was stained with Quick Coomassie (Generon), showing a set of bands with different molecular weights, from which only the largest, which did not enter the resolving part of the gel and were compatible with the large assemblies observed by EM, were excised and subjected to automated reduction, alkylation with iodoacetamide and trypsin digestion in a Proteineer DP robot (Bruker Daltonics). The resulting peptide mixture was speed-vac dried and re-dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was carried out using a nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Eksigent, Framingham, MA) coupled online to a 5600 triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) through a nanospray III ion source (AB Sciex) equipped with a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 μm x 12 cm; New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptides were fractionated at a flow rate of 0.250 mL/min at 50 °C under gradient elution conditions. The ion source was operated in positive ionization mode at 150 °C with a potential difference of 2300 V.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw MS data were searched against a custom-made database containing the amino-acid sequence of human DnaJA2 or DnaJA2∆G/F. The MS/MS ion search was performed with Stavros/MeroX 2.0 (Götze et al., 201) using its quadratic mode of analysis. BS3 was selected as crosslinker with specificity for Lys and protein N-terminus at site 1 and Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr and protein N-terminus at site 2. Intra-peptideal and dead-end crosslinks by reaction with H2O were considered. Trypsin was selected as enzyme allowing 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) and oxidation (Met) were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Analysis was performed with MS and MS/MS tolerances of 10 and 20 ppm and with lower and upper mass limits of 500 and 7000 Da, respectively. For peptide matching, only precursors with a charge state > 1+ and at least 3 fragments of the a, b or y series per peptide were considered. For scoring, the slowest and most precise method was chosen, excluding internal linear ions. The decoy database was generated by shuffling sequences but keeping the protease sites. A prescore (% intensity) of 10 was applied and peptide identifications were filtered at an XlinkX score > 30 and afalse discovery rate (FDR) < 5% . All the MS2 spectra of the resulting peptides were manually revised.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dnaja2 structure, Hsp70 system, Protein folding, Chaperone, J-domain proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Macromolecular Structure, National Centre for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), 28049 Madrid, Spain.
CNB-CSIC

### Submitter
Jorge Cuéllar

### Lab Head
Dr Jorge Cuellar
Department of Macromolecular Structure, National Centre for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), 28049 Madrid, Spain.


