### Accession
PXD015778

### Title
Architecture of human Rag GTPase heterodimers and their complex with mTORC1

### Description
The Rag GTPases recruit the master kinase mTORC1 to lysosomes to regulate cell growth and proliferation in response to amino acid availability. The nucleotide state of Rag heterodimers is critical for their association with mTORC1. Our cryo-EM structure of RagA/RagC in complex with mTORC1 shows the details of RagA/C binding to the RAPTOR subunit of mTORC1 and explains why only the RagAGTP/RagCGDP nucleotide state binds mTORC1. Previous kinetic studies suggested that GTP binding to one Rag locks the heterodimer to prevent GTP binding to the other. Our crystal structures and dynamics show the mechanism for this locking, and explain how oncogenic hotspot mutations disrupt this process. In contrast to allosteric activation by RHEB, Rag heterodimer binding does not change mTORC1 conformation and activates mTORC1 by targeting it to lysosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Solutions consisting of 7.5 uM full-length human RagA-Q66LGTP/RagC-T90NGDP or 7.5 uM Strep-FLAG-RAPTOR were incubated either in the presence or absence of 11 uM RAPTOR or RagA/C, respectively, for 1 h on ice in a buffer consisting of 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. An aliquot of 5 uL of protein was incubated at room temperature with 45 uL D2O Buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, 91.4% D2O) for five timepoints (0.3, 3. 30, 300, 3000 s, the 0.3s was achieved by incubating proteins with ice-cold D2O buffer for 3s). Exchange reactions were quenched by addition of 20 L of ice-cold Quench Buffer (2M Guanidinium chloride and 2.4% formic acid) then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen, prior to storage at -80 °C. For measurements, each sample was thawed and injected onto an M-Class Acquity UPLC with HDX technology (Waters) kept at 0.1 °C. The proteins were digested on an Enzymate Pepsin column (Waters, 186007233) at 15 °C for two minutes. Peptic peptides were then eluted onto an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (Waters, 186002346), equilibrated in Pepsin-A buffer (0.1 % formic acid), using a 3-43% gradient of Pepsin-B buffer (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) over 22 minutes.   Sample A = 7.5 uM RagA/C Sample B = 7.5 uM Raptor Sample C = 7.5 uM RagA/C + 11 uM Raptor Sample D = 7.5 uM Raptor + 11 uM RagA/C

### Data Protocol
Data were collected on a Waters Synapt G2-Si, with an electrospray ionization source, from 50 to 2000 m/z. All exchange reactions were conducted in triplicate. The spray voltage was 3.0 kV. Data were collected in HDMSe mode. Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of either RagA/C or RAPTOR, using the ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters). Three replicates were used to identify non-deuterated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The Rag guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) recruit the master kinase mTORC1 to lysosomes to regulate cell growth and proliferation in response to amino acid availability. The nucleotide state of Rag heterodimers is critical for their association with mTORC1. Our cryo-electron microscopy structure of RagA/RagC in complex with mTORC1 shows the details of RagA/RagC binding to the RAPTOR subunit of mTORC1 and explains why only the RagA<sub>GTP</sub>/RagC<sub>GDP</sub> nucleotide state binds mTORC1. Previous kinetic studies suggested that GTP binding to one Rag locks the heterodimer to prevent GTP binding to the other. Our crystal structures and dynamics of RagA/RagC show the mechanism for this locking and explain how oncogenic hotspot mutations disrupt this process. In contrast to allosteric activation by RHEB, Rag heterodimer binding does not change mTORC1 conformation and activates mTORC1 by targeting it to lysosomes.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Mtorc1, Ragc, Raga

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Glenn Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn Robert Masson
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology


