### Accession
PXD006638

### Title
An OMICS perspective on N-terminal Methionine Excision

### Description
Excision of the N-terminal initiator methionine (iMet) from nascent peptide chains is an essential and omnipresent protein modification carried out by Methionine aminopetidases (MetAPs) and accounting for a major source of N-terminal proteoform diversity. While MetAP2 is known to be implicated in processes such as angiogenesis and proliferation in mammals, the physiological role of MetAP1 is much less clear. In this report we studied the omics-wide effects of MetAP1 deletion and MetAP inhibition in general. While the levels of iMet retention are inversely correlated with cellular proliferation rates, deletion of MetAP1 was in part rescued by the increased MetAP2 expression and activity profiles observed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome sample preparation for shotgun analyses: Cell pellets of WT (HAP1 WT) and METAP1 KO (HAP1 MetAP1Δ) cells obtained from 3 independent cell cultures and containing approx. 10x106 cells per pellet, were collected and stored at -80°C until further processing. HAP1 cell pellets resuspended in 400 µl Gu.HCl lysis buffer (4 M GdmCl, 50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9)) were lysed by three rounds of freeze-thaw lysis in liquid in N2. The lysates were sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 4, 50% duty cycle, 3×30 s, 1 sec pulses) followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 g (4 °C), the supernatant removed and protein concentration determined by Bradford measurement. An aliquot equivalent of 200 µg (~5x106 cells) was transferred to a clean tube, diluted to 1 mg/ml with lysis buffer, 2x diluted with HPLC grade water, and precipitated with 4× volumes of −20 °C acetone overnight. Precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging for 15 min at 2,000g (4 °C), pellets washed twice with −20 °C 80% acetone, and air dried upside down for ~10 min at RT or until no residual acetone odor remained. Pellets were resuspended in 200 µl TFE (2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) digestion buffer (10% TFE, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) with sonication until a homogenous suspension was reached. All samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) (enzyme/substrate of 1:50 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm). Samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Samples were cleared from insoluble particulates by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 g (4°C) and the supernatant transferred to clean tubes. Methionine oxidation was performed by the addition of H2O2 to a f.c. of 0.5% for 30’ at 30°C. Solid phase extraction of peptides was performed using C18 reversed phase sorbent containing 100 µl pipette tips (Bond Elut OMIX 100 µl C18 tips (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pipette tip was conditioned by aspirating the maximum pipette tip volume of water:acetonitrile, 50:50 (v/v) and the solvent discarded. After equilibration of the tip by washing 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume in 0.1% TFA in water, 100 µl of the acidified samples (~200 µg) were dispensed and aspirated for 10 cycles for maximum binding efficiency. The tip was washed 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 98:2 (v/v) and the bound peptides eluted in LC-MS/MS vials with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 30:70 (v/v). The samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 20 µL of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 2% acetonitrile.  Proteome sample preparation for N-terminal peptide enrichment analyses: Cell pellets of WT (HAP1 WT) and METAP1 KO (HAP1 MetAP1Δ) cells obtained from 3 independent cell cultures (corresponding cultures of shotgun analysis) and containing approx. 50x106 cells per pellet, were collected and stored at -80°C until further processing. HAP1 cell pellets resuspended in 50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9) were lysed by three rounds of freeze-thaw lysis in liquid N2 and the lysates cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 x g. Solid guanidinum hydrochloride was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 4 M and the protein samples (equivalent of 2 mg) were reduced and S-alkylated.  All primary protein amines were blocked using an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of (stable isotopic encoded) acetate at the protein level (i.e. an NHS ester of 13C2D3 acetate) to enable the assignment and the calculation of the degree of in vivo Nt-acetylation events. All modified proteome samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (enzyme/substrate of 1:50 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm) and the resulting peptide mixtures vacuum dried. N-terminal peptide enrichment by SCX was performed as described previously (22). The eluted fraction enriched for N-terminal peptides were vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 1 ml of 0.5% TFA in 2% acetonitrile. Samples were cleared from insoluble particulates by centrifugation for 10´ at 13,000 rpm 4°C and the supernatant transferred to clean tubes. Methionine oxidation was performed on 100 µl of acidified sample (~200 µg) by the addition of H2O2 to a f.c. of 0.5% for 30’ at 30°C. Solid phase extraction of peptides was performed using C18 reversed phase sorbent containing 100 µl pipette tips as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched with MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine (version 1.5.4.1) and MS/MS spectra searched against the Swiss-Prot database for N-terminal proteome analyses, or a two amino acids N-terminally truncated version (a modified database was used to avoid contribution of N-terminal peptide abundances to the overall LFQ protein calculations) of the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy Homo sapiens; 20,195 entries; May 2016 version) for shotgun proteome analyses. In both cases potential contaminants present in the contaminants.fasta file that comes with MaxQuant were automatically added. A precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass recalibration) and set to 4.5 ppm for the main search. For shotgun proteome analyses, trypsin/P (i.e. cleavages between lysine/arginine-proline residues were allowed) was selected as enzyme setting and up to two missed cleavage were allowed. Methionine oxidation was searched as fixed modifications, whereas N-terminal protein acetylation was set as variable modification. In case of N-terminal proteome enriched samples, ArgC was selected as enzyme setting as cleavage after lysine residues is obstructed by acylation of their side chains. Cleavages between arginine–proline residues and semi-specific free N-terminus was chosen as digestion mode. Methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and heavy acetylation at lysine side-chains (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (K)) were searched as fixed modifications, whereas acetylation and heavy (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (N-term)) acetylation on protein N-termini were set as variable modifications.  The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimum score threshold for both modified and unmodified peptides was set to 40. The match between runs function was enabled and proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Minimum of 2 ratio counts and only unique peptides were considered for protein quantification.    Quantification of the degree of protein Nt-acetylation: To quantify the degree of protein in vivo Nt-acetylation, raw data files were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and MS/MS spectra searched against the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy Homo sapiens; 20,172 entries; January 2017 version). The Mascot search parameters were set as follows; methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide, heavy acetylation at lysine side-chains (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (K)) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine a were set as fixed modifications. To enable identification quantification of the degree of N-terminal acetylation, acetylation versus heavy acetylation of N-termini (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) N-term) was selected as quantification option, and carried out using the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Tool (version 2.5.1.0). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and to 20 mmu on fragment ions. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-QUAD.  Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was be selected as enzyme allowing for 1 missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Excision of the N-terminal initiator methionine (iMet) residue from nascent peptide chains is an essential and omnipresent protein modification carried out by methionine aminopeptidases (MetAPs) that accounts for a major source of N-terminal proteoform diversity. Although MetAP2 is known to be implicated in processes such as angiogenesis and proliferation in mammals, the physiological role of MetAP1 is much less clear. In this report we studied the omics-wide effects of human MetAP1 deletion and general MetAP inhibition. The levels of iMet retention are inversely correlated with cellular proliferation rates. Further, despite the increased MetAP2 expression on MetAP1 deletion, MetAP2 was unable to restore processing of Met-Ser-, Met-Pro-, and Met-Ala- starting N termini as inferred from the iMet retention profiles observed, indicating a higher activity of MetAP1 over these N termini. Proteome and transcriptome expression profiling point to differential expression of proteins implicated in lipid metabolism, cytoskeleton organization, cell proliferation and protein synthesis upon perturbation of MetAP activity.

### Keywords
N-terminal proteomics, Imet excision, Metap, Shotgun, Metap1

### Affiliations
University of Ghent
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology & Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University,  Albert Baertsoenkaai 3 9000 Ghent Belgium

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology & Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University,  Albert Baertsoenkaai 3 9000 Ghent Belgium


