### Accession
PXD012336

### Title
Bermudagrass stolon and shoot comparative proteomics

### Description
Bermudagrass is an important warm-season turfgrass species with both erect growing shoots and prostrate growing stolons, however, the mechanism how bermudagrass shoots and stolons form and maintain their unique geotropic growth modes are still unclear. In this study, we compared the proteome of the internode section of shoots and stolons at the same developmental stage in bermudagrass cultivar Yangjiang. The results indicated that 376 protein species were differentially accumulated in the two types of stems.

### Sample Protocol
The middle portions of the second internodes of shoots and stolons were randomly collected from different plants of bermudagrass cultivar Yangjiang and frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at 80 °C for protein extraction. Proteins were extracted using the previously described method with minor modifications. Briefly, about 0.5 g sample was ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder, and the powder was suspended completely in 10 ml of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% SDS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF) with sonication on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove the remaining debris. Subsequently, 4 volume of ice-cold acetone was added and the proteins were precipitated at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was collected and washed with ice-cold acetone for three times. The collected protein pellets were dried with N2 to remove any remaining acetone. The dried protein powder was resuspended completely in 1 ml of dissolvent buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). The resulting supernatant was reduced by adding 10 mM DTT. The reduction continued for 30 min at 56°C. Sample was then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein concentration was determined using Bradford method. For trypsin digestion, 100 μg protein was diluted by four volume of digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and digested with 2 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column (Sigma, Shanghai, China), dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 500 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) for following iTRAQ labeling. In this study, 6 peptide samples of shoots and stolons (each with 3 biological replicates) were labeled with iTRAQ tags following the manufacturer's protocol for the iTRAQ® Reagents 8-PLEX Multiplex Kit (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Specifically, the three samples of stolons were labeled with iTRAQ8-113, iTRAQ8-114 and iTRAQ8-115, whereas the three samples of shoots were labeled with iTRAQ8-116, iTRAQ8-117 and iTRAQ8-118, respectively. The labeled peptides were pooled together, desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column, dried by vacuum centrifugation and fractionated using a Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with Durashell C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å). Briefly, peptides were first fractionated with a gradient of 2%-60% acetonitrile in ammonium bicarbonate (10 mM, pH 10) over 60 min into 60 fractions, which were further combined into 12 final fractions and then desalted and vacuum dried. For LC-MS/MS analyses, the fractionated peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O), loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (20 mm × 100 μm, 5 μm) and separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm) through the Eksigent nanoLC system (Eksigent, Livermore, CA, USA). The gradient for MS analysis was set as the following: starting from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile, 2% H2O) over 24 min, then 20%–35% solvent B in 8 min, thereafter increasing to 80% solvent B in 55 min and holding at 80% solvent B for the last 3 min, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data were collected using information-dependent acquisition mode in a high speed TripleTOF™ 5600plus mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Concord, Canada) coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC system. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was operated in a manner that a 0.25 s survey scan (MS) in the mass range of 350-1500 m/z was collected, from which the top 30 ions were selected for automated MS/MS in the mass range of 100-1500 m/z and each MS/MS event consisted of a 0.05 s scan. Once a target ion had been fragmented by MS/MS, its mass and isotopes were excluded for a period of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Analyses of the raw MS spectra generated by LC-MS/MS were performed with the ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (ABSciex) using the Paragon algorithm. Specifically, a high-confident peptide database (210,172 sequences, 69,486,195 residues) derived from a full-length transcriptome sequencing project of bermudagrass was used as the searching database. The searches were performed using the following settings: type of search, iTRAQ 8-PLEX (peptide labeled); enzyme, trypsin; Cys alkylation, Iodoacetamide; instrument, TripleTOF™ 5600plus; bias correction, true; background correction, true; ID focus, biological modifications; search effort, thorough ID; protein mass, unrestricted; unused score, ≥ 1.3; confidence, ≥ 95%; unique peptides, ≥ 1. For protein species quantification, the quantitative protein ratios between shoots and stolons were weighted and normalized by the median ratio of the three replicates. Only the ratios ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 and a p-value of ≤ 0.05 in one-way ANOVA and Student-Newman-Keuls tests were considered as differentially accumulated protein species (DAPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bermudagrass, Itraq, Stem, Gravity

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Bing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Zhang
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


