### Accession
PXD034962

### Title
Deep and fast label-free Dynamic Organellar Mapping - DDA data

### Description
The Dynamic Organellar Maps (DOMs) approach combines cell fractionation and shotgun-proteomics for global profiling analysis of protein subcellular localization. Here, we have drastically enhanced the performance of DOMs through data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). DIA-DOMs achieve twice the depth of our previous workflow in the same MS runtime, and substantially improve profiling precision and reproducibility. This repository contains all DDA-LFQ datasets used in our work: A reference dataset acquired in single shot on 100 min gradients and three fractionated datasets providing measured libraries for DIA searches on 100 min, 44 min and 21 min gradients.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis by dounce homogenization and subcellular fractionation by differential ultracentrifugation were performed as reported previously (Itzhak, D.N., et al, Elife 2016, 5. and Itzhak, D.N., Schessner, J.P., Borner, G.H.H., Curr. Protoc. cell Biol. 2019, 83, e81). Protein was precipitated by the addition of five volumes of ice-cold acetone, incubated at  20°C overnight and pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 × g. Precipitated protein pellets were drained, air-dried and resuspended thoroughly in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris・HCl, pH 8.1, freshly added 1 mM DTT). Sulfhydryl groups were alkylated by the addition of 5 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were digested by the addition of LysC (1 µg per 50 µg of protein) overnight, then diluted four-fold with 50 mM Tris, pH 8.1 and further digested by addition of trypsin (1 µg per 50 µg of protein) for a 3 h. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final pH < 3). Peptides were purified either by solid-phase extraction with poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse-phase sulfonate (SDB RPS), as previously described (Kulak, et al. Nat. Methods 2014, 11, 319–324.), or by LC trapping using commercially available C18 StageTips (EvoTips Cat# EV2001) of the Evosep System, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the DDA library for the 100 min gradient, peptides were triple-fractionated on SDB RPS StageTips (100 mM ammonium formate, 40 % [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.5 % [v/v] formic acid; 150 mM ammonium formate, 60 % [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.5 % [v/v] formic acid; 5 % [v/v] NH4OH, 80 % [v/v] acetonitrile). For the DDA libraries for the 21 and 44 min gradients, peptides were fractionated into a final eight fractions using a Pierce High pH reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All measurements were performed on a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, with minimal chromatography column changes. Nanoflow reversed-phase chromatography was performed using either the Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems) or the EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system coupled online to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument via a nano-electrospray ion source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). On the EASY-nLC 1200 system a binary buffer system with the mobile phases A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) and B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) was employed. Peptides were separated in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 cm × 75 µm (i.d.) column with a laser-pulled emitter tip, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm silica beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was operated at 60 °C using an in-house manufactured oven. In total, 300 ng of purified peptides in Buffer A* were loaded onto the column in Buffer A and eluted using a linear 84 min gradient of Buffer B from 5 % to 30 %, followed by an increase to 60 % B in 8 min, a further increase to 95 % B in 4 min, a constant phase at 95 % B for 4 min, followed by washout – a decrease to 5 % B in 5 min and a constant phase at 5 % B for 5 min – before re equilibration. On the Evosep One LC system a binary buffer system with the mobile phases A (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid) and B (0.1 % [v/v] formic acid in acetonitrile) was used. Peptides were separated in 21 min at a flow rate of 1.0 µL/min on an 8 cm column (with a throughput of 60 samples per day [SPD]) or 44 min at a flow rate of 0.5 µL/min on a 15 cm column (with a throughput of 30 SPD), using in-house packed columns and standard pre programmed gradients. The 15 cm in house packed column was operated at 60 °C using an in house manufactured oven. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer run by Xcalibur (v.4.4, Thermo Fisher) was operated in top 15 scan mode (DDA) with a full scan range of 300   1650 Th when coupled to the EASY nLC 1200 system (100 min gradient). Survey scans were acquired at 60,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 charges and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. The selected precursor ions were isolated in a window of 1.4 Th, fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 30. Fragment scans were performed at 15,000 resolution, with a maximum injection time of 28 ms, an AGC target of 1 × 105 charges, and a precursor dynamic exclusion for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification, MS raw data were imported into MaxQuant version 2.3.1 (search results from 1.6.17 for 100min benchmark were retained as used in the directLFQ manuscript). Unless otherwise stated, default parameters were used for all settings. The MS2 spectra were searched against the SwissProt entries contained in the UniProt human reference proteome FASTA database (UP000005640_9606, 42,418 entries). For accurate label-free quantification, the ‘MaxLFQ algorithm’was enabled with LFQ minimum ratio count of 1 and the match between runs feature was enabled to  match between equivalent and adjacent subcellular fractions of replicates. Downstream analysis of the data was performed using our dedicated quality control tool for organellar maps, online at domqc.bornerlab.org.

### Publication Abstract
CS<sub>2</sub> promises easy access to degradable sulfur-rich polymers and insights into how main-group derivatisation affects polymer formation and properties, though its ring-opening copolymerisation is plagued by low linkage selectivity and small-molecule by-products. We demonstrate that a cooperative Cr(III)/K catalyst selectively delivers poly(dithiocarbonates) from CS<sub>2</sub> and oxetanes while state-of-the-art strategies produce linkage scrambled polymers and heterocyclic by-products. The formal introduction of sulfur centres into the parent polycarbonates results in a net shift of the polymerisation equilibrium towards, and therefore facilitating, depolymerisation. During copolymerisation however, the catalyst enables near quantitative generation of the metastable polymers in high sequence selectivity by limiting the lifetime of alkoxide intermediates. Furthermore, linkage selectivity is key to obtain semi-crystalline materials that can be moulded into self-standing objects as well as to enable chemoselective depolymerisation into cyclic dithiocarbonates which can themselves serve as monomers in ring-opening polymerisation. Our report demonstrates the potential of cooperative catalysis to produce previously inaccessible main-group rich materials with beneficial chemical and physical properties.

### Keywords
Dynamic organellar maps, Data quality control, Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, Spatial proteomics, Profiling analysis, Dia

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Julia Schessner

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H.H.
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking Research Group, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


