### Accession
PXD029397

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based characterization of secretomes from different strains of Pseudomonas chlororaphis and Pseudomonas entomophila.

### Description
To characterize the molecular basis of cytotoxicity of different Pseudomonas species and strains, we analyzed the protein content of secretomes of three P. chlororaphis strains (CIP63, CIP75 and the reference strain PA23) and of six P. entomophila strains (L48 WT, or deleted for various virulence factors: the global activator GacA, the pore-forming toxin Mnl, the pore-forming toxin ExlA, and double mutants for these genes).

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were grown in triplicates in liquid LB medium at 28°C or 30°C for P. chlororaphis or P. entomophila respectively, with agitation at 300 rpm. Overnight cultures were centrifuged 10 min at 13,000 rpm at 4°C to separate bacterial cells from secretomes. Laemmli denaturing buffer was added to secretomes followed by a denaturation step by heating for 10 min at 100°C. Solubilized proteins were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 140-min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the NCBI database (Pseudomonas chlororaphis strain:PA23 taxonomy, June 2020 download) or the Microscope database (Pseudomonas entomophila L48 taxonomy, January 2020 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, peptide score ≥ 25, allowing to reach a false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Two-partner secretion (TPS) is widespread in the bacterial world. The pore-forming TPS toxin ExlA of <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is conserved in pathogenic and environmental <i>Pseudomonas</i>. While <i>P.&#xa0;chlororaphis</i> and <i>P.&#xa0;entomophila</i> displayed ExlA-dependent killing, <i>P.&#xa0;putida</i> did not cause damage to eukaryotic cells. ExlA proteins interacted with epithelial cell membranes; however, only ExlA <sup><i>Pch</i></sup> induced the cleavage of the adhesive molecule E-cadherin. ExlA proteins participated in insecticidal activity toward the larvae of <i>Galleria mellonella</i> and the fly <i>Drosophila melanogaster.</i> Evolutionary analyses demonstrated that the differences in the C-terminal domains are partly due to horizontal movements of the operon within the genus <i>Pseudomonas.</i> Reconstruction of the evolutionary history revealed the complex horizontal acquisitions. Together, our results provide evidence that conserved TPS toxins in environmental <i>Pseudomonas</i> play a role in bacteria-insect interactions and discrete differences in CTDs may determine their specificity and mode of action toward eukaryotic cells.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Secretome, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


