### Accession
PXD014832

### Title
S6K1 Phosphoproteome in Tsc1-null mouse kidney iMCD3 cells

### Description
Loss of Tsc1 in the kidneys gives rise to rapid polycystogenesis and kidney failure due to the hyperactivation of mTOR complex I (mTORC1). One of the major downstream targets of mTORC1 is S6K1, which is responsible for driving many of the effector functions of mTOR. Strikingly, the loss of S6k1 in the context of hyperactivated mTOR is sufficient to reverse the generation of polycystic kidneys. In an effort to uncover novel direct S6k1 substrates involved in the generation of cystic kidneys, we generated Tsc1-null and Tsc1/S6k1-double null murine inner medullary collecting duct (iMCD3) cell lines using CRISPR/Cas9. Using these two cell lines, we conducted a phosphoproteome screen to search for novel candidates. Using a combination of antibody-motif enrichment and metal affinity enrichment, we provide a comprehensive phosphoproteome profile between these two genotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 2 x 108 cells of each genotype were starved for 2 hours in Earl’s Balanced Salt Solution and then rinsed with ice-cold PBS. After carefully removing all PBS, cells were serially lysed in 10 ml of fresh urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (phosStop, Roche), to produce 20-40 mg of protein per condition. Lysates were frozen at -80 °C until processed for PTMScan analysis as previously described (Stokes, M. P., Farnsworth, C. L., Gu, H., Jia, X., Worsfold, C. R., Yang, V., Ren, J. M., Lee, K. A., and Silva, J. C. (2015). Complementary PTM Profiling of Drug Response in Human Gastric Carcinoma by Immunoaffinity and IMAC Methods with Total Proteome Analysis. Proteomes 3, 160-183). Cellular extracts were sonicated, centrifuged, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. 15mg (antibody enrichment) or 500ug (IMAC enrichment) total protein for each sample was digested with LysC (antibody) or trypsin (IMAC) and purified over C18 columns for enrichment with the Fe-IMAC for total phosphopeptides and Akt substrate motif antibodies for phospho-AGC-motif specific enrichment. Enriched peptides were purified over C18 STAGE tips.  Enriched peptides were subjected to secondary digest with trypsin and second STAGE tip prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Replicate injections of each sample were run non-sequentially for each enrichment. Peptides were eluted using a 90-minute or 150-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min.  Tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner with a Thermo Orbitrap QExactive or Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using a top-twenty MS/MS method, a dynamic repeat count of one, and a repeat duration of 30 sec.  Real time recalibration of mass error was performed using lock mass with a singly charged polysiloxane ion m/z = 371.101237.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University.  Files were searched against the most recent update of the UniProt mus musculus FASTA database.  A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions.  Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed.  Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues were allowed as variable modifications.  Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using a 2.5% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a -/+ 5ppm mass error range and presence of a phosphorylated residue (IMAC) or phosphorylated residue within an RXX(s/t) motif (Akt Substrate Motif antibodies).  All quantitative results were generated using Skyline (MacLean) to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments in the MS1 channel.  Accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files.

### Publication Abstract
mTOR activation is essential and sufficient to cause polycystic kidneys in Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) and other genetic disorders. In disease models, a sharp increase of proliferation and cyst formation correlates with a dramatic loss of oriented cell division (OCD). We find that OCD distortion is intrinsically due to S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) activation. The concomitant loss of S6K1 in Tsc1-mutant mice restores OCD but does not decrease hyperproliferation, leading to non-cystic harmonious hyper growth of kidneys. Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics for S6K1 substrates revealed Afadin, a known component of cell-cell junctions required to couple intercellular adhesions and cortical cues to spindle orientation. Afadin is directly phosphorylated by S6K1 and abnormally decorates the apical surface of Tsc1-mutant cells with E-cadherin and &#x3b1;-catenin. Our data reveal that S6K1 hyperactivity alters centrosome positioning in mitotic cells, affecting oriented cell division and promoting kidney cysts in conditions of mTOR hyperactivity.

### Keywords
Tsc1, Phosphoproteome, Kidney, Mtor, S6k1

### Affiliations
INSERM
Laboratory of Cell Growth Control by Nutrients, Inserm U1151, Necker Enfants Malades Institute (INEM), Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Leriche Building 14 Rue Maria Helena Vieira da Silva Paris 75014 France

### Submitter
Nicolas Kuperwasser

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Pende
Laboratory of Cell Growth Control by Nutrients, Inserm U1151, Necker Enfants Malades Institute (INEM), Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Leriche Building 14 Rue Maria Helena Vieira da Silva Paris 75014 France


