### Accession
PXD000872

### Title
Forty-four novel protein-coding loci discovered using a PIT approach in rat male germ cells

### Description
Spermatogenesis is a complex process, dependent upon the successive activation and/or repression of thousands of gene products, and ends with the production of haploid male gametes. RNA sequencing of male germ cells in the rat identified thousands of novel testicular unannotated transcripts, named TUTs. Although such RNAs are usually annotated as long non-coding RNAs, it is possible that some of these TUTs code for protein. To test this possibility, we used a “Proteomics Informed by Transcriptomics” strategy, combining shotgun proteomics analyses and RNA sequencing data for enriched populations of rat testicular cells. Among 3559 TUTs and 506 lncRNAs found in meiotic and post-meiotic germ cells, 44 encoded at least one peptide. We show that these novel high-confidence protein-coding loci exhibit several genomic features intermediate between those of lncRNAs and mRNAs. We experimentally validated the testicular expression pattern of two of these novel protein-coding gene candidates, both highly conserved in mammals: one for a vesicle-associated membrane protein, we named VAMP-9, and the other for an enolase domain-containing protein. This study confirms the potential of PIT approaches for the discovery of protein coding transcripts initially thought to be untranslated, or unknown transcripts. Our results contribute to the understanding of spermatogenesis by characterizing two novel proteins, implicated by their strong expression in germ cells.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts from pachytene spermatocytes and round spermatids were trypsin-digested, separated on a 1D gel subsequently cut into 20 or 21 gel bands that were then subjected to LC MS/MS analysis, using  the three runs-per-band method with the use of exclusion lists between successive runs. The MS measurements were done with a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, LC Packings Ultimate 3000) connected to a hybrid LTQ-OrbiTrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (New Objective).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) supported by Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science), were used for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra were searched against our custom database. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Dalton, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miss cleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of lysine and variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Identified peptides were filtered based on the Mascot score to obtain a false discovery rate of 1 %. We employed Proteome Discoverer to generate lists of peptides identified in the first and second run which are excluded in subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses. Prior to the third analysis, peptide exclusion files from the first two runs are combined. Lists of peptides not filtered out are exported as a text file containing uncharged and accurate mass values (at four decimals) and a retention time window of approximately one minute (Lavigne et al., 2012). The instrument is configured to work with uncharged masses and to automatically calculate the mass of a peptide based on its exact mass and charge state. A mass tolerance of ±10 ppm is used to reject previously identified peptides within the specified retention time window.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogenesis is a complex process, dependent upon the successive activation and/or repression of thousands of gene products, and ends with the production of haploid male gametes. RNA sequencing of male germ cells in the rat identified thousands of novel testicular unannotated transcripts (TUTs). Although such RNAs are usually annotated as long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), it is possible that some of these TUTs code for protein. To test this possibility, we used a "proteomics informed by transcriptomics" (PIT) strategy combining RNA sequencing data with shotgun proteomics analyses of spermatocytes and spermatids in the rat. Among 3559 TUTs and 506 lncRNAs found in meiotic and postmeiotic germ cells, 44 encoded at least one peptide. We showed that these novel high-confidence protein-coding loci exhibit several genomic features intermediate between those of lncRNAs and mRNAs. We experimentally validated the testicular expression pattern of two of these novel protein-coding gene candidates, both highly conserved in mammals: one for a vesicle-associated membrane protein we named VAMP-9, and the other for an enolase domain-containing protein. This study confirms the potential of PIT approaches for the discovery of protein-coding transcripts initially thought to be untranslated or unknown transcripts. Our results contribute to the understanding of spermatogenesis by characterizing two novel proteins, implicated by their strong expression in germ cells. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the data set identifier PXD000872.

### Keywords
Testis, Spermatocytes, Rat, Spermatids, Lc-ms/ms.

### Affiliations
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility IRSET – INSERM U1085 Rennes, France
Plate-forme Protéomique Biogenouest
IRSET – INSERM U1085

### Submitter
Sophie Chocu

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Chocu
Biogenouest Proteomics Core Facility IRSET – INSERM U1085 Rennes, France


