### Accession
PXD008510

### Title
Triatoma dimidiata salivary glands LC-MSMS

### Description
The reduviid bug Triatoma dimidiata is an important Chagas disease vector widely distributed along Central America. This insect has great capability for domestic adaptation as the majority of specimens caught inside human dwellings or in peridomestic areas in Central America fed human blood. Within this context, exploring the salivary compounds that overcome host haemostatic and immune responses to assist blood-feeding is of great scientific interest. Our aim is to provide a deeper insight into T. dimidiata salivary gland molecules that may contribute to its haematophagic habit. We realized T. dimidiata salivary transcriptomic analysis and complemented it through proteomics, disclosing the set complexity of 119 secreted proteins. The large-scale approach used enriches the pharmacologically active molecules database and improves our knowledge about the complexity of salivary compounds from haematophagous vectors and their biological interactions.

### Sample Protocol
T. dimidiata triatomines were reared in standard insectary conditions at the University of Brasília, Brazil (27±1˚C, 70-75% relative humidity and a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle). The blood source of these insects was Gallus gallus domesticus. Two independent biological replicates of fifteen pairs of SGs dissected from 5th instar nymphs and adults at 5, 12 and 24 days post blood meal (five pairs of each stage) were performed in order to increase the total number of identified proteins. The SGs were dissected under a stereomicroscope and carefully punctured at 4 oC. Following centrifugation (16.000 × g, 15 min, 4 oC), the soluble protein fraction from each homogenate was ethanol/acetone precipitated. Resuspended proteins were consecutively reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 56 ºC for 45 min, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 60 min, digested overnight at 37 ºC with modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) and acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using homemade 2 cm long microcolumns of Poros Oligo R3 resin (Applied Biosystems) packed in p200 tips. Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. The concentration of the peptide solution was determined by Qubit® 2.0 quantification assay (Thermo Fischer). The tryptic peptides were first loaded onto a 2 cm fused silica trap column (150 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with reverse phase capillary column ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 5 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and separated in a 35 cm reverse phase capillary column ending with a fused silica emitter packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 Å C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a Dionex UltimanteTM 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Briefly, peptides solubilized in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid were injected into the trap column and washed with 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) under flow rate of 3 µL/min. Peptides were resolved over 200 minutes with 250 nL/min flow rate in the analytical column through use of gradients: 5-25% solvent B until 130 min; and then 45-85% until 181 min; 85% until 191 min; and re-equilibrated at 2% until 200 min. Peptides were ionized by Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 2.5 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. MS1 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with 120,000 resolution at m/z of 400, in the m/z range of 300 to 1800. After ion fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy of 35%, MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense ions were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were generated and used for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer v.1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) with in-house SequestHT algorithm for T. dimidiata SG transcriptome and contaminant proteins (several human keratins, BSA and porcin trypsin). All contaminant proteins identified were manually removed from the result lists. The searches were performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy 10 ppm, MS/MS accuracy 0.5 Da, trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavage allowed, fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable modification of oxidized methionine. Number of proteins, protein groups and number of peptides were filtered for the false discovery rate less than 1%, peptide rank of 1 and at least 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Salivary glands, Saliva, Triatoma dimidiata

### Affiliations
University of Brasilia 
Host-Pathogen Interface Laboratory

### Submitter
Carla  Araújo

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Martins de Santana
Host-Pathogen Interface Laboratory


