### Accession
PXD035713

### Title
Stunted Procoagulant Remodelling in Montreal Platelet Syndrome Kindred with p.V1316M mutation

### Description
The Montreal Platelet Syndrome Kindred (MPS) with p.V1316M mutation (2B-VWDMPS) has been associated with chronic macrothrombocytopenia, spontaneous platelet clumping, and mucocutaneous and other bleeding which can be largely prevented by von Willebrand factor concentrate infusion. However, supplemental platelet transfusion has been required on occasions, particularly for severe gastro-intestinal bleeds. This raises the question of whether a previously uncharacterized platelet dysfunction contributes to bleeding diathesis in 2B-VWDMPS patients. We studied the 2 members of the MPS kindred with the most severe bleeding phenotype and addressed this question by coupling quantitative platelet shotgun proteomics and validating biochemical assays, with the systematic analysis of platelet procoagulant membrane dynamics (PMD). Previously, we showed that membrane ballooning, a major procoagulant response of the human platelet after exposure to collagen, is driven by the influx of Na+ and Cl-, followed by the entry of osmotically obliged water. Here, we report in 2B-VWDMPS platelets, loss of the transmembrane chloride channel CLIC1, and reduced chloride ion influx after collagen stimulation. This was associated with diminished membrane ballooning and a distinct phenotypic composition of platelets over fibrillar collagen. Also, 2B-VWDMPS platelets showed marked loss of regulatory, cytoskeletal, and contractile proteins that may account for structure disorganization, giant platelet formation and further reduce the haemostatic response.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM EDTA, 1X protease inhibitors [Roche cOmplete, mini EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktails]). Lysates were sonicated with a probe type sonnicator at intensity 5 for 5 seconds to shear DNA. Samples where then centrifuged at 14 000 xG for 10 minutes to pellet DNA. Supernatants were transferred to a new tube before a BCA assay according to manufactures directions (Thermofisher catalog 23227). 500 ug of total protein per condition was removed for TAILS analysis. Samples were topped up with 1 ml with lysis buffer followed by the addition of 500 ul of 6M GuHcl. 5 mM of DTT followed by incubation at 37 °C for one hour to reduce disulphide bonds. Free thiols on cysteines were blocked by adding 15 mM of IAA for 25 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The Thiol blocking reaction was then quenched by adding an additional 5 mM of DTT. Samples were labeled with either light formaldehyde (control), or isotopically heavy (VWD; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc. catalog DLM-805-PK). 40 mM of light or heavy formaldehyde was added followed by 20 mM final of sodium cyanoborohydride. The pH was adjusted to 6.5 before incubation overnight at 37 °C. The next day an additional 10 mM of light or heavy formaldehyde was added followed by 10 mM of sodium cyanoborohydride. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 hours. After incubation samples were transferred into a 50 ml Falcon tube with 50 ml of 8:1 ice cold acetone methanol. Samples were incubated at -20 °C for 4 hours. Samples where centrifuged at 9000 xg for 15 minutes. Samples were washed in 100 % methanol. Three methanol washes were completed. Following the last wash, the supernatant was discarded. Samples were air dried in a fume hood for 5 minutes to remove residual methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 ul of 200 uM NaOH. Samples were transferred to a 1.5 ml lobind protein tube before vortexing for 5 minutes.  After the protein pellet was completely resuspended 300 ul of 200 mM HEPES buffer was added. Followed by the addition of 50 ug of mass spec grade trypsin. The pH was adjusted to ~8 before incubation overnight at 37°C. 10% of the sample was removed for PreTAILS (shotgun) analysis. Pretails samples were acidified to a pH of less than 3 with TFA. Pretails samples were stored at 4°C overnight for SEP PAK clean up alongside the TAILS samples. The remaining 90% of the sample was kept for TAILS analysis. 15 ul of TAILS polymer was added followed by 40 mM of sodium cyanoborohydride. pH was adjusted to pH ~6.5 before incubation at 37 °C overnight. 400 ul of 200 mM NaOH was added to a 10 K cut off Amicon filtration tube. The filtration tube was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 5 000 xg. The NaOH wash step was completed an additional 2 times. The filtration tube was then washed with HPLC water 3 times using the same centrifuge settings. The TAILS fraction samples were passed through the Amicon filter 500 ul at a time until all the sample had been filtered. Filtrate was collected in a new tube. Finally 200 ul of 1M tris (ph 6.8) was used to wash the filter. Samples were acidified to ph less then 3 with TFA. PreTAILS and TAILS samples were subjected to SEP PAK (c18) clean up (Waters catalog no. WAT020515). 3ml of conditioning solution (90% v/v methanol, .1% TFA v/v 10% v/v HPLC water) was passed through the SPE. Followed by 2 ml of load solution (100% HPLC water, 0.1% v/v TFA). Sample was loaded into the SPE column followed by 1 ml of additional load solution. Samples were desalted by passing 3 ml of desalt solution (5% v/v. methanol, 95% v/v HPLC water, 0.15 TFA). Followed by sample collection into a new tube by passing 1 ml of elution solution (50% v/v HPLC water, 50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). Samples were frozen at -80 before submission for LCMS.

### Data Protocol
PreTAILS  MaxQuant version 1.6.1 First search peptide tolerance -10 Dimethyl label -Lys (light, or heavy) only first search peptide tolerance -10 digestion – Semi specific - arg-c misc- Requantify minimum peptide length – 5 maximum peptide mass – 6600 Match between runs minimum score for modified peptides – 20 FDR- 0.05  TAILS search  MaxQuant version 1.6.1 First search peptide tolerance -10 Dimethyl label -Lys, N-term (light, or heavy) only Variable modifications • Remove Acetyl (Protein N-term) • Add Acetyl (N-term) • Add Deamidation (NQ)  first search peptide tolerance -10 digestion – Semi specific free n-term- arg-c misc- Requantify minimum peptide length – 5 maximum peptide mass – 6600 Match between runs  minimum score for modified peptides – 20 FDR- 0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Procoagulant membrane dynamics, Cytoskeletal and contractile proteins, Tubulin, Membrane ballooning, Actin, 2b-vwd, Montreal platelet syndrome, Chloride channel clic1

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.


