### Accession
PXD034914

### Title
PGPR isolated from the rhizosphere of a wheat ancestor and active in an elite cultivar: metabolomics and proteomics of bacterial exudates affecting root development

### Description
Two diazotrophic bacteria, BPMP-PU-28 and BPMP-EL-40, isolated from the rhizosphere of a wild wheat ancestor (T. t. dicoccoides) grown in soil from its refuge area in the Fertile Crescent or from south of France, respectively, were shown to behave as efficient Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) upon interaction with an elite wheat cultivar (Anvergur), providing about 50% of the seed nitrogen content in plants grown under low assimilable nitrogen availability. A bacterial growth medium was developed to investigate the effects of bacterial exudates on root development in the elite cultivar and to analyze the exo-metabolomes and exo-proteomes of the two strains. Altered root development was observed, with distinctive responses according to the strain, BPMP-PU-28 also inducing a strong increase in root hair length and density. Exo-metabolome analysis revealed a complex set of secondary metabolites including fatty acids potentially involved in volatile organic compounds (VOCs) metabolism, cyclopeptides that could act as phytohomone mimetics, quorum sensing molecules having inter-kingdom signaling properties and nutrient ion chelators. The exo-proteome comprised a set of strain specific enzymatic activities (e.g., proteases) and structural proteins belonging to outer-membrane vesicles likely to sequester metabolites, peptides and enzymes in their lumen. Thus, the wheat ability to establish efficient beneficial interactions with PGPR has not been profoundly reprogrammed during domestication and breeding, and PGPR constitutively exude rich and complex metabolomes and proteomes, in absence of partner roots, which could allow numerous mechanisms to simultaneously contribute to plant growth promotion and thereby broaden the range of responsive plant species.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial growth medium samples were taken during both the exponential and stationary phases of the culture, relative to the growth curves, after 24 h and 48 h of culture for BPMP-PU-28, and 16 h and 40 h for BPMP-EL-40, respectively. After two centrifugations (3220 rcf, 15 minutes at 4°C), supernatants were filtered (0.22 μm filter) and were either directly desalted using a C18 Sep Pak column (WAT036820 - SPE Cartridge, SEP-PAK ® TC18 Cart 1cc)  according to Lehmann et al. (2021) for metabolomics analysis, or first reduced with 10 mM DTT (1.4-dithiothreitol), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and then desalted using the same type of C18 Sep Pak column for proteomics analysis. Column eluents were lyophilized and stored at -20°C before metabolomics and proteomics analyses. For proteomics, the samples were digested or not with trypsin. They were analysed online using nanoHPLC (NCS3000, Thermo Fisher), with a gradient of 140 min, coupled to a mass spectrometer having a nano electrospray source Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database-dependent search algorithms and de novo sequencing was performed using the PEAKS X plus software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). The database of peptides generated from the 6 reading frames generated from each bacterium genome was used for peptide and protein identifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) was set as a static modification, and methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and deamidation (+0.98 Da) as variable modification. The parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. For trypsin digestion, maximum missed cleavages were set at 3 and for non-digestion, no enzyme and unspecific digestion were used. The false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%. Peptides identified by de novo sequencing were blasted (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Diazotrophic bacteria isolated from the rhizosphere of a wild wheat ancestor, grown from its refuge area in the Fertile Crescent, were found to be efficient Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR), upon interaction with an elite wheat cultivar. In nitrogen-starved plants, they increased the amount of nitrogen in the seed crop (per plant) by about twofold. A bacterial growth medium was developed to investigate the effects of bacterial exudates on root development in the elite cultivar, and to analyze the exo-metabolomes and exo-proteomes. Altered root development was observed, with distinct responses depending on the strain, for instance, with respect to root hair development. A first conclusion from these results is that the ability of wheat to establish effective beneficial interactions with PGPRs does not appear to have undergone systematic deep reprogramming during domestication. Exo-metabolome analysis revealed a complex set of secondary metabolites, including nutrient ion chelators, cyclopeptides that could act as phytohormone mimetics, and quorum sensing molecules having inter-kingdom signaling properties. The exo-proteome-comprised strain-specific enzymes, and structural proteins belonging to outer-membrane vesicles, are likely to sequester metabolites in their lumen. Thus, the methodological processes we have developed to collect and analyze bacterial exudates have revealed that PGPRs constitutively exude a highly complex set of metabolites; this is likely to allow numerous mechanisms to simultaneously contribute to plant growth promotion, and thereby to also broaden the spectra of plant genotypes (species and accessions/cultivars) with which beneficial interactions can occur.

### Keywords
Bacterial exudate, Metabolomics, Durum wheat, Proteomics, Diazotroph, Domestication, Plant-microbiota communication, Pgpr

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
MSAP USR 3290 CNRS Cité scientifique Villeneuve d'Ascq France

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr Bray Fabrice
MSAP USR 3290 CNRS Cité scientifique Villeneuve d'Ascq France


