### Accession
PXD004808

### Title
Penguin plasma LC-MSMS -  The Safety Limits Of An Extended Fast: Lessons from a Non-Model Organism

### Description
While safety of fasting therapy is debated in humans, extended fasting occurs routinely and safely in wild animals. To do so, food deprived animals like breeding penguins anticipate the critical limit of fasting by resuming feeding. To date, however, no molecular indices of the physiological state that links spontaneous refeeding behaviour with fasting limits had been identified. Blood proteomics and physiological data reveal here that fasting-induced body protein depletion is not unsafe “per se”. Indeed, incubating penguins only abandon their chick/egg to refeed when this state is associated with metabolic defects in glucose homeostasis/fatty acid utilization, insulin production and action, and possible renal dysfunctions. Our data illustrate how the field investigation of “exotic” models can be a unique source of information, with possible biomedical interest.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was collected in EDTA tubes and plasma was then prepared. Circulating albumin was eliminated using the vivapure anti-HSA kit from Vivascience (Palaiseau, France). Plasma proteins were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis. All samples were run in duplicate. Protein spots visualization, 2-D gel image acquisition and analysis were performed as previously described18, using PDQUEST™ software (version 8.0; Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). After excision of gel spots from gels where they were the most intense, in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion, the extracted peptides were analyzed by a nanoLC-Chip/MS/MS approach, using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC-Chip/MS system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, USA) coupled to an HCT™ Ultra ion trap (Bruker Daltonics Gmbh, Bremen, Germany).  The chromatographic separations were conducted on a HPLC chip composed of an enrichment column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 40 nL, 5 µm) and a reverse-phase separation column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 43 mm x 75 µm, 5µm). The flow rate was set to 3.75 µL/min for loading of the samples with acetonitrile 2% / HCOOH 0.1% in water. Mobile phase solvents were acetonitrile 2% / HCOOH 0.1% in water (A) and water 2% / HCOOH 0.1% in acetonitrile (B). A linear gradient from 8% to 40% B in 7 min. was used to achieve the chromatographic separation, with a flow rate set to 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode and the voltage applied to the capillary cap was optimized to -1750V. Scan rate was 8100 m/z and 26000m/z per sec. for MS and MS/MS scanning, respectively. A total of 4 and 6 scans were averaged to obtain a MS and MS/MS spectrum, respectively. Through an automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes, the three most abundant doubly charged ions were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and fragmentation using CID. The complete system was fully controlled by the ChemStation Rev B.01.03 (Agilent Technologies) and EsquireControl 6.1 (Bruker Daltonics Gmbh) softwares.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot™ server (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). Spectra were searched with a tolerance of 0.5 Da on mass measurements, both in MS and MS/MS modes. One trypsin missed cleavage per peptide was allowed, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications. Spectra were searched against a target-decoy version (July 2015) of the NCBInr database restricted to Aves (Taxonomy ID: 8782; 3270982 target+decoy entries). Using Scaffold software v.3.6.5 (Proteome software Inc., Portland, OR, USA), stringent filtering criteria were established to identify proteins and estimate a false discovery rate of identification (target-decoy strategy). Hence, protein identification was considered for MS/MS ion scores higher than 39.7 when based on  2 peptides, while a MS/MS ion score higher than 57 was required for single peptide-based identifications.

### Publication Abstract
While safety of fasting therapy is debated in humans, extended fasting occurs routinely and safely in wild animals. To do so, food deprived animals like breeding penguins anticipate the critical limit of fasting by resuming feeding. To date, however, no molecular indices of the physiological state that links spontaneous refeeding behaviour with fasting limits had been identified. Blood proteomics and physiological data reveal here that fasting-induced body protein depletion is not unsafe "per se". Indeed, incubating penguins only abandon their chick/egg to refeed when this state is associated with metabolic defects in glucose homeostasis/fatty acid utilization, insulin production and action, and possible renal dysfunctions. Our data illustrate how the field investigation of "exotic" models can be a unique source of information, with possible biomedical interest.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-msms, 2d gels, Adélie penguin

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


