### Accession
PXD034070

### Title
Mus_Oocyte_LC-MS/MS-mRBPome capture of oocytes identifies the RNA-binding protein LSM14B,an essential regulator of meiosis in mouse oocytes

### Description
A quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteome profiles of oocytes in WT and Lsm14b KO mouse

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes for the experiment should be collected in 0.1% PVP-PBS and stored in -80 ℃. After digestion of extracted proteins with trypsin, purified Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 6-plex-labelled peptides were pooled.All samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry, and raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5.

### Data Protocol
The spectra file were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5 to generate the result file.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian oogenesis features reliance on the mRNAs produced and stored during early growth phase. These are essential for producing an oocyte competent to undergo meiotic maturation and embryogenesis later when oocytes are transcriptionally silent. The fate of maternal mRNAs hence ensures the success of oogenesis and the quality of the resulting eggs. Nevertheless, how the fate of maternal mRNAs is determined remains largely elusive. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are crucial regulators of oogenesis, yet the identity of the full complement of RBPs expressed in oocytes is unknown. Here, a global view of oocyte-expressed RBPs is presented: mRNA-interactome capture identifies 1396 RBPs in mouse oocytes. An analysis of one of these RBPs, LSM family member 14 (LSM14B), demonstrates that this RBP is specific to oocytes and associated with many networks essential for oogenesis. Deletion of Lsm14b results in female-specific infertility and a phenotype characterized by oocytes incompetent to complete meiosis and early embryogenesis. LSM14B serves as an interaction hub for proteins and mRNAs throughout oocyte development and regulates translation of a subset of its bound mRNAs. Therefore, RNP complexes tethered by LSM14B are found exclusively in oocytes and are essential for the control of maternal mRNA fate and oocyte development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Wt and lsm14b ko, Lc-ms/ms, Oocyte

### Affiliations
shang dong university

### Submitter
Li Hui

### Lab Head
Dr Su you-qiang
shang dong university


