### Accession
PXD032735

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of Hcp-mediated Salmonella Enteritidis in ducks (Anas platyrhynchos)

### Description
Salmonella Entertidis (SE) causes persistent infections and egg contamination in laying ducks.Hcp roles as the core structural and effector proteins of T6SS. We generated an hcp deletion mutant MY1△hcp and detected its ability to invade duck granulosa cells (dGCs) and contaminate eggs. Then, Quantitative proteomics of Hcp-mediated Salmonella Enteritidis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
To conduct trypsin-mediated digestion, the protein underwent reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C. The protein sample was next diluted till a uric concentration of <2 M. Then, trypsin was introduced at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio to initiate overnight (O/N) digestion. Additional trypsin was introduced at a 1:100 ratio for a secondary 4 h digestion. The resulting peptides were resuspended in mobile phase A (MPA) for liquid chromatography (LC) analysis, followed by separation with the NanoElute ultrahigh performance liquid system (UHPLS). The aqueous MPA consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA), whereas, mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. The liquid gradient was set at: 0-18 min, 6-24% B; 18-24 min, 24-32% B; 24-27 min, 32-80% B; and 27-30 min, 80% B. The flow rate was kept steady at 450 nL/min. Peptides separated by UHPLS were inserted into the capillary ion source for ionization before analysis with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. The secondary mass spectrum (MS) scanning range was adjusted to 100–1700 m/z., The parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode was employed for data acquisition. Upon collection of the first-level MS, the second-level MS with parent ion charges in the range of 0–5 were recorded 10 times in the PASEF mode. The secondary MS data were extracted with Maxquant (v1.6.6.0). The Anas platyrhynchos 8839_TX_20200225.fasta (23317 sequence) database. The parameters were set as follows: enzyme digestion employed trypsin/P; the missing cleavage site number was adjusted to 2; the primary precursor ion mass error tolerance for the initial and primary searches were 40 and 40 ppm, respectively; and the secondary fragment ion mass error tolerance was adjusted to 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was adjusted as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation and deamidation (NQ) of the N-terminus were adjusted as variable modifications. In terms of protein and peptide spectral match identifications, the FDR was adjusted to 1%.

### Data Protocol
The recognized proteins were stratified and clustered into distinct networks via the KEGG pathways (Version 70). The STRING 10 database (http://string.embl.de/) was employed for protein-protein association analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Salmonella</i> Entertidis (SE) often causes persistent infections and egg contamination in laying ducks. Hcp, the core structural and effector proteins of the Type VI Secretion System (T6SS) in SE, contributes to bacterial invasion, adhesion and virulence. However, little is known about the effect of Hcp on the host's infection responses and egg contamination incidences in duck. Herein, we generated an <i>hcp</i> deletion mutant SE MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp</i> and detected its ability to invade duck granulosa cells (dGCs) and contaminate eggs. In comparison with MY1<i>-</i>infected group, the SE adhesion decreased by 15.96% in MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp-</i>infected dGCs, and the apoptosis in MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp-</i>infected dGCs decreased by 26.58% and 30.99% at 3 and 6 hours postinfection, respectively. However, the expression levels of immunogenic genes <i>TLR4</i>, <i>NOD1</i>, <i>TNF&#x3b1;</i>, <i>IL-1&#x3b2;</i> and proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-1&#x3b2;, TNF-&#x3b1; release were markedly lower in the dGCs inoculated with MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp</i> than that of the wild type. Besides, the laying ducks were challenged with MY1 or MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp in vivo</i>, respectively. The lower egg production and higher egg contamination were observed in MY1<i>-</i>infected ducks in comparison with MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp</i>-infected birds. Furthermore, the host's infection response of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) to <i>Salmonella</i> effector Hcp was identified using quantitative proteomics. A total of 164 DAPs were identified between the MY1- and MY1&#x25b3;<i>hcp</i>-infected cells, which were mainly engaged in the immune, hormone synthesis, cell proliferation and cell apoptotic process. Among them, STAT3, AKT1, MAPK9, MAPK14, and CREBBP were the center of the regulatory network, which might serve as key host response regulators to bacterial Hcp. In conclusion, we demonstrated that effector Hcp contributed to not only SE invasion, induction of dGCs apoptosis, and trigger of immune responses, but also enhanced contamination incidences. Also, the STAT3, AKT1, MAPK9, MAPK14, and CREBBP were identified as host's infection response regulators of bacterial Hcp in duck. Overall, these results not only offered a novel evidence of SE ovarian transmission but also identified some promising candidate regulators during SE infection.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Salmonella enteritidis, Duck

### Affiliations
18252787860
Yangzhou University,Jiangsu,China

### Submitter
宋 莉娜

### Lab Head
Dr Lina Song
Yangzhou University,Jiangsu,China


