### Accession
PXD005823

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis and bioluminescent reporter gene assays to investigate effects of  simulated microgravity on Caco-2 cells

### Description
Microgravity is one of the most important features in spaceflight. Previous evidence has shown that significant changes  to the musculoskeletal and immune systems occurred under microgravity. The present study was undertaken to explore the change in protein abundance in human colon colorectal cells that were incubated for 48 or 72 h either in normal conditions and µG simulated conditions. The comparative proteomic method based on the 18O labeling technique was applied to investigate the up-regulated proteins and down-regulated proteins in SH-SY5Y under simulated microgravity.

### Sample Protocol
Pellet derived from 3x106 cells for each sample were lysed. The lysis buffer consisted of 8 mol L-1 urea in 100 mmol L-1 Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. All the lysates were boiled to denature proteins for 5 min, then sonicated for 30 min and shaken on vortex for other 30 min. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford.  For digestion, 1000 µg protein aliquots were diluted with 50 mmol L-1 Tris-HCl to obtain a 1 mol L-1 final urea concentration. Sequencing grade-modified tryspin was added (1:20, enzyme: protein ratio) and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Enzymatic digestion was quenched with trifluoracetic acid (TFA).  Digested samples were desalted and were dried in a Speed-Vac. High-pH reversed phase liquid chromatography was performed using PLRP-S column (4,6 × 250 mm, 5 μm, Agilent Technologies Santa Clara, CA, USA) coupled with PLRP-S guard cartridge (5 × 3 mm, Agilent Technologies Santa Clara, CA, USA) and the detector was set at a wave length of 214 nm.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v.1.5.1.2 [25] was used together with Andromeda [26] to search the 156 LC-MS/MS raw data against the Human Reference Proteome on UniProtKB (v11.2015, 70075 sequences), concatenated with a list of common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant (245 sequences). We set the digestion mode to fully tryptic and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da), as well as acetylation of protein N-termini (42.01056 Da) were set as variable modifications. As no labeling was performed, multiplicity was set to 1. Candidate peptides were required to have a length of at least 6 amino acids. The fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for ITMS spectra. A first search with a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm was used to recalibrate raw data based on all peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs). After recalibration, the data were searched with a precursor ion tolerance of 4.5 ppm; the “Second peptides” option was enabled to identify co-fragmented peptide precursors. We used “Match between runs” with an alignment time window of 20 min and a match time window of 1 min to transfer identifications between raw files of the same and closed fractions (± 1 fraction). Using the classical target-decoy approach with a concatenated database of reversed peptide sequences, data were filtered using a PSM, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Protein groups were required to have at least one unique peptide. For quantification we used unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Microgravity is one of the most important features in spaceflight. Previous evidence from in-vitro studies has shown that significant changes occur under simulated microgravity. For this reason, human colon adenocarcinoma Caco-2 cells were selected as cell model of intestinal epithelial barrier and their response to altered gravity conditions was investigated, especially on the protein level. In this study, we combined label-free shotgun proteomics and bioluminescent reporter gene assays to identify key proteins and pathways involved in the response of Caco-2 cells under reference and microgravity conditions. A two-dimensional clinostat was modified with 3D-printed adaptors to hold conventional T25 culture flasks. The comparative proteome analysis led to identify 38 and 26 proteins differently regulated by simulated microgravity after 48 and 72 h, respectively. Substantial fractions of these proteins are involved in regulation, cellular and metabolic processes and localization. Bioluminescent reporter gene assays were carried out to investigate microgavity-induced alterations on the transcriptional regulation of key targets, such as NF-kB pathway and CYP27A1. While no significant difference was found in the basal transcription, a lower NF-kB basal activation in simulated microgravity conditions was reported, corroborating the hypothesis of reduced immunity in microgravity conditions.

### Keywords
Bioluminescence, Caco-2 cells, Nuclear factor κ-b, Simulated microgravity, Reporter gene technology, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
university la Sapienza, Roma
1Dipartimento di Chimica, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy

### Submitter
Riccardo Zenezini Chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Aldo Laganà
1Dipartimento di Chimica, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy


