### Accession
PXD006745

### Title
The nuclear proteome of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei is a protozoan flagellate that is transmitted by tsetse flies into the mammalian bloodstream. The parasite has a huge impact on human health both directly by causing African sleeping sickness and indirectly, by infecting domestic cattle. The biology of trypanosomes involves some highly unusual, nuclear-localised processes. These include polycistronic transcription without classical promoters initiated from regions defined by histone variants, trans-splicing of all transcripts to the exon of a spliced leader RNA, transcription of some very abundant proteins by RNA polymerase I and antigenic variation, a switch in expression of the cell surface protein variants that allows the parasite to resist the immune system of its mammalian host.  Here, we provide the nuclear proteome of procyclic Trypanosoma brucei, the stage that resides within the tsetse fly midgut. We have performed quantitative label-free mass spectrometry to score 764 significantly nuclear enriched proteins in comparison to whole cell lysates. A comparison with proteomes of several experimentally characterised nuclear and non-nuclear structures and pathways confirmed the high quality of the dataset: the proteome contains about 80% of all nuclear proteins and less than 2% false positives. Using motif enrichment, we found the amino acid sequence KRxR present in a large number of nuclear proteins. KRxR is a sub-motif of a classical eukaryotic monopartite nuclear localisation signal and could be responsible for nuclear localization of proteins in Kinetoplastida species. As a proof of principle, we have confirmed the nuclear localisation of six proteins with previously unknown localisation by expressing eYFP fusion proteins. While proteome data of several T. brucei organelles have been published, our nuclear proteome closes an important gap in knowledge to study trypanosome biology, in particular nuclear-related processes.

### Sample Protocol
600 µl methanol, 150 µl chloroform and 450 µl water were added stepwise (with vigorous vortexing after each step) to 200 µl (10%) of the pellet fraction or 100 µl of the whole cell lysate. After centrifugation (5 min, 20,000 g), the upper, aqueous phase was discarded, and another 650 µl methanol was added (mixing by inversion). Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (5 min, max. speed), resuspended in 100 µl 4 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 100 mM DTT and incubated at 70°C for 10 minutes. Afterwards the samples were sonicated with the Bioruptor® Plus sonication device (Diagenode, Belgium) (settings: high, 10 cycles, 30 sec ON /30 sec OFF). The samples were in-gel digested and MS measurement was performed as previously described (Bluhm et al, 2016) with the following adaptations: the measurement time per sample was extended to 240 min.

### Data Protocol
The four replicates were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 (Cox & Mann, 2008) with standard settings except LFQ quantitation and match between runs was activated. The trypanosome protein database TREU927 version 8.0 (11,567 entries) was downloaded from www.tritrypdb.org (Aslett et al, 2010). Filtering for proteins only identified by site, potential contaminants and reverse entries where conducted with custom R scripts. A second filter step is removing all protein groups with no unique and less than two peptides. Also the protein needs to be quantified in at least two samples in either NUC or WCL. Prior to imputation of missing LFQ values with a beta distribution ranging from 0.1 to 0.2 percentile within each sample, the values were log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma brucei is a protozoan flagellate that is transmitted by tsetse flies into the mammalian bloodstream. The parasite has a huge impact on human health both directly by causing African sleeping sickness and indirectly, by infecting domestic cattle. The biology of trypanosomes involves some highly unusual, nuclear-localised processes. These include polycistronic transcription without classical promoters initiated from regions defined by histone variants, trans-splicing of all transcripts to the exon of a spliced leader RNA, transcription of some very abundant proteins by RNA polymerase I and antigenic variation, a switch in expression of the cell surface protein variants that allows the parasite to resist the immune system of its mammalian host. Here, we provide the nuclear proteome of procyclic Trypanosoma brucei, the stage that resides within the tsetse fly midgut. We have performed quantitative label-free mass spectrometry to score 764 significantly nuclear enriched proteins in comparison to whole cell lysates. A comparison with proteomes of several experimentally characterised nuclear and non-nuclear structures and pathways confirmed the high quality of the dataset: the proteome contains about 80% of all nuclear proteins and less than 2% false positives. Using motif enrichment, we found the amino acid sequence KRxR present in a large number of nuclear proteins. KRxR is a sub-motif of a classical eukaryotic monopartite nuclear localisation signal and could be responsible for nuclear localization of proteins in Kinetoplastida species. As a proof of principle, we have confirmed the nuclear localisation of six proteins with previously unknown localisation by expressing eYFP fusion proteins. While proteome data of several T. brucei organelles have been published, our nuclear proteome closes an important gap in knowledge to study trypanosome biology, in particular nuclear-related processes.

### Keywords
Nuclear, Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55122 Mainz Germany

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55122 Mainz Germany


