### Accession
PXD019519

### Title
Bioactivatable inhibitor of ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation

### Description
The hyperactive state of malignant cells results in the production of an excess of aberrant proteins that challenge the clearing capacity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), resulting in an increased sensitivity towards drugs that reduce the efficacy of this critical proteolytic system. In this project we report the identification of an inhibitor that subsequent to cellular metabolism inhibits the UPS.

### Sample Protocol
MelJuSo cells were treated with either DMSO or Probe CLICK for 1 hour and lysed (triplicates per condition). The probe compound was then labelled with the trifunctional linker (TFL) TAMRA-azide-biotin, introduced via click chemistry. Enrichment of compound interactors was performed using streptavidin beads, and after in-bead digestion using trypsin, samples were analyzed in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a 3h gradient.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using Sequest HT/Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 against the human FASTA proteome (canonical and isoform) obtained from uniprot.org on 2016-10-24. Oxidation of Methionine was used as dynamic modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
Malignant cells display an increased sensitivity towards drugs that reduce the function of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), which is the primary proteolytic system for destruction of aberrant proteins. Here, we report on the discovery of the bioactivatable compound CBK77, which causes an irreversible collapse of the UPS, accompanied by a general accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and caspase-dependent cell death. CBK77 caused accumulation of ubiquitin-dependent, but not ubiquitin-independent, reporter substrates of the UPS, suggesting a selective effect on ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. In a genome-wide CRISPR interference screen, we identified the redox enzyme NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) as a critical mediator of CBK77 activity, and further demonstrated its role as the compound bioactivator. Through affinity-based proteomics, we found that CBK77 covalently interacts with ubiquitin. In vitro experiments showed that CBK77-treated ubiquitin conjugates were less susceptible to disassembly by deubiquitylating enzymes. In vivo efficacy of CBK77 was validated by reduced growth of NQO1-proficient human adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice treated with CBK77. This first-in-class NQO1-activatable UPS inhibitor suggests that it may be possible to exploit the intracellular environment in malignant cells for leveraging the impact of compounds that impair the UPS.

### Keywords
Pulldown, Lc-msms, Upr, Ups, Click-chemistry

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat) (lab head)
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat) (lab head)


