### Accession
PXD032045

### Title
Translational specialization in pluripotency by RBPMS poises future lineage-decisions

### Description
Total proteome for triplicates of WT and RBPMS KO hESCs to identify differences in proteins abundances due to a loss of RBPMS. Cells were lysed and prepared according to the in solution digest protocol and 50 µg proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with Lys-C and trypsind.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC  (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm length, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min using the following gradient: 4-6% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 6-30% solvent B within 200.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 28.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.   The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 40.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical Uniprot Human.fasta (downloaded at: 16.06.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification.Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The blueprints of developing organs are preset at the early stages of embryogenesis. Transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms are proposed to preset developmental trajectories. However, we reveal that the competence for the future cardiac fate of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is preset in pluripotency by a specialized mRNA translation circuit controlled by RBPMS. RBPMS is recruited to active ribosomes in hESCs to control the translation of essential factors needed for cardiac commitment program, including Wingless/Integrated (WNT) signaling. Consequently, RBPMS loss specifically and severely impedes cardiac mesoderm specification, leading to patterning and morphogenetic defects in human cardiac organoids. Mechanistically, RBPMS specializes mRNA translation, selectively via 3'UTR binding and globally by promoting translation initiation. Accordingly, RBPMS loss causes translation initiation defects highlighted by aberrant retention of the EIF3 complex and depletion of EIF5A from mRNAs, thereby abrogating ribosome recruitment. We demonstrate how future fate trajectories are programmed during embryogenesis by specialized mRNA translation.

### Keywords
Exit of pluripotency, Active-ribosome associated proteins, Rbpms, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
1. Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, D- 50931 Cologne, Germany 2. Inst. for Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 39, D-50931 Cologne, Germany 3. CECAD; Cologne Cluster of Excellence in Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-associated Diseases, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, D-50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Leo Kurian
1. Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 21, D- 50931 Cologne, Germany 2. Inst. for Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Robert-Koch-Str. 39, D-50931 Cologne, Germany 3. CECAD; Cologne Cluster of Excellence in Cellular Stress Responses in Ageing-associated Diseases, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, D-50931 Cologne, Germany


