### Accession
PXD013019

### Title
A chemical strategy for protease substrate profiling

### Description
Here, we introduce a simple method, termed CHOPS, for the discovery of protease substrates. CHOPS exploits a 2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde (2PCA)-biotin probe, which selectively biotinylates protein N-termini except those with proline in the second position.  CHOPS can, in theory, discover substrates for any protease, but is particularly well-suited to discover canonical DPP substrates, as cleaved but not intact DPP substrates can be identified by gel electrophoresis or mass spectrometry. This work delineates a practical technology for identifying protease substrates, which we anticipate will complement available “N-terminomic” approaches.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC lysates were mixed together and labeled with probe 1 for 16 h at 37 ºC. Proteins were precipitated with acetone. The residual protein pellet was suspended with sonication in 1 mL of 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl with 1% NP-40. 200 µl of high capacity neutroavidin agarose resin slurry was added and the mixture was rotated end-over-end for 2 h at ambient temperature. Agarose resin was washed 2 times with 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl with 1% NP-40 (1 ml), 2 times with PBS (1 mL), 2 times with water (1 mL). Proteins were reduced on-bead with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Agarose resin was pelleted, resuspended in 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 in 25 mM ABC and trypsinized overnight while shaking at 37 ºC. The resulting tryptic peptides were washed once with 50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl with 1% NP-40 (1 mL), 2 times with PBS (1 mL), and 2 times with water (1 mL). Bound peptides were eluted twice with 200 µL of 80% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid (first at RT for 10 min, second at 70 ºC for 10 min). The combined elution fractions were dried using a Genevac EZ-2 evaporator, resuspended in 100 µL water containing 0.1% formic acid, desalted with a C18 Silica MicroSpin Column and re-dried using a Genevac EZ-2 evaporator to give the final peptide pellet for LC-MS/MS analysis. The desalted peptides were resuspended in 50 ul of 0.1% formic acid in water. 1 ul sample was injected for microcapillary liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry using the NanoAcquity (Waters) with a 100- µm-inner-diameter × 10-cm-length C18 column [1.7 (µm) BEH130, Waters] configured with a 180-µm × 2-cm trap column coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 15 uL/min (0.1% formic acid) for 1 min.  Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0-50% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) in water (0.1% formic acid) over 90 min with a flow rate of 300 (nL/min). Full scan MS1 spectra were acquired over 400-1600 (m/z) at 70,000 resolution with max IT of 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) at 1 × 10^6 ions.  MS data was collected in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode scanning the top 10 most intense precursor ions for HCD fragmentation performed at normalized collision energy (NCE) 27% with AGC at 5 × 10^4 ions, isolation window 1.5 m/z, and dynamic exclusion of 15s.  MS/MS spectra were collected with resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data (.raw files) were analyzed with pFIND version 3.1.5 (Chi et al., 2018). Probe 1 was added as a variable peptide N-terminal modification (C21N5O2H27S1, +413.1885) and searches were conducted with the following parameters: open search against semi-tryptic peptides, allowing precursor and fragment tolerances of ± 20 ppm, using a human SwissProt FASTA database with reverse sequence decoys and common contaminants, quantified with SILAC labeling (Light label = none, Heavy label = SILAC-Arg10Lys8), and allowing an FDR of less than 1% at the peptides level.

### Publication Abstract
The dipeptidyl peptidases (DPPs) regulate hormones, cytokines, and neuropeptides by cleaving dipeptides after proline from their amino termini. Due to technical challenges, many DPP substrates remain unknown. Here, we introduce a simple method, termed CHOPS (chemical enrichment of protease substrates), for the discovery of protease substrates. CHOPS exploits a 2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde (2PCA)-biotin probe, which selectively biotinylates protein N-termini except those with proline in the second position. CHOPS can, in theory, discover substrates for any protease, but is particularly well suited to discover canonical DPP substrates, as cleaved but not intact DPP substrates can be identified by gel electrophoresis or mass spectrometry. Using CHOPS, we show that DPP8 and DPP9, enzymes that control the Nlrp1 inflammasome through an unknown mechanism, do not directly cleave Nlrp1. We further show that DPP9 robustly cleaves short peptides but not full-length proteins. More generally, this work delineates a practical technology for identifying protease substrates, which we anticipate will complement available "N-terminomic" approaches.

### Keywords
N-terminomics, Silac, Chops

### Affiliations
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA
Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, New York, New York, USA.

### Submitter
Andrew Griswold

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel A. Bachovchin
Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA


