### Accession
PXD044399

### Title
Systematic identification of 20S proteasome targets

### Description
For many years, the ubiquitin-26S proteasome degradation pathway was considered the principal route for proteasomal degradation. However, it is now becoming clear that proteins can also be targeted for degradation by an ubiquitin-independent mechanism mediated by the core 20S proteasome itself. The fact that half of cellular proteasomes are free 20S complexes suggests that degradation by this complex is not limited to rare cases. Identifying 20S proteasome substrates is challenging, as different pools of the same protein can be sent to degradation via either 20S or 26S proteasomes. Hence, current knowledge regarding the repertoire of 20S proteasome substrates mainly originates from individual case studies. Here, in an effort to unravel the global repertoire of substrates degraded by the 20S proteasome, we used an advanced mass spectrometry approach coupled with biochemical and cellular analysis. Our analysis enabled the identification of hundreds of 20S proteasome substrates. In addition to proteins that are degraded to completion, we also identified proteins that undergo specific cleavage by the 20S proteasome, at their N- or C- termini, to possibly tune their function. We also found that 20S substrates are significantly enriched with RNA- and DNA-binding proteins that contain intrinsically disordered regions. The vast majority of them are localized in the nucleus and stress granules. Further, we demonstrate that oxidized proteasomes have reduced proteolytic activity compared to naïve proteasomes, which we propose is an adaptive advantage under conditions of cellular stress. Whereas oxidized protein substrates, rather than being folded proteins that lost their native structure due to the stress, actually display a higher degree of structural-disorder than naïve proteins. In summary, here we shed light on the nature of the 20S substrates, providing critical insight into the biological role of the 20S proteasome.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG proteasomes were thawed on ice and their concentration was also re-measured via Bradford assay. The proteasomes and lysate were mixed for final concentrations of 0.7 mg/mL of protesomes to 2 mg/mL of lysate. For proteasomes inhibited by epoximicin, they were pre-incubated at 37 ºC for 15 minutes. All reactions were then mixed gently and centrifuged before incubation for 20 hours overnight at 37 ºC. The following morning, AntiNTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel,  were rinsed thoroughly with HEPES buffer and mixed with lysate in a 1:1.25 ratio of lysate:beads. Reactions were shaken at 4C for 2 hours before pouring onto a small spin column. Samples were centrifuged to remove the lysate, which was immediately diluted with 10M urea for a final concentration of 8M urea. Samples were flash frozen before later analysis. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 1,4-Dithiothreitol (final concentration of 12mM) for 30 minutes at 37°C and alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide (final concentration of 40 mM) for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate to a final 2M urea concentration. Proteins were digested overnight with lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako Chemicals) and sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100 at 37°C with constant shaking (800 rpm). For Glu-C digestion samples, Glu-C was added in an enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100 instead of the Lys-C and trypsin. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1% (pH < 3). The peptide mixtures were loaded onto 96 wells elution plates (Waters), desalted, and eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. After elution, peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resolubilised in 0.1% formic acid to final 1 mg/ml concentration, and analysed by mass spectrometry. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and a nano-flow LC system (Easy-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on a 40 cm x 0.75 μm i.d. column (New Objective, PF360- 75-10-N-5) packed in-house with 3 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120). Buffer A was 0.1% FA (Carl Roth GmbH), and buffer B was 99% ACN (Fisher Scientific A955-212) 0.1% FA (Carl Roth GmbH). Fractionation was achieved with a linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B over 120 min, followed by 5 min with an isocratic constant concentration of 90% buffer B. The flow rate was 300 nl/min, and the column was heated to 50°C. Aliquots of 2 μl of each sample were injected independently and measured in data-independent acquisition mode. The DIA-MS method consisted of a survey MS1 scan from 350 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 50% or 100 ms injection time, followed by DIA in 41 variable-width isolation windows. Precursors were isolated by a quadrupole and fragmented with HCD with a collision energy of 28%. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired with a scan range of 200 to 1800 m/z at an orbitrap resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 200% or 54 ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched in Spectronaut version 15.10 (Biognosys) using the direct DIA Pulsar search using the default setting and trypsin digestion rule. The data was searched against the human Uniprot fasta database (downloaded March 2020). The targeted data extraction was performed in Spectronaut version 15.10 with default settings except for the machine learning which was set to “across experiment” and the data filtering which was set to “Qvalue” and data normalisation that was set to median normalisation. The FDR was set to 1% on peptide and protein level. Peptide and protein level quantification was exported for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Disorder, 20s proteasome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

### Submitter
Michal sharon

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Sharon
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel


