### Accession
PXD024327

### Title
Stress response signaling modulates growth pathway outcomes to direct reversible intestinal regenerative growth in snakes

### Description
We extracted proteins from fasted, 12hrpf, 1dpf, and 3dpf snakes

### Sample Protocol
We extracted proteins from fasted, 12hrpf, 1dpf, and 3dpf snakes with the T-PER Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher, 78510). We then quantified proteins using a BCA assay, then purified using the methanol-chloroform precipitation method, and digested with proteolytic enzyme of trypsin. The dried pellet was resuspended in 50 mM NH4CO3. Following Kamal et al. 201817, proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with Trypsin (MS Grade) at a 1:50 enzyme/protein concentration for 16 h at 37°C. We added formic acid to the resulting peptides to acidify the sample (pH < 3). Samples were desalted with a C18 desalting column (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA). Peptides were dried by speed vacuum, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -20°C. The Enrichment of Phosphorylated Peptides: Extracted proteins using TPER buffer from the tissues were reduced in 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 min and then alkylated in 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (~25°C) for 30 min in dark condition. Protein samples digested with proteolytic enzyme of trypsin (enzyme-to-proteins ratio of 1:50 at 37°C for 16 hours). Digested peptides were desalted through C18 cartridges (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA) and dried by Speed Vacuum (Kamal et al., 2018). The dissolved digested peptides with 0.1% formic acid were used for phosphopeptides enrichment using High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA) based on manufacturer instructions. Briefly, the column was activated using a washing and binding buffer. The digested peptides passed through an activated filter and again washed with binding buffer. After removing all excess buffer, enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (50 µL) two times. Enriched peptides dried using speed-vacuum and reconstitute with 0.1% formic acid in water for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Velos Pro Dual-Pressure Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA) was used to analyze digested peptides and phosphopeptides. We loaded peptides onto the analytical column and separated them by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC) with an inner diameter of 75 μm and packed with 2 μm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). These peptide samples were then eluted from the Nano column with multi-step gradients of 4-90% solvent B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 90 min. We operated the mass spectrometer in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.50 kV and source temperature at 275°C. We consecutively isolated the three precursor ions with the most intense signal in a full MS scan and fragmented them to acquire their corresponding MS2 scans. Full MS scans were performed with 1 micro scan at a resolution of 3000, a mass range of m/z 350-1500, and normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via high-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Linear Ion Trap with a resolution of 0.05 FWHM (full-width half-maximum) with an Ultra Zoom-Scan between m/z 50-2000. During data acquisition, we used a maximum injection volume of 5 µl with partial injection mode. The mass spectrometer was controlled in a data-dependent mode that toggled automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS/MS data acquisition and processing were performed by XcaliburTM software, ver. 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA).  Spectra were searched against species-specific protein databases generated from the Boa constrictor genome7,18 with Proteome Discoverer software, ver. 2.1, (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA). We used the considerations in SEQUEST searches for normal peptides with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as the static modification and oxidation of methionine as the dynamic modification. For phosphoproteomics data, variable modifications were oxidation (methionine) and phosphopeptides (+79.966 Da; S; Serine /T; threonine/ Y; tyrosine) as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethylation (peptides) of cysteine as the static modification. The cutoff of the false discovery rate (FDR) using a target-decoy strategy was less than 1% for both proteins and peptides. In addition, ptmRS node is used in the consensus step of Proteome Discoverer to filter the true phosphopeptides. For proteins and phosphoproteins, trypsin was indicated as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages, and peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set at ± 1.6 and 0.6 Da and precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da. Peptide charges were set, excluding +1. To improve the sensitivity and accuracy of the peptide identification, we filtered SEQUEST results with the target PSM validator. Using a decoy search strategy, target false discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were ˂ 1% with at least two peptides per proteins while at least one peptides per phosphoproteins, and the results were strictly filtered by ΔCn (˂ 0.01), Xcorr (≥ 1.5) for peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) with high confidence (q-value of ≤ 0.05). Protein quantification was conducted using the total spectrum count of identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Arlington
Associate Professor, Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington,TX 76019

### Submitter
Abu Hena Mostafa  Kamal

### Lab Head
Dr Saiful M. Chowdhury
Associate Professor, Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington,TX 76019


