### Accession
PXD010892

### Title
In vivo cross-linking supports a head-to-tail mechanism for regulation of the plant plasma membrane P-type H+-ATPase

### Description
In higher plants, a P-type proton pumping ATPase generates the proton-motive force essential for the function of all other transporters and for proper growth and development.  X-ray crystallographic studies of the plant plasma membrane proton pump have provided information on amino acids involved in ATP catalysis but provided no information on the structure of the C-terminal regulatory domain. Despite progress in elucidating enzymes involved in the signaling pathways that activate or inhibit this pump, the site of interaction of the C-terminal regulatory domain with the catalytic domains remains a mystery.  Genetic studies have pointed to amino acids in various parts of the protein that may be involved but direct chemical evidence for which ones are specifically interacting with the C-terminus is lacking. In this study we used in vivo cross-linking experiments with a photo-reactive unnatural amino acid, p-benzoyl-phenylalanine (BPA) and tandem mass spectrometry, to obtain direct evidence that the carboxyl terminal regulatory domain directly interacts with amino acids located within the N-terminal actuator domain.  Our observations are consistent with a mechanism in which intermolecular, rather than intramolecular, interactions are involved. Our model invokes a ‘head-to-tail’ organization of ATPase monomers in which the carboxyl terminal domain of one ATPase molecule interacts with the actuator domain of another ATPase molecule.  This model serves to explain why cross-linked peptides are found only in dimers and trimers, and is consistent with prior studies suggesting that within the membrane, the protein can be organized as homopolymers, including dimers, trimers and hexamers.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Bands corresponding to monomer, dimer, and trimer of BPA-AHA2 were excised after gel electrophoresis and Gelcode blue staining. The gel pieces were then de-stained with 50% MeOH/100 mM NH4HCO3, dehydrated for 2 minutes in CH3CN/H2O/NH4HCO3 (50%/50%/25mM) then once more time for 30 seconds in 100% CH3CN and finally dried in vacuum for 2 minutes. The gel pieces were then hydrated and reduced with 25 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 minutes at 56 oC, and alkylated with 55 mM  IAA (Iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3) in darkness for 30 minutes, dehydrated as previous step.  Protein was digested with 200 ng Trypsin (Promega) at 42 oC for 3 hours then with 100 ng AspN (Roche) at 37 oC or 200 ng Chymotrypsin (Roche) at room temperature overnight for double digestion. All the digestions were performed in 25 mM NH4HCO3, and 0.01% ProteaseMax detergent (Promega). The digestion reactions were stopped with 0.3 % TFA (Trifluoroacetic Acid) and the supernatant was transferred to a Protein LoBind tubes (~60 µl volume). The residual proteolytic peptides were then extracted by addition of 75% CH3CN/ 0.1% TFA, vortexed gently for 10 minutes. An additional extraction step was performed with 96% CH3CN /0.1% TFA. All extractions were then combined and vacuum dried and then resuspended in 30 µl of 0.05% TFA.  Degraded ProteaseMAX™ was removed via centrifugation (max speed, 10 minutes) and the peptides was cleaned with solid phase (Bond Elut OMIX  C18 pipette tips from Agilent). Peptides were eluted off the C18 column with 15μl of 96%CH3CN/ 0.1% TFA, dried to minimum volume then brought up to 12 μl total volume with 0.1% formic acid and 3 μl was loaded on the instrument.   NanoLC-MS/MS Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source.  Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3µM, 100Å, 150x0.075mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto which 3µl of extracted peptides was automatically loaded. NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual gradient from 3% (v/v) B to 20% (v/v) B over 18 minutes and concluded  with 5 minute fast gradient from 20% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 4 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS2 for the 20 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 350 to 1800 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion with repeat count of 2 and 15 sec duration. CID-based MS/MS fragmentation in the Ion Trap portion of the instrument used activation time of 10msec, normalized collision energy of 35 and isolation width of 2AMU. Monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled and +2 and lower charge states were rejected.

### Data Protocol
To obtain identifications of un-cross-linked peptides raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development). Resulting mgf files were used to search against Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c RefSeq amino acid sequence database (5,913 protein entries) containing AHA2-BPA user construct plus a list of common contaminants using our in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 (Matrix Science) with variable methionine oxidation and asparagine and glutamine deamidation plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass at 0.6 Da. To determine the identity of cross-linked products a targeted database search of raw mass spec data was conducted using only the sequence of AHA2 proteins used in the cross-linking experiment plus most abundant yeast proteins identified in the samples. Cross-linked candidates were generated using StavroX software (StavroX Freeware version 3.5.1 from University of Halle-Wittenberg) with BPA chosen as a cross-linker, trypsin, AspN, and chymotrypsin with 2 missed cleavages as a protease digestion sites with static cysteine carbamidomethylation plus variable methionine oxidation as possible modifications. The candidates were manually verified based on the quality of MS1 and MS/MS data, matches with their theoretical isotopic and fragmentation distribution and finally cross-checked against the non-UV treated peptide mass spec data from proteins used in the cross-linking experiment. Precursor area and spectral counts of cross-linked peptides was manually calculated from Xcalibur and StavroX correspondingly

### Publication Abstract
In higher plants, a P-type proton-pumping ATPase generates the proton-motive force essential for the function of all other transporters and for proper growth and development. X-ray crystallographic studies of the plant plasma membrane proton pump have provided information on amino acids involved in ATP catalysis but provided no information on the structure of the C-terminal regulatory domain. Despite progress in elucidating enzymes involved in the signaling pathways that activate or inhibit this pump, the site of interaction of the C-terminal regulatory domain with the catalytic domains remains a mystery. Genetic studies have pointed to amino acids in various parts of the protein that may be involved, but direct chemical evidence for which ones are specifically interacting with the C terminus is lacking. In this study, we used <i>in vivo</i> cross-linking experiments with a photoreactive unnatural amino acid, <i>p</i>-benzoylphenylalanine, and tandem MS to obtain direct evidence that the C-terminal regulatory domain interacts with amino acids located within the N-terminal actuator domain. Our observations are consistent with a mechanism in which intermolecular, rather than intramolecular, interactions are involved. Our model invokes a "head-to-tail" organization of ATPase monomers in which the C-terminal domain of one ATPase molecule interacts with the actuator domain of another ATPase molecule. This model serves to explain why cross-linked peptides are found only in dimers and trimers, and it is consistent with prior studies suggesting that within the membrane the protein can be organized as homopolymers, including dimers, trimers, and hexamers.

### Keywords
And arabidopsis thaliana, Protein-protein interaction, H+-atpase, Mass spectrometry, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry. University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Missouri-Columbia

### Submitter
Thao Thi Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael R. Sussman
Department of Biochemistry. University of Wisconsin-Madison


