### Accession
PXD035896

### Title
Quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome datasets of DNA replication and mitosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Cell division is a highly regulated process that secures the generation of healthy progeny in all organisms, from yeast to human. Dysregulation of this process can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation and genomic instability, both which are hallmarks of cancer. Cell cycle progression is dictated by a complex network of kinases and phosphatases. These enzymes act on their substrates in a highly specific temporal manner ensuring that the process of cell division is unidirectional and irreversible. Key events of the cell cycle, such as duplication of genetic material and its redistribution to daughter cells, occur in S-phase and mitosis, respectively. Deciphering the dynamics of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events during these cell cycle phases is important. Here we showcase a quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry dataset that profiles both early and late phosphorylation events and associated proteome alterations that occur during S-phase and mitotic arrest in the model organism S. cerevisiae. This dataset is of broad interest as the molecular mechanisms governing cell cycle progression are conserved throughout evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type S. cerevisiae cells (W303 background: ade2‐1, trp1‐1, leu2‐3,112, his3‐11, 15, ura3) were grown at 25°C in YEP medium (1% yeast extract, 2% bactopeptone, 50 mg/l adenine) supplemented with 2% glucose as the carbon source (YEPD). Triplicate cultures were synchronized in G1 with alpha factor (4 mg/ml) at 25°C for 2.25 hr. After the arrest, yeast cells were washed with YEPD by centrifugation at 2,000 g and subsequently released in fresh YEPD (for cell cycle progression through S-phase) or in YEPD containing the microtubule depolymerizing drug nocodazole (mitotic arrest) at 25°C. Nocodazole was used at 15 μg/ml. Cells were harvested after 30 min (early S-phase) and 40 min (late S-phase) in the absence of nocodazole or after 90 min in nocodazole-containing medium. Cells were collected by centrifugation (2,000 g) and rinsed with 1 ml of 20% TCA for downstream mass spectrometry-based proteome and phosphoproteome profiling. In parallel, an aliquot (2 ml) of cells was collected for FACS analysis of DNA content.

### Data Protocol
Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with the database search engine. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphopeptide enrichment, deamidation (+0.984 Da) at glutamine and asparagine residues and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were also set as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Dna replication, Tmt, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115, USA


