### Accession
PXD035696

### Title
Distinct transcriptome, translatome, and proteome reprogramming during the oocyte-to-embryo transition

### Description
The oocyte-to-embryo transition converts terminally differentiated gametes into a totipotent embryo. Fertilized embryos undergo the resetting of the transcriptional program as the zygotic genome is activated from a silenced state started from the late-stage oocyte. How transcriptome, translatome, and proteome interplay in this critical developmental window remains poorly understood. Utilizing a highly sensitive mass spectrometry, we obtained high-quality proteome landscapes including nearly 6,000 genes spanning 10 stages, from the mouse full-grown oocyte (FGO) to blastocyst, using 100 oocytes/embryos at each stage. By integrative analysis with corresponding transcriptomes and translatomes, we found transcription and translation levels can not reflect protein abundance in most cases. From FGOs to the 4-cell embryos, the proteomes are predominated by FGO-produced proteins, while the transcriptome and the translatome are much more dynamic. FGO-originated proteins frequently persist in embryos after the corresponding transcripts are already downregulated or decayed. Improved concordance between protein and RNA is observed for genes starting translation only upon meiotic resumption or transcribed only in embryos, although the detected protein dynamics often lag behind transcription and translation. Concordance between protein and transcription/translation is associated with protein half-lives. Finally, a kinetic model well predicts protein dynamics when incorporating both the initial protein abundance in FGO and translation kinetics across developmental stages. In sum, our study reveals multilayer control of gene expression during oocyte maturation and embryogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis, 100 oocytes or embryos of each developmental stage were harvested with two replicates. The oocytes or embryos were deprived of the zona pellucida in warm acidic Tyrode solution and washed with 1X PBS three times. Then oocytes/embryos were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), then boiled for 5 min and sonicated to denature proteins, shear DNA and enhance cell disruption. Proteins were digested by trypsin and LysC with a ratio of 1:100 (micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of proteins), and desalted by SDB-RPS StageTips. The eluted peptides were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for analysis by mass spectrometry.  An UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system, directly interfaced with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was used here for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were loaded to a trap column (75 µm×20 mm, 3 µm C18,100 Å, 164535, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a max pressure of 620 bar using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O), then separated on an analytical column (samples of FGO to 8C used 75 µm×500 mm, 3 µm C18,100 Å, 164570, Thermo Fisher Scientific; samples of blastocyst cells used 100 μm inner diameter, packed in house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a gradient of 4-60% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min for 280 min. The MS analysis was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, with one full scan (300-1800 m/z, R=60,000 at 200 m/z) at automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, followed by top 40 MS/MS scans with high energy collision dissociation (AGC of 1e5, maximum injection time (IT) 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27%).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data from proteome experiments were processed by MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016) software (v 1.6.2.10) for protein identification searching against the mouse UniprotKB database (September 2019 release). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as the fixed modifications; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N terminal) were set as the variable modifications; ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides and determined by searching a reverse database. Protein abundance was quantified using iBAQ intensity and log (base 2) transformed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Hongmei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Xie
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China


