### Accession
PXD044641

### Title
Site- and structure-specific glycosylation signatures of bovine, caprine, porcine and human milk-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Intact glycopeptides in MEVs from bovines, caprines, porcines and humans were comprehensively analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry using the sceHCD followed by EThcD fragment method, revealing that protein glycosylation is abundant and heterogeneous in MEVs.

### Sample Protocol
Human milk collection Human milk collection was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Jiangnan University. All women involved signed informed consent forms. Human milk samples were collected between 9:00–11:00 a.m. with a breast pump and stored in sterile milk collection bags from five healthy women in lactation. All samples were transported to the laboratory on ice within 2 h for further analysis34. Milk-derived EV preparation and characterization For bovines, caprines and porcines, we collect milk from more than 50 individuals of local livestock farms to cover more milk sources. Then, all milk samples were mixed together by species. First, the milk samples were homogenized using a homogenizer (FJ200-S, LICHEN, China), diluted with an aliquot of PBS, and then centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 10 min and 13,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C to prepare skimmed milk (CT-5RE, Hitachi, Japan). 2 M HCl was added to adjust the pH to ~4.4 to reach the isoelectric point of casein. Then the solution was centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 30 min and 21,500 × g for 1 h to precipitate casein at 4°C. The supernatant was filtered with a 0.22 μm membrane and then ultracentrifuged at 135,000 g at 4°C for 90 min. The pellet was collected and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Sangon, China) to obtain MEVs. The size and ζ-potential of the EVs were measured on a Zetasizer (Malvern, U.K.). In addition, isolated EVs were visualized by transmission electron microscopy (H-7650, HITACH2, Japan). Glycopeptide enrichment EV proteins were transferred into ultrafiltration tubes (Millipore) and denatured by 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3. Then, the solution was diluted with distilled water to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M, and the protein reduction and alkylation were performed with 10 mM DTT and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM). Proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (protein: enzyme, 40:1, w/w; Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C. The glycopeptides were desalted and enriched by a C18 column (Sep-Pak 1 cc, Waters) and MAX column (Oasis 1 cc, Waters)54. The C18 columns were sequentially conditioned in ACN, 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA, and the peptide in 0.1% TFA (pH = 3) was loaded twice, washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with 400 μL of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and 400 μL of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. For glycopeptide enrichment, the MAX columns were sequentially conditioned in ACN, triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma), 1% TFA and 1% TFA/95% ACN. Peptides in 1%TFA/95%ACN were loaded twice and washed with 1%TFA/95%ACN and eluted with 50%ACN/1%TFA. After the elution from the MAX column, all the glycopeptides were freeze-dried with a lyophilizer (CVE-3110, EYELA, Japan) and stored in a -80°C refrigerator.

### Data Protocol
To identify intact glycopeptide (IGP), the data were searched using BYONIC 2.0. The glycan database was the Byonic mammalian N-linked glycan database, which contains 309 N-glycans. The mass tolerance of MS1 and MS2 was set as 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The spectra containing oxonium ions (m/z 204.09) were chosen for further searching. The results were filtered based on the following criteria: (1) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% for glycopeptides (2) the absolute value of Log Prob value larger than 2 and each peptide spectra match (PSM) annotated by at least one N-linked glycan and (3) each protein have more than 2 PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membrane-bound vesicles released by living cells. As vesicles for macromolecule transmission and intercellular communication, EVs are broadly applied in clinical diagnosis and biomimetic drug delivery. Milk-derived EVs (MEVs) are an ideal choice for scale-up applications because they exhibit biocompatibility and are easily obtained. Herein, intact glycopeptides in MEVs from bovines, caprines, porcines, and humans were comprehensively analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry using the sceHCD, followed by the EThcD fragment method, revealing that protein glycosylation is abundant and heterogeneous in MEVs. The dominant glycans in all MEVs were sialic acid-modified N-linked glycans (over 50%). A couple of species-specific glycans were also characterized, which are potentially markers of different original EVs. Interestingly, the Neu5Gc-modified glycans were enriched in caprine milk-derived EVs (58 &#xb1; 2%). Heterogeneity of MEV protein glycosylation was observed for glycosites and glycan compositions, and the structural heterogeneity of protein glycosylation was also identified and validated. The glycosignatures of EV biogenesis- and endocytosis-related proteins (CD63 and MFGE8) were significantly different in these four species. Overall, we comprehensively characterized the glycosylation signature of MEVs from four different species and provided insight into protein glycosylation related to drug target delivery.

### Keywords
Scehcd-ethcd, Glycoproteome, Milk-derived extracellular vesicles (mevs), Sialylated evs, Glycosignature

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Jiangnan University

### Submitter
Xiuyuan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ganglong Yang
State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China


