### Accession
PXD015152

### Title
Identification of critical therapeutic nodes to overcome Asparagine deprivation resistance in melanoma

### Description
Asparagine deprivation by L-Asparaginase is a successful therapeutic strategy in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, with resistance occurring due to upregulation of ASNS. L-Asparaginase efficacy in solid tumors is hampered by dose-related toxicities. Large scale loss of function genetic screens identified ASNS, the only human enzyme synthetizing asparagine, as a cancer dependency in several solid malignancies, including melanoma. We here evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting ASNS in melanoma cells in-vitro and in-vivo. Using ex-vivo quantitative proteome and transcriptome profiling, we observed that concomitant ASNS deletion and asparagine deprivation elicit a compensatory mechanism allowing tumor growth. Genome wide CRISPR screens upon manipulation of aminoacid levels identifies MAPK and GCN2 as critical nodes mediating the observed resistance mechanism. Importantly MEK and GCN2 inhibitor synergize with L-Asparaginase suggesting novel potential therapeutic strategy in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were extracted from homogenized tissues powders with the PreOmics iST-NHS lysis buffer (#P.O.00026). The samples were then processed using the PreOmics kit following their recommended protocol with minor modifications. In brief, the proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested for 2h at 37 °C. The peptides were then labelled with TMT reagent (1:4; peptide:TMT label) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After quenching, the peptides were purified and the 11 samples were combined to a 1:1 ratio. Mixed and labeled peptides were subjected to high-pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation on an Agilent X-bridge C18 column (3.5 µm particles, 2.1 mm i.d., and 15 cm in length). Using an Agilent 1200 LC system, a 60 min linear gradient from 10 % to 40 % acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate separated the peptide mixture into a total of 96 fractions, which were then consolidated into 24 fractions. The dried 24 fractions were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS3 analysis. Labelled peptides were loaded onto a 15 cm column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9µM (75 µm inner diameter) in an EASY-nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 3 % to 30 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted TMT peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 scans were acquired at resolution 120,000 with 350-1500 m/z scan range, AGC target 2x105, maximum injection time 50 ms. Then, MS2 precursors were isolated using the quadrupole (0.7 m/z window) with AGC 1x104 and maximum injection time 50 ms. Precursors were fragmented by CID at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35 % and analyzed in the ion trap. Following MS2, synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scans were collected by using high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and fragments were analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65 %, AGC target 1x105, maximum injection time 120 ms, resolution 60,000).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 with the SEQUEST algorithm and Uniprot human database (2014-01-31, 21568 protein sequences). Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursors and at 0.6 Da for fragment. Maximum of 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification; while TMT tags on peptide N termini/lysine residues and cysteine alkylation (+57.02146) were set as static modifications.  The list of identified peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was filtered to respect a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) after excluding PSMs with an average TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise value higher than 10 and a precursor interference level value lower than 50%. Subsequently, protein identifications were inferred from protein specific peptides, i.e. peptides matching multiple protein entries were excluded. A minimum of 2 PSMs per protein was required. The final list of identified proteins was filtered to achieve a 5% FDR. Protein relative quantification was performed using an in-house developed python (v.3.4) notebook. This analysis included multiple steps; adjustment of reporter ion intensities for isotopic impurities according to the manufacturer’s instructions, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance log2 fold changes (L2FC) and testing for differential abundance using moderated t-statistics where the resulting p-values reflect the probability of detecting a given L2FC across sample conditions by chance alone.

### Publication Abstract
Asparagine deprivation by l-asparaginase (L-ASNase) is an effective therapeutic strategy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, with resistance occurring due to upregulation of ASNS, the only human enzyme synthetizing asparagine (<i>Annu. Rev. Biochem.</i> <b>2006</b>, <i>75</i> (1), 629-654). l-Asparaginase efficacy in solid tumors is limited by dose-related toxicities (<i>OncoTargets and Therapy</i> 2017, pp 1413-1422). Large-scale loss of function genetic <i>in vitro</i> screens identified ASNS as a cancer dependency in several solid malignancies (<i>Cell</i> <b>2017</b>, <i>170</i> (3), 564-576.e16. <i>Cell</i> <b>2017</b>, <i>170</i> (3), 577-592.e10). Here we evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting ASNS in melanoma cells. While we confirm <i>in vitro</i> dependency on ASNS silencing, this is largely dispensable for <i>in vivo</i> tumor growth, even in the face of asparagine deprivation, prompting us to characterize such a resistance mechanism to devise novel therapeutic strategies. Using <i>ex vivo</i> quantitative proteome and transcriptome profiling, we characterize the compensatory mechanism elicited by ASNS knockout melanoma cells allowing their survival. Mechanistically, a genome-wide CRISPR screen revealed that such a resistance mechanism is elicited by a dual axis: GCN2-ATF4 aimed at restoring amino acid levels and MAPK-BCLXL to promote survival. Importantly, pharmacological inhibition of such nodes synergizes with l-asparaginase-mediated asparagine deprivation in ASNS deficient cells suggesting novel potential therapeutic combinations in melanoma.

### Keywords
Human, Leukemia, Asparagine

### Affiliations
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Debora Bonenfant

### Lab Head
Dr Debora Bonenfant
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


