### Accession
PXD030665

### Title
A nuclear receptor facilitates differentiation of human PSCs into more mature hepatocytes

### Description
To start examining the mechanisms by which THRB mediated the epigenetic changes, we performed immunoprecipitation (IP) of THRB in THRB-FLAG HepG2 cells with anti-FLAG antibody, followed by mass-spectrometry to identify THRB-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
THRB-FLAG-HepG2 cells were cultured in 10-cm cell culture plates in DMEM with 10% FBS, 1x penicillin/streptomycin, 1x MEM-NEAA, 1% glutamax. Cells, about 50-70% confluent, were washed with PBS, and 10 ml William’s E medium was added for 1-2 days. Then the cells were washed with PBS, and collected with 500 µL NP40 buffer (1% Nonidet P-40 (Igepal A-680), 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, 10 Glycerol 10 %, with freshly supplemented protease inhibitors (Roche 04693159001)). Cell lysates were collected, incubated at 4 ºC for 30 min, passed through 1 ml syringe with 23G needle 10 times. Then spun at 14,000 rpm for 5 min. Then the pellets were ground for about 2 min, spun at 14,000 rpm for 5 min. The nuclear fraction and supernatant fraction (800 µL) were collected, and 8 µg rabbit-anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma F7425), or about 8 µg rabbit control serum were added to incubate overnight at 4 ºC. The clear lysates were incubated with 100 µL protein G dynabeads (Thermo Fisher 10003D) for 2 hours at 4ºC. Pellets were washed 4 times with NP40 buffer. For mass-spectrometry, the dynabeads samples were washed and resuspended in a Tris/ Urea buffer, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin at 37 ºC overnight. This solution was subjected to solid phase extraction to concentrate the peptides followed by injection onto a Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC equipped with an EASY-Spray ES900 3 um C18 analytical column 0.075 mm by 15 cm, (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using standard reverse-phase gradients. The effluent from the column was analyzed using a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (nanospray configuration) operated in a data dependent manner for the 90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The resulting fragmentation spectra were correlated against the Refseq entries for homo sapiens using PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatic Solutions) and to provide consensus reports for the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
To understand the mechanisms regulating the in&#xa0;vitro maturation of hPSC-derived hepatocytes, we developed a 3D differentiation system and compared gene regulatory elements in human primary hepatocytes with those in hPSC-hepatocytes that were differentiated in 2D or 3D conditions by RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, and H3K27Ac ChIP-seq. Regulome comparisons showed a reduced enrichment of thyroid receptor THRB motifs in accessible chromatin and active enhancers without a reduced transcription of THRB. The addition of thyroid hormone T3 increased the binding of THRB to the CYP3A4 proximal enhancer, restored the super-enhancer status and gene expression of NFIC, and reduced the expression of AFP. The resultant hPSC-hepatocytes&#xa0;showed gene expression, epigenetic status, and super-enhancer landscape closer to primary hepatocytes and activated regulatory regions including non-coding SNPs associated with liver-related diseases. Transplanting the hPSC-hepatocytes resulted in the engraftment of human hepatocytes into the mouse liver without disrupting normal liver histology. This work implicates the environmental factor-nuclear receptor axis in regulating the maturation of hPSC-hepatocytes.

### Keywords
Human, Thrb interacting proteins, Thrb-flag-hepg2

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute

### Submitter
Haiting Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf Jaenisch
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research


