### Accession
PXD038440

### Title
Quantitative timecourse analysis of oncogenic KRAS expression impact on the proteme of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells.

### Description
To reveal the impact of mutant KRAS expression on the proteome of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, we carried out a timecourse quantitative proteomic analysis of tumour cells isolated from an inducible mouse model of PDAC (iKras PDAC) (Ying et al., 2012). In this model, oncogenic Kras (G12D) expression can be controlled by administration of doxycycline(Dox). Cells were grown in the absence of Dox for 48 hrs, before being treated with or without Dox for 4, 8, 12, 24, and 36 hrs, followed by total lysis and quantitative proteomics analysis using Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT). A total of 2 biological replicate experiments were analysed, with all samples from each replicate barcoded and pooled together using TMT 10plex labelling kit (Thermo).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5. Isobraric Filter Aided Sample Preparation (iFASP) (McDowell et al., 2013) was performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before, with some modifications. Briefly, from each sample, 25 micrograms of total protein was first reduced with 50 mM Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (ThermoFisher) at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Reduced samples were then diluted 7 fold in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer), transferred to Vivacon 500 filters, and concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min. Samples were then washed twice by addition of 400 micolitres of UA buffer to the filter tops and centrifugation, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Iodoacetamide was then removed by centrifugation and samples were further washed by UA buffer as before for three times, followed by three additional washes with 100 mM TEAB to remove the urea. Trypsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin in TEAB buffer to the filter tops (1:100 w/w) and overnight incubation at 37C. Next day. each sample was incubated with 0.2 micrograms of TMT 10 plex label reagent (see READ ME.XLS file for barcode details) at 25°C for 1 h in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer, and then quenched with 5% hydroxylamine at 25°C for 30 min in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g. The elution was repeated three times following addition of TEAB buffer to the filter tops, and a final elution was carried out with 30% acetonitrile. Combined eluates with different TMT labels were then mixed together and dried with a vacuum concentrator. The dired peptide mix was dissolved in 0.1% TFA and fractionated into 7 fractions via Pierce™ basic pH reverse-phase fractionation kit, according to manufacturer's instructions. Fractionated peptides were dried again via vacuum centrifugation, before resuspending in A* buffer (0.1% TFA, 0.5% Acetic Acid, 2% Acetonitrile) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An equivalent of 1 µg of each fraction was injected into the mass spectrometer. Samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 35,000 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) was used for all mass spectrometry search and quantifications (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Raw data files were searched against a FASTA file of the Mus musculus proteome, extracted from Uniprot (2016). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin”, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a reverse database search approach, and were both set at 1%. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with some adjustments (see mqpar.xml file for the detailed parameters used). All downstream data analyses, such as data filtering, Log transformation, data normalization, 2-sample t-test analyses, and data visualizations, were performed in Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016b) (version 1.6.2.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt; quantitative proteomics; kras; pdac

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz K. Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.


