### Accession
PXD005045

### Title
Comparative proteome of the BeWo and HTR8/SVneo trophoblastic cell lines

### Description
Here, we have undertaken comparative label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic profiling of the proteins expressed in BeWo and HTR8/SVneo cell lines using a mass spectrometry approach. We have identified 1557 proteins in total. 915 proteins were expressed in both cell lines including various transcription factors, chaperones and transport proteins. A further 338 and 304 proteins were uniquely expressed in BeWo and HTR8/SVneo cells respectively. Our bioinformatics analysis reflects the known epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes of these cell models with principal differences in GO observed in ‘Cell junction’, ‘Catenin complex’ as well as ‘Cell adhesion’ and ‘Cell differentiation’. Our novel comparative proteomic analysis of these trophoblastic cell lines will set the stage for the use of trophoblastic cell lines for the study of pregnancy disorders and further research focusing on placental function.

### Sample Protocol
BeWo cells were cultured in 5 % CO2 + 95 % air on fibrillar collagen (10 µg/cm2) with Ham’s F-12K media supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin. HTR8/SVneo cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 5 % FBS.  BeWo (n=3) and HTR8/SVneo (n=3) cells were grown to 80-90% confluence and lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (300 nM NaCl, 2 % Triton X-100, 0.2 % SDS and 100 nM Tris-HCL, pH 8.0) in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (1 %). Lysed cells were placed on ice for 30 min with regular vortexing, before clarification at 14,000xg for 30 min. For Mass Spectrometry analysis, proteins were precipitated from each biological replicate (n=3) with 95 % acetone overnight.  Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea/ 25 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.2, at 37 oC with gentle agitation.  Protein concentration was assessed and 15 µg of each sample used for tandem MS.  Disulphide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT and protected with 15 mM iodoacetamide.  Proteins were first digested with Lys-C followed by digestion with trypsin.  Peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips according to manufacturer instructions and resuspended in 1 % formic acid. Samples were analysed in triplicate using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer raw data files were searched using MaxQuant proteomics software. Peptides were searched against human FASTA (May 2014) obtained from UniProt with a false discovery rate of 0.05. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant output was performed using Perseus or Microsoft Excel. Functional Enrichment analysis tool (FunRich, http://www.funrich.org/) was used to assign gene ontology and STRING functional protein association network (http://string-db.org/) to allocate protein networks.

### Publication Abstract
Trophoblastic cell lines are widely used in in vitro studies of placental function as a surrogate for primary trophoblasts. To date, no reference proteomics dataset exists to directly compare the shared and unique characteristics of these cells. Here, we performed comparative proteomic profiling of the BeWo and HTR8/SVneo cell lines using label-free quantitative MS. A total of 1557 proteins were identified, which included 338 uniquely attributed to BeWo cells, and a further 304 specifically identified in HTR8/SVneo cells. Raw data are available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PDX005045. Of the 915 proteins expressed by both cell lines, 105 were of higher abundance in BeWo cells, while 199 proteins had a significantly higher expression in HTR8/SVneo cells. Comparative GO of unique and upregulated proteins revealed principal differences in cell junction/adhesion, catenin complex, spindle and microtubule associated complex, as well as cell differentiation. Our data indicate that BeWo cells express an epithelial proteome more characteristic of villous trophoblasts, whereas HTR8/SVneo cells embrace a mesenchymal phenotype, more characteristic of extravillous trophoblasts. This novel comparative proteomic profiling of these trophoblastic cell lines provides a useful platform for future investigations of placental function.

### Keywords
Trophoblastic cell lines., Label-free quantitation, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia B. Maguire
University College Dublin


