### Accession
PXD026719

### Title
Characterization of ultraID for PDB-MS

### Description
Comparison of BioID (24h labeling) and ultraID (10 min labeling) for PDB-MS (POI = Ago2, control protein = Rab11). 4 biological replicates per condition.

### Sample Protocol
Samples are lysates from stable HeLa cells expressing BioID or ultraID fusion proteins after PDB. Biotinylated proteins were isolated on trypsin-resistant streptavidin-coupled beads and trypsin-digested on the beads. The peptides were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an orbitrap instrument

### Data Protocol
Samples are lysates of stable HeLa cells expressing BioID or ultraID fusion proteins after PDB. Biotinylated proteins were isolated on trypsin-resistant streptavidin beads and then trypsin-digested on beads. The digested peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS on an orbitrap instrument

### Publication Abstract
Proximity-dependent biotinylation (PDB) combined with mass spectrometry analysis has established itself as a key technology to study protein-protein interactions in living cells. A widespread approach, BioID, uses an abortive variant of the E. coli BirA biotin protein ligase, a quite bulky enzyme with slow labeling kinetics. To improve PDB versatility and speed, various enzymes have been developed by different approaches. Here we present a small-size engineered enzyme: ultraID. We show its practical use to probe the interactome of Argonaute-2 after a 10&#x2009;min labeling pulse and expression at physiological levels. Moreover, using ultraID, we provide a membrane-associated interactome of coatomer, the coat protein complex of COPI vesicles. To date, ultraID is the smallest and most efficient biotin ligase available for PDB and offers the possibility of investigating interactomes at a high temporal resolution.

### Keywords
Bioid pdb

### Affiliations
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences

### Submitter
Julien Béthune

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Béthune
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences


