### Accession
PXD039848

### Title
Interaction protoemics of Dictyostelium discoideum GFP-SAC1

### Description
Label free interaction protoemics of Dictyostelium discoideum GFP-SAC1 compared to GFP expressing cells

### Sample Protocol
Dictyostelium discoideum strains expressing either pDM317-GFP-Sac1 or pDM317-GFP59 were grown at 22°C in HL5-C medium (ForMedium) supplemented with geneticin (G418, 5 μg/ml). Electroporation of D. discoideum was performed according to Paschke et al. 2018 with modification. The cell number was determined (Countess II F2, Thermo Fisher Invitro-gen) and 3 ∙ 107 cells were used for each sample. Pull-downs were performed in triplicates. The cells were pelleted and washed once in cold Soerensen-Sorbitol. Cell pellets were snap frozen in Eppendorf tubes and lysed with glass beads in 500 µl GFP pull-down buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM KOAc, 5% Glycerol, 1% GDN, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA free, Roche) using a FastPrep (MP biomedicals). Supernatant was cleared at 14,000 rpm for 10 min and incubated for 10 min rotating at 4 °C together with 12.5 µl pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek). Beads were washed four times with GFP pull-down buffer at 2,500 g for 2 min at 4 ° C. Afterwards, they were washed two times with wash buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM KOAc, 5% glycerol) at 2,500 g for 2 min at 4 °C. Beads were further treated following the “iST Sample Preparation Kit (Aga-rose Immunoprecipitation Samples)” protocol with the iST Sample Preparation Kit (Preomics) for protein digestion. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl LC-Load and 5 µl were used to perform reversed-phase chromatography on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a QExactivePLUS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 easy spray column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an inner diameter of 75 µm and a col-umn temperature of 40 °C. Elution of peptides from the column was realized via a linear gra-dient of acetonitrile from 12-35% in 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min following a 20 min increase to 60% and finally 10 min to reach 90% buffer B.  Eluted peptides were directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were ac-quired on the Q ExactivePlus in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 50 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense multiply charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected with an iso-lation width of 1.6 Th and fragment with higher energy collision dissociation (Olsen et al., 2007) with normalized collision energies of 27. Target values for MS/MS were set at 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To avoid repeti-tive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set at 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0, www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), the R software package (www.r-project.org/; RRID:SCR_001905) and Perseus (V2.0.7.0, www.maxquant.org/perseus).

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids are structural membrane components that also function in cellular stress responses. The serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in sphingolipid biogenesis. Its activity is tightly regulated through multiple binding partners, including Tsc3, Orm proteins, ceramides, and the phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P) phosphatase Sac1. The structural organization and regulatory mechanisms of this complex are not yet understood. Here, we report the high-resolution cryo-EM structures of the yeast SPT in complex with Tsc3 and Orm1 (SPOT) as dimers and monomers and a monomeric complex further carrying Sac1 (SPOTS). In all complexes, the tight interaction of the downstream metabolite ceramide and Orm1 reveals the ceramide-dependent inhibition. Additionally, observation of ceramide and ergosterol binding suggests a co-regulation of sphingolipid biogenesis and sterol metabolism within the SPOTS complex.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium, Ip-ms, Sac1

### Affiliations
Osnabrueck University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical chemistry section
University of Osnabrueck; DEpartment of Biology/Chemistry

### Submitter
Florian Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Fröhlich
Osnabrueck University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical chemistry section


