### Accession
PXD031267

### Title
A repurposed, non-canonical cytochrome c, chaperones calcium binding by PilY1 for type IVa pili formation - Dataset 2/2

### Description
Type IVa pili (T4aP) are versatile bacterial cell surface structures that undergo extension/adhesion/retraction cycles powered by the cell envelope-spanning T4aP machine. In this machine, a complex composed of four minor pilins and PilY1 primes T4aP extension and is also present at the pilus tip mediating adhesion. Similar to many other bacteria, Myxococcus xanthus contains multiple minor pilins/PilY1 sets, the function of which remains unknown.Here, we report that minor pilins and PilY1 of cluster_1 (PilY1.1) form calcium-responsive priming and tip complexes contingent on a non-canonical cytochrome c (TfcP) with an unusual His/Cys heme ligation. We provide evidence that TfcP is unlikely to participate in electron transport and has been repurposed to promote calcium binding by PilY1.1 at low calcium concentrations, thereby stabilising PilY1.1 and enabling its function in a broader range of calcium concentrations. These results identify a novel function of cytochromes c and illustrate how incorporating an accessory factor expands the environmental range under which the T4aP system functions.

### Sample Protocol
To identify peptides of T4aPM proteins suitable for targeted-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, we performed sample preparation on M. xanthus cell pellets for total proteome analysis as described previously10. Briefly, proteins were extracted from cell pellets by heat exposure in the presence of 2% sodiumlauroylsarcosinate. Extracts were then reduced, alkylated and digested overnight using trypsin (Promega). Peptides were purified using C18 solid phase extraction and analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). The peptides were analysed using data dependent acquisition with settings as described10. MS raw data were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science) and loaded into Scaffold 4 (Proteome software) for further data evaluation. Peptides considered most amenable for targeted MS were chosen for reference peptide synthesis (JPT Peptide Technologies, Berlin) containing heavy labeled (13C and 15N) C-terminal lysine or arginine with a resulting mass shift of +8 Da and +10 Da, respectively. Sequences of reference peptides are listed in Supplementary Table 4. For targeted MS experiments, reference peptides and iRT retention calibration peptides (Biognosys) were spiked into the M. xanthus total proteome peptide samples (generated as described), and analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS.  Peptides were separated on a 90 min gradient from 2-50% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1, and analysed by the MS in targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode. The mass spectrometer first acquired a full MS-Selected Ion Monitoring (SIM) scan with an MS1 resolution of 70,000, AGC (automatic gain control) target setting of 1e6 and 100 ms max injection time. Then PRM scans were carried out with a MS2 resolution of 35,000, AGC target setting of 2e5, 100 ms maximum injection time with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z. Normalised collision energy was set to 27%.

### Data Protocol
All stages of targeted MS data analysis was carried out in Skyline (20.2.1.384)74. Results with dot-product <0.85 or ratioheavy/light<0.005 were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myxococcus xanthus

### Affiliations
MPI Marburg
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology 35043 Marburg Germany


