### Accession
PXD023146

### Title
SILAC phosphoproteome analysis upon transient Abl1/2 or DDR1 knockdown in human U-2 OS cells

### Description
Analysis of changes in the phosphoproteome upon transient siRNA-mediated knockdown of ABL1/ABL2 or DDR1 for 48 hours. CILAC phosphoproteome analysis was conducted  after 48hrs using human U-2 OS cells.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were labelled in light (lysine-0/arginine-0) or heavy (lysine-8/arginine-10) DMEM/FCS, and transient downregulation was performed for 48hrs. Extracted proteins were digested in solution with trypsin, desalted with C18 StageTips and further analysed on an Easy-nLC1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The rest of the peptide mixture was purified on Sep-Pak 18 cartridges (Waters). Peptide extraction was performed using Sep-Pak Vac 1cc C18 Cartridges (Waters). Phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 chromatography in 10 cycles/Set, and LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with the following settings: 227 minute (proteome) or 57 minute (phosphoproteome)  segmented gradient from 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 12 (proteome)  or 7 (phosphoproteome)  most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 10^5 charges and 3x10^6 charges for the MS scan. Internal References: Project 0810TaPC, Set1 R02: non-targeting siRNA Control for Set 1 R03 (K0R0), Set 1 R03: siRNA targeting ABL1/ABL2 (K8R10) / Set2 R04: non-targeting siRNA Control for Set 2 R05 (K0R0), Set 2 R05: siRNA targeting DDR1 (K8R10).

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a Homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot, (93,827 entries, downloaded 20.12.2017), and 286 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. For protein group quantitation a minimum of two quantified peptides were required. To assign a p-site to a specific residue, we used a minimal reported localization probability of 0.75, and we refer to these as localized phosphorylation sites. The detected phosphorylation sites were normalised for changes in protein abundance using R (v 3.5.1).

### Publication Abstract
Human WIPI &#x3b2;-propellers function as PI3P effectors in autophagy, with WIPI4 and WIPI3 being able to link autophagy control by AMPK and TORC1 to the formation of autophagosomes. WIPI1, instead, assists WIPI2 in efficiently recruiting the ATG16L1 complex at the nascent autophagosome, which in turn promotes lipidation of LC3/GABARAP and autophagosome maturation. However, the specific role of WIPI1 and its regulation are unknown. Here, we discovered the ABL-ERK-MYC signalling axis controlling WIPI1. As a result of this signalling, MYC binds to the WIPI1 promoter and represses WIPI1 gene expression. When ABL-ERK-MYC signalling is counteracted, increased WIPI1 gene expression enhances the formation of autophagic membranes capable of migrating through tunnelling nanotubes to neighbouring cells with low autophagic activity. ABL-regulated WIPI1 function is relevant to lifespan control, as ABL deficiency in C. elegans increased gene expression of the WIPI1 orthologue ATG-18 and prolonged lifespan in a manner dependent on ATG-18. We propose that WIPI1 acts as an enhancer of autophagy that is physiologically relevant for regulating the level of autophagic activity over the lifespan.

### Keywords
Abl2, Abl1, Silac, Ddr1

### Affiliations
Eberhard Karls University T端bingen Faculty of Science, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 T端bingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Tassula Proikas-Cezanne
Eberhard Karls University T端bingen Faculty of Science, Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 T端bingen Germany


