### Accession
PXD011102

### Title
Pediatric burn blister fluid LC-MS/MS SWATH

### Description
Blister fluid (BF) is a novel and viable research matrix for burn injury study, which can reflect both systemic and local micro-environmental responses. The protein abundance in BF from different burn severities were initially observed using a 2D SDS-PAGE approach. Subsequently, a quantitative data independent acquisition (DIA) method – SWATHTM was employed to characterize the proteome of pediatric burn blister fluid.  More than 600 proteins were quantitatively profiled in 87 BF samples from different pediatric burn patients.

### Sample Protocol
Blister fluid samples were collected, as previously described, during routine blister de-roofing procedures. Briefly, the blisters were punctured by a needle or scissors and the effluent fluid was aspirated with a syringe or collected using 200 μL ringcaps® capillary pipettes (Hirschmann Laborgerate, Eberstadt, Germany). The fluid was centrifuged at 855 × g to remove cellular debris prior to storage of aliquots at -80 °C in Lo-bind Micro tubes (Eppendorf; North Ryde, New South Wales, Australia). Patient clinical data were collected from patient medical records. Large-scale SWATH MS measurement was performed on all 101 collected samples to generate a more comprehensive biochemical profile of burn blister fluid. An aliquot containing 60 μg of total protein from each sample was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Castle Hill, New South Wales, Australia) to a final volume of 18 μL. The proteins were reduced by the addition of 2 μL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Roche Life Science, Castle Hill, NSW, Australia) and incubated at 56 °C in an oven for 45 minutes, prior to alkylation with 2 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Merck Pty Ltd, Bayswater, Victoria, Australia) and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 20 minutes. Sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Alexandria, New South Wales, Australia) was then added to each sample to achieve an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) prior to incubation in an oven at 37 °C overnight. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using custom made Stage-Tips. The eluted peptides were dried in a rotary evaporator and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. A liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) system consisting of an Eksigent 400 nanoLC system and a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Mulgrave, VIC, Australia) was used to perform both data dependent and independent acquisitions (DDA and DIA, respectively). The peptides in each sample were separated by a 65 minute gradient using a C18 nano-LC resolving column (Eksigent Chrom XP C18 CL-120, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 75 μm × 150mm) with a flow rate of 300 nL/minute.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were acquired in DIA mode with SWATH variable window widths, which were calculated using the AB Sciex SWATH Variable Window Assay Calculator Version 1.0 (June 26, 2014), from 300 m/z to 1250 m/z with 100 window targets and a 1 Da window overlap. The peptide spectral ion library was developed using the DDA results, which included 645 proteins identified by at least one peptide and 14691 peptides at 95% confidence.  SWATH-MS data analysis was performed using the SWATH MicroApp (v2.0) plug-in for PeakView (v2.2) (SCIEX). The protein identifications were accepted as positive where five peptides were detected per protein, with five transitions per peptide, 95% peptide confidence score, 1% false discovery rate (FDR), four min peak detection window and 70 ppm XIC extraction window. Prior to ion extraction, retention time (RT) recalibration was performed using five highly abundant albumin peptides spread across the gradient and detected across all samples. This resulted in a final detection of all the 645 high confidence multi-peptide proteins in the ion library.

### Publication Abstract
Blister fluid (BF) is a novel and viable research matrix for burn injury study, which can reflect both systemic and local microenvironmental responses. The protein abundance in BF from different burn severities were initially observed using a 2D SDS-PAGE approach. Subsequently, a quantitative data independent acquisition (DIA) method, SWATH, was employed to characterize the proteome of pediatric burn blister fluid. More than 600 proteins were quantitatively profiled in 87 BF samples from different pediatric burn patients. These data were correlated with clinically assessed burn depth and time until complete wound re-epithelialization through several different statistical analyses. Several proteins from these analyses exhibited significant abundance change between different burn depth or re-epithelialization groups, and can be considered as potential biomarker candidates. Further gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the significant proteins revealed the most significant burn related biological processes (BP) that are altered with burn depth, including homeostasis and oxygen transport. However, for wounds with re-epithelialization times more or less than 21 days, the significant GO annotations were related to enzyme activity. This quantitative proteomics investigation of burn BF may enable objective classification of burn wound severity and assist with clinical decision-making. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011102.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Burn depth, Swath, Blister fluid, Time to re-epithelialization, Burn injury

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology
Senior Lecturer - Anatomy and Physiology | School of Biomedical Sciences | Faculty of Health | Queensland University of Technology.  Deputy Program Leader - Tissue Repair & Translational Physiology Program | Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI) | 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, Qld, Australia, 4059

### Submitter
Tuo Zang

### Lab Head
Dr Tony J. Parker
Senior Lecturer - Anatomy and Physiology | School of Biomedical Sciences | Faculty of Health | Queensland University of Technology.  Deputy Program Leader - Tissue Repair & Translational Physiology Program | Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI) | 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, Qld, Australia, 4059


