### Accession
PXD031335

### Title
Paramecium Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 physically interacts with the small RNA binding PIWI protein to repress transposable elements

### Description
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) maintains transcriptionally silent genes in a repressed state via deposition of histone H3 K27 trimethyl (me3) marks. PRC2 has also been implicated in silencing transposable elements (TEs) yet how PRC2 is targeted to TEs remains unclear. To address this question, we performed tandem affinity purification combined with mass spectrometry and identified proteins that physically interact with the Paramecium Enhancer-of-zeste Ezl1 enzyme, which catalyzes H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 deposition at TEs. We show that the Paramecium PRC2 core complex comprises four subunits, each required in vivo for catalytic activity. We also identify PRC2 cofactors, including the RNA interference (RNAi) effector Ptiwi09, which are necessary to target H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 to TEs. We find that the physical interaction between PRC2 and the RNAi pathway is mediated by a RING finger protein and that small RNA recruitment of PRC2 to TEs is analogous to the small RNA recruitment of H3K9 methylation SU(VAR)3-9 enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
The purified immunocomplexes were boiled during 5 min at 96°C in NuPAGE 4X loading buffer (Life Technologies) and NuPAGE™ Sample Reducing Agent (Life Technologies). Samples were then loaded on an SDS-polyacrylamide 4-12 % gel and run at 150 V constant for 5 min to allow the proteins enter the gel. The gel was washed with water; fixed for 20 – 30 min with fixative solution (10 % acetic acid, 50 % methanol, 40 % ultra-clean water) then washed 5 times in ultra-clean water. The bands containing the proteins were cut, stored in 1 mL of ultra-clean water and sent to mass spectrometry (MS) facility. MS identification of proteins was carried out in the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. https://taplin.med.harvard.edu/home).  Briefly, excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. After removal of acetonitrile, gel pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac, then rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/μl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4°C. After 45 min, the excess of trypsin was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to cover the gel pieces overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The samples were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr) and stored at 4°C. For the MS analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5-10 μl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reversephase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 μm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 μm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng and Gygi, 2001). After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). After elution, peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences, and hence protein identity, were determined by matching the protein database (Paramecium tetraurelia strain d4-2 MAC genome (v1.0)) with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (Eng et al., 1994). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data were filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.  For the proteins Ptiwi01, Ptiwi03 and Ptiwi09 and Rf1a and Rf1b that are paralogs with high amino acid identity, common peptides were assigned to either one, proportionally to the unique peptides identified for each one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small rna, Paramecium, Tetraurelia, Polycomb repressive complex, Piwi

### Affiliations
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 
Proteomic facility, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592 (CNRS & Université de Paris)

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic facility, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592 (CNRS & Université de Paris)


