### Accession
PXD046902

### Title
Two distinct ferredoxins are essential for nitrogen fixation by the iron nitrogenase in Rhodobacter capsulatus

### Description
Nitrogenases are the only enzymes able to ‘fix’ gaseous nitrogen into bioavailable ammonia and, hence, are essential for sustaining life. Catalysis by nitrogenases requires both a large amount of ATP and electrons donated by strongly reducing ferredoxins or flavodoxins. Our knowledge about the mechanisms of electron transfer to nitrogenase enzymes is limited, with electron transport to the iron (Fe)-nitrogenase having hardly been investigated. Here, we characterised the electron transfer pathway to the Fe-nitrogenase in Rhodobacter capsulatus via proteome analyses, genetic deletions, complementation studies and phylogenetics. Proteome analyses revealed an upregulation of four ferredoxins under nitrogen-fixing conditions reliant on the Fe-nitrogenase in a molybdenum nitrogenase knockout strain (nifD), compared to non-nitrogen-fixing conditions. Based on these findings, R. capsulatus strains with deletions of ferredoxin (fdx) and flavodoxin (fld, nifF) genes were constructed to investigate their roles in nitrogen fixation by the Fe-nitrogenase. R. capsulatus deletion strains were characterised by monitoring diazotrophic growth and nitrogenase activity in vivo. Only deletion of fdxC or fdxN resulted in slower growth and reduced Fe-nitrogenase activity, whereas the double-deletion of both fdxC and fdxN abolished diazotrophic growth. Differences in the proteomes of ∆fdxC and ∆fdxN strains, in conjunction with differing plasmid complementation behaviours of fdxC and fdxN, indicate that the two Fds likely possess different roles and functions. These findings will guide future engineering of the electron transport systems to nitrogenase enzymes, with the aim of increased electron flux and product formation.

### Sample Protocol
R. capsulatus strains were cultured anaerobically until a total OD660 of 3 was achieved. Cell samples were prepared by three centrifugation steps and two washing steps with phosphate buffer (3.6 g Na2HPO4 × 2 H2O and 2.6 g KH2PO4 per litre distilled H2O).For protein extraction frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 2% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) and heated for 15 min at 90°C. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Thermo Fischer Scientific) at 90°C for 15 min and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamid (Sigma Aldrich) at 20°C for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with a 6-fold excess of ice cold acetone, followed by two methanol washing steps. Dried proteins were reconstituted in 0.2 % SLS and the amount of proteins was determined by bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific). For tryptic digestion 50 µg protein was incubated in 0.5% SLS and 1 µg of trypsin (Serva) at 30°C over night.  After digestion, SLS was precipitated by adding a final concentration of 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were desalted by using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Macherey-Nagel). Cartridges were prepared by adding acetonitrile (ACN), followed by equilibration with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded on equilibrated cartridges, washed with 5% ACN and 0.1% TFA containing buffer and finally eluted with 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA.  Peptides were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and then analyzed using liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on a Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm; Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 94% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 6% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 25% solvent B over 95 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and an additional increase of solvent B to 35% for 25min. MS raw data was acquired in data independent acquisition mode with a method adopted from (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7124470/). In short, Spray voltage were set to 2.3 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C. For DIA experiments full MS resolutions were set to 120.000 at m/z 200 and full MS, AGC (Automatic Gain Control) target was 300% with an IT of 50 ms. Mass range was set to 350–1400. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 3000%. 45 windows of 14 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms. Stepped HCD collision energy of 25, 27.5, 30 % was used. MS1 data was acquired in profile, MS2 DIA data in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of DIA data was performed using DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6949130/) using a uniprot protein database from Rhodobacter capsulatus. Full tryptic digest was allowed with two missed cleavage sites, and oxidized methionines and carbamidomethylated cysteins. Match between runs and remove likely interferences were enabled. The neural network classifier was set to the single-pass mode, and protein inference was based on genes. Quantification strategy was set to any LC (high accuracy). Cross-run normalization was set to RT-dependent. Library generation was set to smart profiling. DIA-NN outputs were further evaluated using the SafeQuant (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23017020/ & https://analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pmic.201300135) script modified to process DIA-NN outputs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhodobacter capsulatus, Nitrogenase

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10  35043 Marburg Germany


