### Accession
PXD001889

### Title
Global proteome changes in liver tissue 6 weeks after FOLFOX treatment of colorectal cancer liver metastases.

### Description
Study: Oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy for colorectal liver metastasis is associated with sinusoidal injury of liver parenchyma and may result in increased morbidity after liver surgery. Preclinical and human liver parenchyma studies have proposed several pathways of oxaliplatin-induced injury, but the effects on protein level remains unknown. Protein expression in liver tissue from eight patients treated with FOLFOX and seven controls without treatment was analyzed by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Conclusion: Six weeks after FOLFOX treatment less than 1% of identified proteins showed changes in expression. The changes were associated with DNA replication, cell cycle entry and innate immune response. We hypothesize that the changes are residual after recovery from FOLFOX treatment injury.

### Sample Protocol
sodium dodecyl sulfate lysates. Filter aided sample preparation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant Software version 1.2.6.20, Label free quantitation

### Publication Abstract
(1) Oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy for colorectal cancer liver metastasis is associated with sinusoidal injury of liver parenchyma. The effects of oxaliplatin-induced liver injury on the protein level remain unknown. (2) Protein expression in liver tissue was analyzed-from eight patients treated with FOLFOX (combination of fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) and seven controls-by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Recursive feature elimination-support vector machine and Welch <i>t</i>-test were used to identify classifying and relevantly changed proteins, respectively. Resulting proteins were analyzed for associations with gene ontology categories and pathways. (3) A total of 5891 proteins were detected. A set of 184 (3.1%) proteins classified the groups with a 20% error rate, but relevant change was observed only in 55 (0.9%) proteins. The classifying proteins were associated with changes in DNA replication (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) through upregulation of the minichromosome maintenance complex and with the innate immune response (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). The importance of DNA replication changes was supported by the results of Welch <i>t</i>-test (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). (4) Six weeks after FOLFOX treatment, less than 1% of identified proteins showed changes in expression associated with DNA replication, cell cycle entry, and innate immune response. We hypothesize that the changes remain after recovery from FOLFOX treatment injury.

### Keywords
Recovery of liver injury, Minichromosome maintenance complex, Innate immune response

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


