### Accession
PXD034065

### Title
Chitotriosidase 1 in the cerebrospinal fluid as a putative biomarker for HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) progression

### Description
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is an inflammatory neurodegenerative disease that affects motor, urinary, intestinal, and sensory functions. Typically, HAM/TSP is slowly progressive, but it may vary from limited motor disability after decades (very slow progression) to loss of motor function in a few years from disease onset (rapid). In this study, we aimed to identify prognostic biomarkers for HAM/TSP to support patient management. Thus, proteomic analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was performed with samples from HTLV-1 asymptomatic carriers (AC) (n=13) and HAM/TSP patients (n=21) with rapid, typical, and very slow progression using quantitative label-free liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Enrichment analyses were also carried out to identify key biological processes associated with distinct neurological conditions in HTLV-1 infection. Candidate biomarkers were validated by ELISA in paired CSF and serum samples, and samples from HTLV-1-seronegative individuals (n=9) were used as controls. CSF analysis identified 602 proteins. Leukocyte/cell activation, immune response processes and neurodegeneration pathways were enriched in rapid progressors. Conversely, HTLV-1 AC and HAM/TSP patients with typical and very slow progression had enriched processes for nervous system development. Differential expression analysis showed that soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (sVCAM-1), chitotriosidase 1 (CHIT1), and cathepsin C (CTSC) were upregulated in HAM/TSP. However, only CHIT1 was significantly elevated after validation, particularly in HAM/TSP rapid progressors. In contrast, none of these biomarkers were altered in serum. Additionally, CSF CHIT1 levels in HAM/TSP patients positively correlated with the speed of HAM/TSP progression, defined as points in the IPEC-2 HAM/TSP disability scale per year of disease, and with CSF levels of phosphorylated neurofilament heavy chain, neopterin, CXCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL11. In conclusion, higher CSF levels of CHIT1 were associated with HAM/TSP rapid progression and correlated with other biomarkers of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Therefore, we propose CHIT1 as a surrogate CSF biomarker to identify HAM/TSP patients with a worse prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples from HTLV-1-infected patients were obtained by lumbar puncture between L3/L4 or L4/L5 vertebrates, collected into polypropylene tubes and maintained on ice bath. After, samples were centrifugated at 400 × g for 10 minutes, the supernatants were filtered with 0.45 μm polyethersulfone hydrophilic membrane and stored at -80ºC. At the time of use, CSF samples were thawed and a volume corresponding to 100 μg of total proteins was concentrated in a SpeedVac centrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). To enhance the sensitivity of the proteomic analysis, albumin and immunoglobulin G (IgG), two of the most abundant proteins in the CSF, were depleted using the Pierce™ Albumin/IgG Removal kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The albumin/IgG-depleted samples were again concentrated in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate and 8 M urea. After, 5 μL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added, and the solution was incubated at 37ºC for 1 hour. Following, 5 μL of 400 mM iodoacetamide was added and the solution was further incubated at room temperature and protected from light for 1 hour. Finally, urea concentration was adjusted to 1 M with 130L of deionized water (Milli-Q), and protein digestion was performed by overnight incubation at 37ºC with 1/50 (m/m) of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, USA). After, peptides were desalted in C18 spin-columns and eluted in 0.1% formic acid 40% acetonitrile. Peptides samples were dried in SpeedVac centrifuge without heating and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid 5% DMSO 5% acetonitrile prior to separation by liquid chromatography with the UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The flow was adjusted to 250 nL/min with a 120 min linear gradient of 5−40% acetonitrile and carried out in two phases: (a) 0.1% formic acid, and (b) 0.1% formic acid and 95% acetonitrile. Also, it was used a 15 cm long and 75 μm diameter analytic column containing 3 μm diameter C18 particles and heated at 60ºC. Peptides were analyzed in technical duplicates using 600 ng in a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). For the Ion Source, the spray voltage was set at 2300 V and the ion transfer tube temperature at 175ºC. For the Master Scan (MS1), it was used a resolution of 120,000, a m/z scan range of 300−1500, the standard AGC Target, an injection time of 50 milliseconds, and it was performed with the incorporation of the EASY-IC™. Additionally, data-dependent acquisition mode was performed to obtain MS2 spectra using an intensity threshold set at 2.0 × 104, an injection time of 22 milliseconds, a dynamic exclusion period of 60 seconds, and a cycle time of 2 seconds between MS1 scans. The higher-energy collisional dissociation with Orbitrap detection (HCD-OT) was implemented for peptide fragmentation and spectra detection, which was performed with the standard AGC Target and the Orbitrap resolution set as 15,000. Each sample was analyzed in two technical runs.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry output data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0. The Homo sapiens UniProt database (75777 entries of non-redundant, canonical proteins and isoforms, accessed on November 11th 2021) was used for protein identification. Proteins with at least seven amino acid length were accepted while peptide and protein FDR were set at 1%. The oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal modifications were included as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, and both were considered for protein quantification. Proteins representing potential contaminants or identified only by peptides with modified sites were excluded.  Proteins displaying intensity > 0 were considered as identified. Proteins identified in at least one sample were considered for qualitative analysis. For the quantitative analysis, the intensity values scale and normalization were carried out with the Perseus software  version 1.6.10.43. For this, proteins identified in at least one sample of each group were used. The intensity values were log2-transformed, and the missing values were inputted with values from a normal distribution and then normalized by subtracting each value from the median protein intensity among samples. The resulting data matrix was exported and further analyzed in the R software.

### Publication Abstract
Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) is an inflammatory neurodegenerative disease that affects motor, urinary, intestinal, and sensory functions. Typically, HAM/TSP is slowly progressive, but it may vary from limited motor disability after decades (very slow progression) to loss of motor function in a few years from disease onset (rapid). In this study, we aimed to identify prognostic biomarkers for HAM/TSP to support patient management. Thus, proteomic analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was performed with samples from HTLV-1 asymptomatic carriers (AC) (n=13) and HAM/TSP patients (n=21) with rapid, typical, and very slow progression using quantitative label-free liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Enrichment analyses were also carried out to identify key biological processes associated with distinct neurological conditions in HTLV-1 infection. Candidate biomarkers were validated by ELISA in paired CSF and serum samples, and samples from HTLV-1-seronegative individuals (n=9) were used as controls. CSF analysis identified 602 proteins. Leukocyte/cell activation, immune response processes and neurodegeneration pathways were enriched in rapid progressors. Conversely, HTLV-1 AC and HAM/TSP patients with typical and very slow progression had enriched processes for nervous system development. Differential expression analysis showed that soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (sVCAM-1), chitotriosidase 1 (CHIT1), and cathepsin C (CTSC) were upregulated in HAM/TSP. However, only CHIT1 was significantly elevated after validation, particularly in HAM/TSP rapid progressors. In contrast, none of these biomarkers were altered in serum. Additionally, CSF CHIT1 levels in HAM/TSP patients positively correlated with the speed of HAM/TSP progression, defined as points in the IPEC-2 HAM/TSP disability scale per year of disease, and with CSF levels of phosphorylated neurofilament heavy chain, neopterin, CXCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL11. In conclusion, higher CSF levels of CHIT1 were associated with HAM/TSP rapid progression and correlated with other biomarkers of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Therefore, we propose CHIT1 as an additional or alternative CSF biomarker to identify HAM/TSP patients with a worse prognosis.

### Keywords
Soluble vcam-1, Chitotriosidase 1, Proteomic analysis., Neurodegeneration, Htlv-1, Biomarkers, Ham/tsp, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases (INI), Oswal1Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases (INI), Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.do Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
IOC/FIOCRUZ

### Submitter
Yago Gomes

### Lab Head
Dr Otávio de Melo Espíndola
Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases (INI), Oswal1Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectious Diseases (INI), Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.do Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.


