### Accession
PXD041702

### Title
Atg9 resides on a unique population of small vesicles in presynaptic nerve terminals

### Description
In neurons, autophagosomes are mainly initiated in distal axons, followed by maturation during retrograde transport. Autophagosomal growth depends on the supply of membrane lipids which requires small vesicles containing Atg9, a lipid scramblase essential for autophagocytosis. Here, we show that Atg9 vesicles are enriched in synapses and resemble synaptic vesicles in size and density. The proteome of Atg9 vesicles immunoisolated from nerve terminals showed conspicuously low levels of trafficking proteins except of the AP2-complex and some enzymes involved in endosomal phosphatidylinositol metabolism. Super resolution microscopy of nerve terminals and isolated vesicles revealed that Atg9-vesicles represent a distinct vesicle population with limited overlap not only with synaptic vesicles but also other membranes of the secretory pathway, uncovering a surprising heterogeneity in their membrane composition. Our results are compatible with the view that Atg9-vesicles function as lipid shuttles that scavenge membrane lipids from various intracellular membranes to support autophagosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of immunoisolated samples were resolved on NuPAGE 4-12 % Bis-Tris gradient gels (Thermo Fischer Scientific), stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain (Expedeon) and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin . Briefly, following Coomassie Blue detection, all visible bands were excised, cut into approximately 1 mm2 pieces, and subjected to in-gel reduction with 10 mM DTT, alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and overnight trypsinization (Promega, V5111). Tryptic peptides were extracted, dried and reconstituted in 2% [v/v] acetonitrile and 0.05% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  Peptides derived from three biological replicates were analyzed as technical duplicates on Q Exactive HF and HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Samples were separated using a 48-min gradient (start at 5% B, increase to 10% B in 3 min, followed by 10-45% B for 33 min, 90% B for 6 min, re-equilibration to 5% B for 6 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using 0.1% formic acid [v/v] as mobile phase A and 80 % acetonitrile/0.08% formic acid [v/v] as mobile phase B. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method (selecting the top 30 most abundant precursors for higher energy collision dissociation). MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM in the Orbitrap covering a mass range of 350-1600 m/z, 100% automatic gain control (AGC) target (1 × 106), and 50 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions were isolated using a 1.6 m/z isolation window, and a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of 30% was applied for fragmentation. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, all unassigned charge states were rejected, and only precursors with charge states from 2+ to 7+ were considered, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, 100% AGC target (1 × 105), 60 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw acquisition files were processed using the MaxQuant (MQ) software (version 1.6.5.0) (Cox and Mann 2008, Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) with the built-in Andromeda peptide search engine (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011). The spectra were searched against the complete Rattus norvegicus proteome sequence database generated from UniProt (UP000002494, accessed 29 March 2019, 21,678 entries). Trypsin/P was set as digestion enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavage sites per peptide. Carbamidomethylated cysteines were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable (a maximum number of five modifications per site was allowed). Maximum false discovery rate was kept at 1% at both peptide and protein levels. One peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids were defined as required for protein identification. The “Match between runs” option with default parameters was enabled to allow identifications to be transferred to non-sequenced MS features in other LC-MS runs. For intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) (Schwanhausser, Busse et al. 2011), which normalizes each protein MS intensity by the corresponding number of identified peptides for any given protein, the “iBAQ” option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
In neurons, autophagosome biogenesis occurs mainly in distal axons, followed by maturation during retrograde transport. Autophagosomal growth depends on the supply of membrane lipids which requires small vesicles containing ATG9, a lipid scramblase essential for macroautophagy/autophagy. Here, we show that ATG9-containing vesicles are enriched in synapses and resemble synaptic vesicles in size and density. The proteome of ATG9-containing vesicles immuno-isolated from nerve terminals showed conspicuously low levels of trafficking proteins except of the AP2-complex and some enzymes involved in endosomal phosphatidylinositol metabolism. Super resolution microscopy of nerve terminals and isolated vesicles revealed that ATG9-containing vesicles represent a distinct vesicle population with limited overlap not only with synaptic vesicles but also other membranes of the secretory pathway, uncovering a surprising heterogeneity in their membrane composition. Our results are compatible with the view that ATG9-containing vesicles function as lipid shuttles that scavenge membrane lipids from various intracellular membranes to support autophagosome biogenesis.<b>Abbreviations</b>: AP: adaptor related protein complex: ATG2: autophagy related 2; ATG9: autophagy related 9; DNA PAINT: DNA-based point accumulation for imaging in nanoscale topography; DyMIN STED: dynamic minimum stimulated emission depletion; EL: endosome and lysosome; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; GA: Golgi apparatus; iBAQ: intensity based absolute quantification; LAMP: lysosomal-associated membrane protein; M6PR: mannose-6-phosphate receptor, cation dependent; Minflux: minimal photon fluxes; Mito: mitochondria; MS: mass spectrometry; PAS: phagophore assembly site; PM: plasma membrane; Px: peroxisome; RAB26: RAB26, member RAS oncogene family; RAB3A: RAB3A, member RAS oncogene family; RAB5A: RAB5A, member RAS oncogene family; SNARE: soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive-factor attachment receptor; SVs: synaptic vesicles; SYP: synaptophysin; TGN: <i>trans-Golgi</i> network; TRAPP: transport protein particle; VTI1: vesicle transport through interaction with t-SNAREs.

### Keywords
Neurons, Atg9, Immunoisolation

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany


