### Accession
PXD015725

### Title
Wnt activator FOXB2 drives the neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer

### Description
The Wnt signaling pathway is playing a crucial role during development and adult tissue homeostasis. However, the tissue and cell type-specific regulation of Wnt pathway activity remains incompletely understood. Here we identify FOXB2, an uncharacterized forkhead box family transcription factor, as a potent activator of Wnt signaling in normal and cancer cells. Proximity-dependent biotinylation assay (BioID) coupled with mass spectrometry identified  transcriptional co-regulators required for FOXB2-dependent Wnt activation.

### Sample Protocol
The BioID assay was performed essentially as described (25). Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer for 1 h at 4ºC with end-over-end rotation. Pre-washed streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare, USA) were added to the cell lysate and incubated for 3 h at 4ºC with end-over-end rotation. The beads were washed four times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Enzymatic digestion was carried out by adding 100 µl of freshly prepared 10 ng/µl trypsin (Thermo Fisher) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to the beads, and samples were incubated overnight at 37ºC with end-over-end rotation. The digested samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. The samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry, using an Easy nano LC II HPLC interfaced with a nanoEasy spray ion source (Thermo Fisher) connected to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by Proteome Discover 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) searching the UniProt database with Sequest HT search engine. The search parameters were: Taxonomy: Homo sapiens; Enzymes; trypsin with one missed cleavage, no variable Modifications; Peptide Mass Tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS Fragment Tolerance, 0.5 Da. Quantification of the analyzed data were performed with Scaffold 4 a Proteome Software using total spectral count.

### Publication Abstract
The Wnt signaling pathway is of paramount importance for development and disease. However, the tissue-specific regulation of Wnt pathway activity remains incompletely understood. Here we identify FOXB2, an uncharacterized forkhead box family transcription factor, as a potent activator of Wnt signaling in normal and cancer cells. Mechanistically, FOXB2 induces multiple Wnt ligands, including WNT7B, which increases TCF/LEF-dependent transcription without activating Wnt coreceptor LRP6 or &#x3b2;-catenin. Proximity ligation and functional complementation assays identified several transcription regulators, including YY1, JUN, and DDX5, as cofactors required for FOXB2-dependent pathway activation. Although FOXB2 expression is limited in adults, it is induced in select cancers, particularly advanced prostate cancer. RNA-seq data analysis suggests that FOXB2/WNT7B expression in prostate cancer is associated with a transcriptional program that favors neuronal differentiation and decreases recurrence-free survival. Consistently, FOXB2 controls Wnt signaling and neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cell lines. Our results suggest that FOXB2 is a tissue-specific Wnt activator that promotes the malignant transformation of prostate cancer.

### Keywords
Foxb2, Wnt, Differentiation, Cancer

### Affiliations
LINKÖPING UNIVERSITY
Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, SE-581 85, Linköping, Sweden Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (IKE), Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, SE-581 85, Linköping, Sweden

### Submitter
Lavanya Moparthi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Stefan Koch
Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, SE-581 85, Linköping, Sweden Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (IKE), Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, SE-581 85, Linköping, Sweden


