### Accession
PXD003561

### Title
Identification of Glycoproteins Associated with HIV Latently Infected Cells Using Quantitative Glycoproteomics

### Description
HIV infection is not curable due to viral latency. Compelling reports studying proteins such as CD2, PD-1, LAG-3 and TIGIT suggest that there is a distinct profile of surface proteins that can be used for targeting latently infected cells. We have recently reported that glycoproteins were differentially secreted from HIV latently infected ACH-2 cells compared to the parental A3.01 cells. This observation suggests that glyco-phenotype might be different in these two cell lines. To determine the difference, the ACH-2 and A3.01 cell lines were subjected to a glycoproteomic analysis. A total number of 940 unique N-linked glycosite-containing peptides from 515 glycoproteins were identified. Among the glycoproteins, 365 and 104 were annotated as cell surface and membrane-associated proteins, respectively. Label free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis revealed a change of 236 glycosite-containing peptides from 172 glycoproteins between the two cell lines without reactivation. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that cell adhesion, immune response, glycoprotein metabolic process, cell motion and cell activation were associated with the changed proteins. After reactivation of latency by phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), changes in glycosite-containing peptides were observed in both cell lines. Changes in 49 glycosite-containing peptides from 45 glycoproteins might be due to viral replication. The changed proteins suggest that cell migration, response to wounding and immune response were impaired in reactivated latently infected cells. Our study provides important glycoproteomic data in respect to HIV latently infected cells. Glycoproteomics merits future application using primary cells to discover reveal mechanisms in HIV pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides: cell lysates (1 mg) of each sample were reduced in 10 mM TCEP at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour. Proteins were alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted into 6 mL using 0.2 M AB buffer to decrease the concentration of urea and proteins. Trypsin (0.5 g/l, enzyme/protein ratio of 1/40 w/w) was added to digest proteins at 37C over night. After digestion, 5 l of sample was resolved on a tricine gel and silver staining was used to determine the completion of tryptic digested peptides. The peptides were desalted by a C18 cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions and oxidized by incubating with 10 mM sodium periodate in 60% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v) at RT for 1 hour in the dark. Sodium sulphite was added at a final concentration of 60 mM to quench the oxidation reaction. The samples were then mixed with 50 l of (50% slurry) hydrazide support prewashed with 1 mL deionised water. The mixture was incubated with gentle shaking at RT overnight for the coupling reaction. The glycopeptide conjugated hydrazide beads were sequentially washed with 800 l of 50% ACN (v/v) 0.1% TFA (v/v), then 1.5 M NaCl and water, three times/solution to remove non-coupled peptides. The beads were finally washed with 200 l of 1X G7 buffer twice and incubated with 3 l of PNGase F in 50 l of 1X G7 buffer at 37C overnight to specifically release N-linked glycosite-containing peptides, which were desalted by a C18 cartridge, dried in a speed-vac and re-suspended in 40 l of 0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis: the N-linked glycosite-containing peptides (~1 μg) were separated through a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) with a 75 µm x 15 cm Acclaim PepMap100 separating column (Thermo Scientific) protected by a 2 cm guarding column (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid 95% acetonitrile (B). Flow rate was 300 nL/min. The gradient profile was set as following: 4-35% B for 70 min, 35-95% B for 5 min, 95% B for 10 min and equilibrated in 4% B for 15 min. MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV. Orbitrap spectra (AGC 1x106) were collected from 400-1800 m/z at a resolution of 60K followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS (at a resolution of 7500, collision energy 35%, activation time 0.1 ms) of the ten most abundant ions using an isolation width of 2.0 Da. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 35 sec was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification: proteins were identified using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4). A NCBI human database containing 53,918 protein entries was used [26]. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance at 0.06 Da. Parameters of the search were modified as follows: oxidized methionines (add Met with 15.995 Da), a (PNGase F-catalyzed) conversion of Asn to Asp (add Asn with 0.984 Da) and Cys modification (add cysteine with 57 Da). A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage sites were allowed. Percolator node in SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer was used to filter protein identification at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Annotation node in Proteome Discoverer and Cell Surface Protein Atlas [27] were used to determine cellular component. Only peptides unique to one protein group and with at least 2 spectral counts were reported and used for quantification. The label-free, semi-quantitative differential expression analysis of the identified protein was conducted using SIEVE software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.0). The raw files were imported into SIEVE and the chromatograms were aligned. Frame parameters were set as follows: frame for all MS2 peak intensity threshold 1-E4, retention time from 0 to 60 mins, m/z from 350 to 1800, frame time retention time width 2.5 mins and frame m/z width 10 ppm. After framing, the Proteome Discoverer result files were imported with a 1% FDR. The integrated intensity (peak area) of glycosite-containing peptides was normalized by the median of each sample and used to calculate a p-value. The average intensity of peptides with modifications was used to calculate fold change.

### Publication Abstract
HIV infection is not curable due to viral latency. Compelling reports suggest that there is a distinct profile of surface proteins that can be used for targeting latently infected cells. We have recently reported that glycoproteins were differentially secreted from HIV latently infected ACH-2 cells compared to the parental A3.01 cells. This finding suggests that glyco-phenotype might be different in these two cell lines. To determine the difference, the ACH-2 and A3.01 cell lines were subjected to a glycoproteomic analysis. A total number of 940 unique N-linked glycosite-containing peptides from 515 glycoproteins were identified. Among the glycoproteins, 365 and 104 were annotated as cell surface and membrane-associated proteins, respectively. Quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis revealed a change of 236 glycosite-containing peptides from 172 glycoproteins between the two cell lines without reactivation. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that cell adhesion, immune response, glycoprotein metabolic process, cell motion, and cell activation were associated with the changed proteins. After reactivation of latency, changes in glycosite-containing peptides were observed in both cell lines. The changed proteins suggest that cell migration, response to wounding and immune response might be impaired in reactivated latently infected cells. Glycoproteomics merits future application using primary cells to discover reveal mechanisms in HIV pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Quantitative glycoproteomics, Hiv, Speg, Latency

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 21287
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA 21287


