### Accession
PXD017541

### Title
Human RNA-binding protein E3 ubiquitin ligase AP-MS

### Description
The canonical mammalian mRNA nuclear export process is thought to terminate at the cytoplasmic face of the nuclear pore complex through ribonucleoprotein remodeling. We conducted a stringent affinity-purification mass-spectrometry-based screen of the physical interactions of human RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligases. The resulting protein-interaction network revealed interactions between the RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligase MKRN2 and GLE1, a DEAD-box helicase activator implicated in mRNA export termination. We assessed MKRN2 epistasis with GLE1 in a genetically tractable zebrafish model. Morpholino-mediated knockdown or CRISPR/Cas9-based knockout of MKRN2 partially rescued retinal developmental defects seen upon GLE1 depletion, consistent with a functional association between GLE1 and MKRN2. Using ribonomic approaches, we showed that MKRN2 binds selectively to the 3'UTR of a diverse subset of mRNAs and that nuclear export of MKRN2-associated mRNAs is enhanced upon knockdown of MKRN2. Taken together, we suggest that MKRN2 interacts with GLE1 to selectively regulate mRNA nuclear export and retinal development.

### Sample Protocol
Protein eluate from each purification was dried and suspended in 44 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each sample was reduced with 1 µL of 100 mM TCEP-HCl for 1 h at 37°C with shaking, followed by alkylation with 1 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37°C with shaking with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega). Digests were stopped with 2 µL of 50% acetic acid. Peptide samples were analyzed on a Velos-Orbitrap mass-spectrometer utilizing a 90-minute HPLC gradient and top 15 data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
AP-MS datasets were searched with Maxquant (Tyanova et al., 2016) (v.1.6.2.10) and human protein sequences from the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (downloaded 16-06-17). Spectral counts for each identified protein were extracted from maxquant evidence files. High-confidence interactions were defined by a CompPASS (Sowa et al., 2009) WD scoring cutoff of one, normalized to the top 1% of interactions and identification in <50% of control purifications catalogued on the CRAPome database (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian mRNA nuclear export process is thought to terminate at the cytoplasmic face of the nuclear pore complex through ribonucleoprotein remodeling. We conduct a stringent affinity-purification mass-spectrometry-based screen of the physical interactions of human RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligases. The resulting protein-interaction network reveals interactions between the RNA-binding E3 ubiquitin ligase MKRN2 and GLE1, a DEAD-box helicase activator implicated in mRNA export termination. We assess MKRN2 epistasis with GLE1 in a zebrafish model. Morpholino-mediated knockdown or CRISPR/Cas9-based knockout of MKRN2 partially rescue retinal developmental defects seen upon GLE1 depletion, consistent with a functional association between GLE1 and MKRN2. Using ribonomic approaches, we show that MKRN2 binds selectively to the 3' UTR of a diverse subset of mRNAs and that nuclear export of MKRN2-associated mRNAs is enhanced upon knockdown of MKRN2. Taken together, we suggest that MKRN2 interacts with GLE1 to selectively regulate mRNA nuclear export and retinal development.

### Keywords
E3-rbp, Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Professor, Departments of Biochemistry & Biology
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Eric Wolf

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Emili
Professor, Departments of Biochemistry & Biology


