### Accession
PXD009956

### Title
Haemonchus contortus Global Somatic Proteome

### Description
Parasitic nematodes cause diseases that adversely impact on animal health and production. Although advances in genomics and transcriptomics are revolutionising the way we explore these parasites, there is a dearth of proteomic data to underpin or support fundamental discoveries. Here, using a high throughput LC-MS/MS-based approach, we undertook the first large-scale (global) proteomic investigation of Haemonchus contortus (the barber's pole worm), one of the most important parasitic nematodes of livestock animals worldwide. In total, 2487 unique H. contortus proteins, representing five key developmental stages [i. e. eggs, third-stage (L3) and fourth-stage (L4) larvae; female (Af) and male adults (Am)] were identified and quantified with high confidence. Bioinformatic analyses of the somatic proteome of H. contortus discovered substantial alterations in protein profiles during the life cycle, particularly in the transition from the free-living to the parasitic phase, and identified groups of key proteins involved specifically in feeding, digestion, metabolism, development, parasite-host interactions (including immunomodulation), structural remodelling of the body wall and other adaptive processes during the parasitic phase. This global proteomic data set will likely facilitate future molecular, biochemical and physiological investigations of H. contortus and related nematodes, and should underpin the discovery of novel intervention targets against haemonchosis.

### Sample Protocol
For data dependent acquisition (DDA) profiling, tryptic peptides were analysed using a combination of QE plus Orbitrap and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode, 70000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 50ms. Fifteen of the most intense peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2 and an intensity threshold of 1.7e4 were isolated for MSMS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors fragmented using a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 17500, an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionisation mode, with the spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and the source temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120000 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 sec cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used, whereby peptide ions with charge states of 2 to 5 were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and fragmented with a high energy collision (HCD) mode with a stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identification (and for subsequent spectral library generation) was carried out using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with the Sequest HT search engine and the Percolator semi-supervised learning algorithm.36 An in-house sequence database, with GenBank's non-redundant protein database (NR) annotation, was established for H. contortus (16093 protein entries) based on transcriptomes,3,17,18 PacBio long sequence reads (Bioproject: PRJEB2252 at NCBI) and additional, curated protein databases for H. contortus (494 protein entries)37-39 as well as the Biognosys iRT peptide sequence. Search parameters were a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, MSMS tolerance of 0.05 Da, fixed modification of carboamydomethylation of cysteine (+ 57 Da) and methionine oxidation (+ 16 Da). Peptides were accepted based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 at both the peptide and protein levels. For stage-specific identification and relative quantification comparisons, only protein identifications with ≥ 2 unique peptides and present in ≥ 3 biological replicates in at least one developmental stage were accepted.  HRM-DIA-based quantitation was carried out using Spectronaut (Biognosys, v.11). The spectral library used for database search contained a total of 4276 protein groups (42986 peptides), generated from a total of 85 in-gel-digested and basic reverse phase-separated peptides DDA experiments from the QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer workflow. Exported results were analysed via Spectronaut using default settings with stringent q-value cut-off (< 0.01). For each protein, the three peptides with the highest intensities were used for quantitative analysis. The data were normalised based on the median protein intensity under each condition. Fold-change thresholds of ≥ 2 with the q-value inferior set at ≤ 0.05 were used to establish whether a protein was up- or down-regulated. The p-values were adjusted using a Benjamini-Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus, Lc-ms/ms, Parasitic nematode

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


