### Accession
PXD043050

### Title
Proteomic analysis of fresh and liquid stored turkey spermatozoa

### Description
The liquid storage of turkey semen without the loss of fertilizing ability is of practical interest to poultry industry. However, fertility rates from liquid stored turkey semen decline within a few hours. A clear cause of the decline in spermatozoa quality is unknown. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to monitor dynamic of proteomic changes of spermatozoa during liquid storage at three time points (2, 24 and 48h) by 2-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) coupled with a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass (MALDI TOF/TOF) spectrometry. A total of 57 protein spots were differentially expressed in fresh and stored spermatozoa; 42 spots were more- and 15 were less- abundant in spermatozoa after 48 h of semen storage. Most of the proteins that changed in response to liquid storage were related to i) flagellum dependent cell motility, ii) energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds and iii) introduction of fertilization, suggesting complexity of the processes leading to decreases of stored semen quality.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of 0.5 ml freshly diluted and stored semen for 24 and 48h was subjected to centrifugation at 12,800xg for 3 min at 4°C, to separate spermatozoa from seminal plasma. Next, spermatozoa were sonicated using VC-13 PB (Sonics, USA), set at 35% relative output, for 30s in 120 µl lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 2% [w/v] 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio]-1 propanesulfonate [CHAPS]), supplemented with 2% (v/v) ampholytes in the range of pH 3-10 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 4% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. After sonication extracts were kept on ice for 1 h, centrifuged at 12,800 × g for 20 min at 4°C and proteins were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The precipitate was dissolved in labeling buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Aliquots of 50 µg of protein from each sample were labelled with CyDye DIGE Fluor minimal dyes (GE Healthcare) at a concentration of 400 pmol dye/50 µg of protein The internal standard was generated by combining equal amounts of each samples within the experiment and was labelled with Cy2. Differentially labelled samples were mixed together loaded onto Immobiline DryStrip gel strips (24 cm, pH 3 to 10 non-linear; GE Healthcare). Isoelectric focusing was performed with an IPGphor isoelectric focusing unit (GE Healthcare), and SDS-PAGE was run using the ETTAN Dalt six electrophoresis unit (GE Healthcare). The CyDye-labelled gels were scanned using Typhoon FLA 9500 instrument (GE Healthcare) and analysed by DeCyder Differential Analysis Software (version 5.0; GE Healthcare). Spots of interests were excised and digested using a trypsin solution (Promega) containing 0.2mg/mL trypsin in 15mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptide mixtures were desalted using ZipTip C-18 RP tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and spotted in a matrix of 0.5% cyanhydroxy cinnamic acid on a 96-spot MALDI target. Peptide samples were analyzed on the Autoflex Speed MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the Meleagris gallopavo database (created on July 04, 2022) using the Mascot Server (Matrix Science, London, UK) database. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 Da, and max 2 missed cleavage allowed. The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid storage of turkey semen without the loss of fertilizing ability is of practical interest to the poultry industry. However, fertility rates from liquid-stored turkey semen decline within a few hours. A clear cause of the decline in spermatozoa quality remains unidentified. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to monitor the dynamics of proteomic changes in spermatozoa during 48&#xa0;h of liquid storage by 2-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis coupled with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry. A total of 57 protein spots were differentially expressed between fresh and stored spermatozoa; 42 spots were more and 15 were less abundant after 48&#xa0;h of semen storage. Raw proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD043050. The selected differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were validated by western blotting and localized in specific spermatozoa structures by immunofluorescence, such as the head (acrosin and tubulin &#x3b1;), midpiece (acrosin, aconitate hydratase 2, and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) and tail (tubulin &#x3b1;). Most of the DEPs that changed in response to liquid storage were related to flagellum-dependent cell motility, energy derivation through oxidation of organic compounds and induction of fertilization, suggesting the complexity of the processes leading to the decrease in stored semen quality. The damaging effect of liquid storage on spermatozoa flagellum manifested as more microtubule proteins, such as tubulins and tektins, most likely formed by posttranslational modifications, tubulin &#x3b1; relocation from the tail to the sperm head, which appeared after 48&#xa0;h of semen storage, and decreases in fibrous shelf proteins at the same time. Motility could be affected by dysregulation of Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding proteins and disturbances in energy metabolism in spermatozoa flagellum. Regarding sperm mitochondria, DEPs involved in energy derivation through the oxidation of organic compounds indicated disturbances in fatty acid beta oxidation and the tricarboxylic acid cycle as possible reasons for energy deficiency during liquid storage. Disturbances in acrosin and 1-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase zeta may be involved in rapid declines in the fertility potential of stored turkey spermatozoa. These results showed the complexity of the processes leading to a decrease in stored semen quality and broadened knowledge of the detrimental effects of liquid storage on turkey spermatozoa physiology.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Turkey, Maldi tof/tof, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn

### Submitter
Mariola Słowińska

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Słowińska
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn


