### Accession
PXD045845

### Title
Structural basis for the modulation of MRP2 activity by phosphorylation and drugs

### Description
Chemotherapy resistance by ABC transporters and secondary transporters is well established. Liver cancer is hard to treat by chemotherapy due to the presence of the multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2/ABCC2) in addition to other transporters. The activity of MRP2 can be modulated by phosphorylation of its regulatory domain but also by drug-drug interactions. Here, we have determined the cryo-EM structure of MRP2 from Rattus norvegicus in an autoinhibited state (nucleotide-free) and in the presence of the drug modulator probenecid (uricosuric agent). The autoinhibited conformation is caused by the partially phosphorylated regulatory domain that folds within the transmembrane domain. Combining, in vitro phosphorylation of MRP2, mass spectrometry and kinetics, we show that full phosphorylation of the regulatory domain is required to relieve the autoinhibitory state due to steric clashes between the phosphate groups and the transmembrane domain. The drug bound state, has identified two drug binding sites that has allowed us to propose how probenecid modulates the activity of the transporter in addition to drug-drug interactions. Overall, we have structurally characterised the clinically relevant transporter MRP2, and we provide evidence on its modulation by intracellular kinases but also in the presence of external drugs. Finally, we mapped the mutations that cause Dubin–Johnson syndrome onto the structure and gain an understanding on their contribution in MRP2 dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Protein solutions were adjusted to 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and digested overnight with trypsin at a final concentration of 50 ng/μL (Pierce). Peptides were SpeedVac dried and subjected to clean-up with C18 Pierce spin tips followed by phosphopeptide enrichment using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Both the eluents (phosphopeptides) and the flow-throughs were collected for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Ascend Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, trapping column at flow rate 10 μL/min and analysed with a nanoEase MZ PST BEH130 1.7μ 75 μm × 250 mm C18 capillary column. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The separation method was as follows: for 80 min gradient 5%-35% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 5 min isocratic at 5% B, at flow rate 300 nL/min. MS scans were acquired in the range of 400-1,600 m/z at mass resolution of 120K, AGC 4×105 and max IT 251 ms. Precursors were selected with the top speed mode in 3 sec cycles and isolated for HCD fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.9 Th. Collision energy was 35% with AGC 1.25×105, max IT 200 ms and orbitrap detection at 45K resolution. Targeted precursors were  dynamically excluded for 30 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
dynamically excluded for 30 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance. The mass spectra were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific) with the SequestHT and Comet search engines for peptide identification and quantification. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed-cleavages. Carbamidomethyl at C was selected as static modification and oxidation of M, deamidation of N/Q and phosphorylation of S/T/Y were selected as dynamic modifications. Spectra were searched against UniProt Rattus norvegicus reviewed protein entries, peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on target-decoy database search. Phosphorylation localization probabilities were estimated with the IMP-ptmRS node and peptide quantification was performed with the Minora Feature Detector and Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mrp2 activataion

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


