### Accession
PXD017616

### Title
Role of hormones regulate productive diapause queens in year-round mass rearing of Bombus terrestris

### Description
Adult reproductive diapause is a powerful overwintering strategy for many continental insect species including bumblebees, which enables queens to survive several months through harsh winter conditions and then build new beehives in the following spring. There are few reports regarding the molecular regulatory mechanism of reproductive diapause in Bombus terrestris, which is an important pollinators of wild plants and crops, and our previous researches identified the conditions for reproductive diapause of year-round mass rearing. Here, we performed combined RNA sequencing transcriptomics and quantitative proteomic analyses in different development phases relate to reproductive diapause. According to the overall analysis, we found these differentially expressed proteins/genes act in the citrate cycle, insect hormone biosynthesis, insulin and mTOR signalling pathway. To get better sense of the reproductive diapause regulated mechanism, some genes regulated JH synthesis, insulin/ TOR signal pathway were detected, the BtRheb, BtTOR, BtVg and BtJHAMT had lower expression levels in diapause queens, and the JH III titers levels and some metabolic enzymes activities were significantly up-regulated in found post-diapause queens. After microinjected insulin-like peptides (ILPs) and JH analog (JHA), some indicators shows the significantly changes of hormones, cold tolerance substances, metabolic enzymes and reproduction. Along with other related researches, a reproductive diapause regulated model during B. terrestris year-round mass rearing process was establishment. This study contribute to a comprehensive view and the molecular regulate mechanism of productive diapause in eusocial insect.

### Sample Protocol
We obtained the different treatment groups queens of B.terrestris from Shandong Lubao Technology Co. Ltd, which is a specialized manufacturer of bumblebee in China. Mated queens, virgin queens (5-10 days after emergence) were sampled 24h post-mating with males. Three different physiology conditions include (a) Diapause queens (D), mated queens were held in the refrigerator at 2 ± 0.5°C for 9–10 weeks; (b) Post-diapause queens (PD), diapause queens were treated with pure CO2 until they were anesthetized about 1 min, repeated once after 24h; (c) Founder post-diapause queens (FPD), diapause queens were normally fed until they begin lay eggs. Three biological replicate samples were stored at −80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
All of the MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against B.terrestris transcriptome and genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. First search range was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions, main search range set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 0.01 and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. At least 2 unique peptides were used for the protein quantification, and FC > 1.5 or < 0.667 were used as the thresholds to determine signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the protein level (34).  GO annotation the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) data were derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Identified DEPs domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used. Used KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description, then mapped the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database used KEGG mapper, and used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft (PSORT/PSORT II) to predict subcellular localization. Functional enrichment of GO, domain and KEGG pathway analysis, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of DEPs. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods, and the corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on DEPs functional classification, we first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with p-values < 0.05, and the filtered p value matrix was transformed by the function x = -log10 (p value). The x values were z-transformed for each functional category, and the z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering in Genesis

### Publication Abstract
Adult reproductive diapause is an adaptive strategy under adverse environments for insects and other arthropod species, including bumblebees, which enables queens to survive through a harsh winter and then build new colonies in the following spring. Little research has been done on the molecular regulatory mechanism of reproductive diapause in <i>Bombus terrestris</i>, which is an important pollinator of wild plants and crops. Our previous research identified the conditions that induced reproductive diapause during the year-round mass rearing of <i>B.&#xa0;terrestris</i>. Here, we performed combined transcriptomics and proteomics analyses of reproductive diapause in <i>B.&#xa0;terrestris</i> during and after diapause at three different ecophysiological phases, diapause, postdiapause, and founder postdiapause. The analyses showed that differentially expressed proteins/genes acted in the citrate cycle, insect hormone biosynthesis, insulin and mTOR signaling pathway. To further understand the mechanisms that regulated the reproductive diapause, genes involved in the regulation of JH synthesis, insulin/TOR signal pathway were determined. The <i>BtRheb</i>, <i>BtTOR</i>, <i>BtVg</i>, and <i>BtJHAMT</i> had lower expression levels in diapause queens. The JH III titer levels and the activities of the metabolic enzymes were significantly up-regulated in postdiapause queens. Also, after the microinjection of insulin-like peptides (ILPs) and JH analogue (JHA), hormones, cold-tolerance metabolites, metabolic enzymes, and reproduction showed significant changes. Together with results from other related research, a model of the regulation of reproductive diapause during the year-round mass rearing of <i>B.&#xa0;terrestris</i> was proposed. This study contributes to a comprehensive insight into the molecular regulatory mechanism of reproductive diapause in eusocial insects.

### Keywords
Social insects, Tmt., Rna-seq, Reproductive diapause, Hormones

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Protection, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Plant Protection, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, P.R.China

### Submitter
Yifan Zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Yifan Zhai
Institute of Plant Protection, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, P.R.China


