### Accession
PXD010760

### Title
Exosomal transport of hepatocyte-derived drug-modified proteins to the immune system

### Description
Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a rare, often difficult to predict adverse reaction with complex pathomechanisms. However, it is now evident that certain forms of DILI are immune-mediated and may involve the activation of drug-specific T-cells. Exosomes are cell-derived vesicles that carry RNA, lipids and protein cargo from their cell of origin to distant cells, and may play a role in immune activation. Herein, primary human hepatocytes were treated with drugs associated with a high incidence of DILI (flucloxacillin, amoxicillin, isoniazid and nitroso-sulfamethoxazole) to characterize the proteins packaged within exosomes that are subsequently transported to dendritic cells for processing. Exosomes measured between 50-100 nm and expressed CD63.  LC-MS/MS identified an average of 1200 proteins across all exosome samples. Analysis of gene ontologies revealed that exosomes mirrored whole human liver tissue in terms of the families of proteins present, regardless of drug treatment. However, exosomes from nitroso-sulfamethoxazole-treated hepatocytes selectively packaged a specific subset of proteins. LC-MS also revealed the presence of hepatocyte-derived exosomal proteins covalently modified with amoxicillin, flucloxacillin and nitroso-sulfamethoxazole. Uptake of exosomes by monocyte-derived dendritic cells occurred mainly via phagocytosis, and was inhibited by latrunculin A. This study reveals that exosomes have the potential to transmit drug-specific hepatocyte-derived signals to the immune system and provides a pathway for the induction of drug hapten-specific T-cell responses.

### Sample Protocol
Human hepatocytes from 3 donors were cultured in the presence of vehicle control, amoxicillin, flucloxacillin, isoniazid or nitroso-sulfamethoxazole. Exosomes were isolated from the culture supernatant using ExoQuick-TC. Exosome pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer and the protein content was determined by Bradford assay. Each lane of an SDS-PAGE gel was loaded with 20ug protein and the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue. Each lane of the gel was excised into 8 bands, which were diced and subjected to digestion with trypsin. Extracted peptides were cleaned up using C18 ZipTips prior to nano-LC-MS on a Triple TOF 6600 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Two approaches were used to assess potential differences in the protein profile induced by each of the drug treatments. In approach 1, peptide intensities for each protein derived from ProteinPilot were summed and normalised to total ion count for each exosome sample. The data were sorted in RStudio (version 3.4.0) to produce a composite list of proteins present in every sample and log10 transformed. In approach 2, the data were analysed using label-free quantification in MaxQuant: all settings used were default apart from the minimal LFQ ratio count being set to 1 and the retention time window being increased to 5 minutes. The samples were grouped into experiments, but no fractions were assigned as the positions of the gel slices were not sufficiently consistent across all experiments. The data were searched using human UniProt database (release 2017_04, 20201 human entries). The MaxQuant output file was edited to remove contaminants and proteins matching the reverse database. A composite list of proteins present in every sample was generated and the data were log10 transformed. Data generated by the 2 approaches were then subjected to further analysis using the Partek Genomics Suite (version 7.18.0130). Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed using standardisation (shifting the columns to a mean of zero and scaling to an SD of 1), whilst a correlative PCA analysis was performed assuming all variables had an equal influence on the principal components. These analyses resulted in separation of the samples based on the donor. The data were then batch corrected for donor and the above analyses were repeated. ANOVA analysis was performed to compare the protein profile of the nitroso sulfamethoxazole-treated sample to all the others and proteins significantly associated with treatment were classified using PANTHER. The overlap between proteins identified and quantified by the two approaches were illustrated using the Venn diagram tool developed by Ghent University (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/).

### Publication Abstract
Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a rare, often difficult-to-predict adverse reaction with complex pathomechanisms. However, it is now evident that certain forms of DILI are immune-mediated and may involve the activation of drug-specific T cells. Exosomes are cell-derived vesicles that carry RNA, lipids, and protein cargo from their cell of origin to distant cells, and they may play a role in immune activation. Herein, primary human hepatocytes were treated with drugs associated with a high incidence of DILI (flucloxacillin, amoxicillin, isoniazid, and nitroso-sulfamethoxazole) to characterize the proteins packaged within exosomes that are subsequently transported to dendritic cells for processing. Exosomes measured between 50 and 100 nm and expressed enriched CD63. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS-MS) identified 2,109 proteins, with 608 proteins being quantified across all exosome samples. Data are available through ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010760. Analysis of gene ontologies revealed that exosomes mirrored whole human liver tissue in terms of the families of proteins present, regardless of drug treatment. However, exosomes from nitroso-sulfamethoxazole-treated hepatocytes selectively packaged a specific subset of proteins. LC/MS-MS also revealed the presence of hepatocyte-derived exosomal proteins covalently modified with amoxicillin, flucloxacillin, and nitroso-sulfamethoxazole. Uptake of exosomes by monocyte-derived dendritic cells occurred silently, mainly through phagocytosis, and was inhibited by latrunculin A. An amoxicillin-modified 9-mer peptide derived from the exosomal transcription factor protein SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 30 activated na&#xef;ve T cells from human leukocyte antigen A*02:01-positive human donors. Conclusion: This study shows that exosomes have the potential to transmit drug-specific hepatocyte-derived signals to the immune system and provide a pathway for the induction of drug hapten-specific T-cell responses.

### Keywords
Immune response, Hepatocytes, Drug-induced liver injury, Exosomes

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalind Jenkins
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool


