### Accession
PXD023228

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the secretome of seven Leishmania species

### Description
This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the secretome of seven different Leishmania species (six main human pathogenic species: L. donovani, L. infantum, L. braziliensis, L. major, L. amazonensis, L. tropica) and L. tarentolae, non-pathogenic to humans, produced by promastigotes cultured in serum-free conditions. The exhaustive analysis of the protein content of the secretome using mass spectrometry led to the identification of common and unique proteins, as well as useful insights on the relation between secretome content and pathogenesis. The biological relevance of the secretome is undeniable and, in the particular case of Leishmania parasites, it is a crucial player in the host-pathogen interactions which dictate the outcome of infection and disease severity. This study actively contributes to current knowledge on Leishmania biology and the generated datasets are an addition to current databases, associating the identified proteins with subcellular localization and putative extracellular functions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: The in vitro culture of Leishmania promastigotes from seven different species – Leishmania infantum MHOM/MA/67/ITMAP-263; Leishmania major MHOM/SY/91/LEM-2420; Leishmania tropica MHOM/SY/90/LEM-2067; Leishmania donovani MHOM/IN/80/DD8; Leishmania braziliensis MHOM/BR/75/M-2904; Leishmania amazonensis MHOM/BR/76/LTB-012; Leishmania tarentolae WT laboratory strain P10 (Jena Bioscience) – was performed in a completely chemically defined medium (CDM/LP) free of serum, macromolecules, proteins and peptides as previously described [51,52].  When parasite concentration reached 2–3×107 promastigotes/mL in a 6-day period, culture was centrifuged (2000×g, 20 min, 4°C) to remove parasites. The supernatant was collected, filtered (0.2-μm-pore-size filter, Millipore) to eliminate promastigotes, concentrated approximately 100-fold by lyophilisation and dialysed by ultrafiltration with a 3-kDa-cutoff filter unit (Pall). Protein concentration was determined according to Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The purified naturally excreted secreted antigens from Leishmania promastigotes are designated as ESAp. Leishmania ESAps were stored at -80°C until use.  Protein separation: Proteins were separated on 1D SDS-PAGE gels (12 % polyacrylamide gels, Bio-Rad, Hercules USA). Gels were stained with PageBlue Protein Staining Solution (Fermentas) and scanned using a computer-assisted densitometer (Epson Perfection V750 PRO). Gel lanes were cut into 12 gel pieces (11 bands plus the well fraction) and destained with three washes in 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC). After protein reduction (with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50mM TEABC at 56 °C for 45 min) and alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide TEABC at room temperature for 30 min) proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (800 ng/band, Gold, Promega, Madison USA) as previously described (1). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed with a ZipTip C18. Digest products were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge and reduced to 3 µL.  High-performance liquid chromatography and MS measurements: Peptide samples were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge, solubilised in 3 µl of 0.1% formic acid-2% acetonitrile. Three µL were analysed online by nano-flow HPLC-nanoelectrospray ionization using an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap® precolumn (0.3 mm x 10 mm). A gradient consisting of 0-40% B in 30 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the capillary (0.075 mm x 150 mm) reverse-phase column (Pepmap®, Dionex). LC-MS/MS experiments comprised cycles of 5 events; an MS1 scan with orbitrap mass analysis at 60000 resolution followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the five most abundant precursors. Fragment ions generated by CID were detected at the linear trap. Normalised collision energy of 35 eV and activation time of 30 ms were used for CID. Spectra were acquired with the instrument operating in the information-dependent acquisition mode throughout the HPLC gradient. The mass scanning range was m/z 400-2000 and standard mass spectrometric conditions for experiments were: spray voltage, 1.9 to 2.4 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200°C; capillary voltage, 40 V and tube lens, 120 V. For all full scan measurements with the Orbitrap detector, a lock-mass ion from ambient air (m/z 445.120024) was used as an internal calibrant as described [Olsen JV et al. Parts per Million Mass Accuracy on an Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer via Lock Mass Injection into a C-trap, Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 4 (2005) 2010–2021].

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were processed using the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.5.1) and Andromeda for database search with Intensity-Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) algorithm enabled. The MS/MS spectra were matched against the Leishmania entries of UniProtKB SwissProt and TrEMBL sections (release 191 2017_01; http://www.uniprot.org) and 250 frequently observed contaminants (MaxQuant contaminants database) as well as reversed sequences of all entries. The following settings were applied for database interrogation: mass tolerance of 7 ppm (MS) and 0.5 Th (MS/MS), trypsin/P enzyme specificity, up to two missed cleavages allowed for protease digestion, minimal peptide length at 7, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for peptides and proteins. Protein abundance is measured with the iBAQ value calculated by MaxQuant (Σ intensity of unique peptides mapped to each protein/number of theoretical peptides).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Secretome, Leishmaniasis, Promastigote

### Affiliations
UMR177 INTERTRYP, IRD, Montpellier, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Loup Lemesre
UMR177 INTERTRYP, IRD, Montpellier, France


