### Accession
PXD012430

### Title
Mouse brain LC-MS -  KIBRA controls exosome secretion via inhibiting the proteasomal degradation of Rab27a

### Description
To investigate the molecular mechanisms by which KIBRA regulates exosome secretion, we performed mass spectral (MS) analysis and an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) assay to screen the differentially-expressed proteins in the brains of KIBRA-KO mice compared with their WT littermates.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted and digested with Trypsin Gold peptides (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C for 16 h. After desalting, the peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents (iTRAQ® Reagent-8PLEX Multiplex Kit, Sigma), following the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA). One unit of labeling reagent was used for 0.1 mg of peptides. Differently labeled peptides were mixed equally and then desalted on 100 mg SCX columns (Strata-x-c, 8B-S029-EBJ; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mix was fractionated using a C18 column (BEH C18 4.6 × 250 mm, 5 μm; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) on a Rigol L3000 high performance illiquid chromatography system operating at 1 ml/min. The column oven temperature was set to 50°C. Mobile phases A (2% acetonitrile, 20 mM NH4FA, adjusted to pH 10.0 using NH3·H2O) and B (98% acetonitrile, 20 mM NH4FA, adjusted to pH 10.0 using NH3·H2O) were used to develop a gradient elution. The eluent was dried under a vacuum and reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 3% (v/v) acetonitrile in water for subsequent analyses. The fractions were dissolved in loading buffer and separated on a C18 column (150 μm inner-diameter, 360 μm outer-diameter × 15 cm, 1.9 μm C18, Reprosil-AQ Pur; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with a capillary temperature of 320℃. Full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 with an AGC target value of 3,000,000 and a scan range of 350-1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against Uniprot database by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus and iTRAQ 8-plex of tyrosine, lysine were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 miscleavage sites were allowed. For protein identification, protein with at least 1 unique peptide was identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Reporter Quantification (iTRAQ 8-plex) was used for iTRAQ quantification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, the significant ratios, defined as p < 0.05, were used to screen the differentially expressed proteins (DEP).

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are nanosized membrane vesicles released from cells after fusion of multivesicular bodies (MVBs) with the plasma membrane (PM) and play important roles in intercellular communication and numerous biological processes. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating exosome secretion remain poorly understood. Here we identify KIBRA as an adaptor-like protein that stabilizes Rab27a, which in turn controls exosome secretion both in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown or overexpression of KIBRA in neuronal and podocyte cell lines leads to a decrease or increase of exosome secretion, respectively, and KIBRA depletion increases MVB size and number. Comparing protein profiles between KIBRA knockout and wild-type mouse brain showed significantly decreased Rab27a, a small GTPase that regulates MVB-PM docking. Rab27a is stabilized by interacting with KIBRA, which prevents ubiquitination and degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In conclusion, we show that KIBRA controls exosome secretion via inhibiting the proteasomal degradation of Rab27a.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Kibra, Brain, Mouse

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, P. R. China.
Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, No. 324 Jingwuweiqi Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Lin Song

### Lab Head
Dr Yifeng Du
Department of Neurology, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, No. 324 Jingwuweiqi Road, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, P. R. China.


