### Accession
PXD009232

### Title
PGC-1a isoform-specific nuclear interactome

### Description
PGC-1α (Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha) coactivators regulate adaptive gene expression in response to challenges such as cold exposure, fasting, or physical exercise to balance energy supply and demand. Transcription of a single PGC-1α gene produces different isoforms (e.g. PGC-1α1 to α4) with different biological functions. We aimed to characterize the nuclear interactome for each PGC-1α variant, in particular the transcription factors they bind to regulate gene expression. This was done by generating GST-fusions of all PGC-1a variants, expressed in an insect cell system. These were used to capture associated protein complexes from HeLa nuclear extracts.

### Sample Protocol
PGC-1α isoform-associated Protein Complex Purification- HeLa nuclear extracts were prepared as previously described [1]. For purification of PGC-1α-associated protein complexes, 2 mg of nuclear extract were incubated with 20 μg of each GST-PGC-1α isoform in BC(200) containing 0.1% NP-40 overnight at 4°C with rotation. The day after, beads were extensively washed with BC(200) and 0.1% NP-40. The bound protein complexes were eluted in BC(1000) and after SDS-PAGE analysis were sent for peptide identification by mass spectrometry.  Proteins samples were TCA precipitated (20 % w/v) overnight on ice and spun down for 30 minutes at 20,000 g. Pellets were washed with ice-cold methanol and resuspended in 100 µL of 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 and digested overnight with Lys-C and trypsin(1μg each).  TMT reagents(Thermo Fisher) were dissolved in 40 μL of dry acetonitrile (ACN), and 2 μL of the solution was added to each digest. After incubating for 1 hr at room temperature (23 °C), the reaction was quenched by adding 1 μL of 5% w/v hydroxylamine. TMT labeled peptides were subsequently combined and desalted by C18 StageTips (3M Empore). LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher) equipped with Agilent 1200 binary HPLC pump (Agilent Technologies) and a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings).  Peptides were separated onto an 100 µm I.D. microcapillary column packed first with ~1 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by ~40 cm of Maccel C18AQ resin (3 μm , 200 Å, Nest Group). Peptide were separated by applying a gradient from 6 to 30% ACN in 0.5% FA over 180 min at ~250 nL/min.  Electrospray ionization was enabled through applying a voltage of 2.6 kV.   1. Dignam, J.D., Lebovitz, R.M., and Roeder, R.G. (1983) Accurate transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II in a soluble extract from isolated mammalian nuclei. Nucleic Acids Res 11, 1475–1489

### Data Protocol
A compendium of in-house developed software tools was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the RAW file to the mzxml format and to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z.  The Sequest algorithm was used to assign MS/MS spectra by searching the data against a protein sequence database including Human Uniprot Database (download date June, 2014) and known contaminants such as porcine trypsin. This forward (target) database component was followed by a decoy component including all listed protein sequences.  Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and requiring both peptide termini to be consistent with trypsin specificity, while allowing up to two missed cleavages.  Six-plex TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+ 229.16293 Da) were set as static modifications and oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as variable modification.  An MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy.  Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra properties: Sequest parameters XCorr and ΔCn, peptide ion mass accuracy, and peptide length. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the dataset with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR to obtain a protein identification FDR of smaller than 1 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Interactome

### Affiliations
KI Stockholm
Associate Professor of Molecular Physiology at Karolinska Institutet Molecular & Cellular Exercise Physiology Dept. of Physiology and Pharmacology Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Lars Ketscher

### Lab Head
Dr Jorge L Ruas
Associate Professor of Molecular Physiology at Karolinska Institutet Molecular & Cellular Exercise Physiology Dept. of Physiology and Pharmacology Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden


