### Accession
PXD048648

### Title
Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and role of transcription factor Znf1 

### Description
 Agricultural wastes and other non-food sources can be used to produce biofuels. Despite multiple attempts using engineered yeast strains expressing exogenous genes, the native Saccharomyces cerevisiae produces low amount of second generations of biofuels. Here, we focused on Znf1, a non-fermentable carbon transcription factor and the suppressor protein Bud21 to overcome this challenge. Several mutants of engineered S. cerevisiae strains were engineered to enhance production of biofuels and xylose-derived compounds such as xylitol. This study demonstrates Znf1's novel transcriptional regulatory control of xylose and offer an initial step toward a more sustainable production of advanced biofuels from xylose.

### Sample Protocol
The S. cerevisae wild-type BY4742, znf1Δ, BY4742+pLJ529-ZNF1, and bud21Δ+pLJ529-ZNF1 strains were cultured in YPD, while the BY4742+pLJ529-ZNF1 strain was cultured in SD-Ura broth prior to be transferred to YPD and incubated for an overnight at 30 °C at 150 rpm. Cells were resuspended in distilled water and transferred to YP broth containing 2% (w/v) xylose mixed with 0.05% (w/v) glucose. After 48 hours, cell samples were taken and treated according to (Krobthong et al., 2021). Briefly, 100 mM NaCl (Bio basic, Us), 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (USB, Us), 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Amresco, Us), and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 (Bio basic, Us) were used to lyse the yeast samples. The protein contents of the lysates were measured using a Biorad Protein Assay Kit (Biorad, CN). After reducing the protein sample with 4 mM (DTT) for 25-30 minutes at 72 ◦C, it was alkylated with 12 mM iodoacetamide (van Zyl et al.) (GE Healthcare, UK) for 25-30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Next, it was desalted with a Zeba spin desalting column (Thermo Scientific, Se) before trypsin (Thermo Scientific, LT) was added and the mixture was digested at 37 ◦C for an overnight. After evaporated, the solution was reconstituted in LC-MS water (Supelco®, De) containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, De). Each digested sample was pooled at 5 g to create a spectral library of yeast for the Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) analysis. A 2% acetonitrile (ACN) (VWR, Fr) and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich, De) were used to desalt the 1 μg of pooled sample that had been loaded using a nanoLC (Thermo Scientific, De) onto a trap column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, packed with 5 µm C18 100Å PepMapTM) (Thermo scientific, De). Then, we packed the peptides with Acclaim PepMapTM C18 (Thermo Scientific, De) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min into an analytical column that measured 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm. The elution process was performed using a linear gradient of 3–35% of buffer B in A (A: 0.1% FA in water; B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The peptides that had been eluted were examined using an AbSCIEX, De. 6600plus TripleTOF (LC-MS/MS). The MS1 spectra were obtained in the mass range of 400-1,500 m/z with 250 ms in "high sensitivity" mode. The MS acquisition time was set from gradient time zero to 120 min. Each MS1 spectrum underwent additional fragmentation, with a maximum of 30 precursors per cycle. The following switch criteria were applied: dynamic exclusion for 15 s, 500 cps intensity threshold, and charge of 2+ to 5+. Individual sample SWATH-MS data were obtained using LC-MS/MS, as previously mentioned. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode was used for the SWATH acquisition. The MS1 spectra were obtained in the mass range of 400–1,250 m/z, using "high sensitivity" mode. After, the SWATH Acquisition Variable Window Calculator (https://sciex.com/software-support/software-downloads) was performed to optimize the variable Q1 isolation windows, based on the spectral library. Every window showed a different collision energy. Biological triplicates were injected one at a time.

### Data Protocol
Spectra library was processed with Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (UniProtKB) using ProteinPilotTM Software 5.0.2 (ABSCIEX, De). The proteins identified by LC-MS/MS data in each pooled yeast strain sample with an unused score above 0.05 (> 95% confidence) and a False Discovery Rate (FDR) less than 1% were analyzed, which were deemed significant. Software from ABSCIEX, De. called PeakView 2.2 was used to analyze the SWATH-MS data. The spectral library was obtained and served as the SWATH analysis database. A 5-minute XIC extraction window and a 75 ppm XIC width were then used to process the data. Using MarkerView v1.3.0 (ABSCIEX, De), we extracted the peak areas from peptides with >95% confidence and <1% global false discovery rate. The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (http://www.yeastgenome.org/) was  used as the source of all annotations to carry out the cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Advanced biofuel; carbon source utilization; isobutanol; low-cost substrate; transcriptional regulatory network; yeast platform

### Affiliations
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi 
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi

### Submitter
Pattanan Songdech

### Lab Head
Dr Nitnipa Soontorngun
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi


