### Accession
PXD004779

### Title
Malignant hepatocellular carcinoma cells enrich translation regulatory proteins in exosomes

### Description
It is known that exosomes (endosome derived vesicles) play important roles in the formation of the tumor microenvironment. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly malignant cancer, whose malignancy is largely influenced by the tumor microenvironment. The possible role and the specific content of the HCC derived exosomes are however largely unknown. We performed super-SILAC-based mass spectrometry (MS) analyses to interrogate the differential proteins in the exosome of three human HCC cell lines, MHCC97H, MHCCLM3 and Hep3B cells. Exosomal proteins were systematically compared with multi-omics strategies, considering both proteomics and translatomics. With stringent data quality control (quantified unique peptides ≥ 2, FDR ≤ 0.01 at both protein and peptide level), 1907 exosomal proteins were confidently identified from the three HCC cell lines, out of which 469 and 443 exosomal proteins significantly altered in the highly malignant cell lines (MHCC97H/Hep3B and MHCCLM3/Hep3B), respectively. ClueGo and IPA analyses on the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) revealed that translation and ubiquitination biological processes pathways were significantly more encapsulated in the exosome of higher malignant cell lines. We further observed significantly negative correlation of exosomal protein to cellular protein and translating mRNA in terms of relative abundances comparing the higher malignant cell lines with the low malignant cell line. The negatively correlated genes are also translation regulation-centric. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the exosomal enrichment of translation regulatory proteins is related to the malignant level of HCC cells.

### Sample Protocol
Here we employed super SILAC method,exosomal protein (100 μg) with the super SILAC mix at a ratio 1:1 and further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and StageTip -based fractionation. Briefly, the mixtures were reduction, alkylation and loaded into the ultracentrifugal filters. Next, all buﬀer exchanges and liquid elution were carried out by centrifugation at 12 000 × g for 15 min, 4 °C. Then the retentate digested using trypsin at 37 °C, for 8 h, deionized water was used to elute the peptide-rich solution. After loading the peptides to the strong anion exchange (SAX) filters (performed in tip columns by stacking six layers of Empore anion exchange disks, peptide fractions were eluted and collected consecutively with buffers of pH 11,8, 6, 5, 4,and 3.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were searched against Uniprot-Swiss Human database (2016_01 Release, 20193 entries) using MaxQuant (version1.5.2.8) with Andromeda as described previously. The parameters included: (i) enzyme, trypsin; (ii) fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); (iii) variable modifications, oxidation (M), Gln → pyro-Glu (N-terminus), and acetyl (N-terminus); (iv)precursor ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance , 0.5 Da; (v) heavy labels: Arg10, Lys8; (vi) minimum peptide length, 7; (vii) Protein and peptide FDRs, 0.01; (viii) minimum ratio count, 2; and (ix) peptides for quantification: unique.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are deliverers of critically functional proteins, capable of transforming target cells in numerous cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We hypothesize that the motility of HCC cells can be featured by comparative proteome of exosomes. Hence, we performed the super-SILAC-based MS analysis on the exosomes secreted by three human HCC cell lines, including the non-motile Hep3B cell, and the motile 97H and LM3 cells. More than 1400 exosomal proteins were confidently quantified in each MS analysis with highly biological reproducibility. We justified that 469 and 443 exosomal proteins represented differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the 97H/Hep3B and LM3/Hep3B comparisons, respectively. These DEPs focused on sugar metabolism-centric canonical pathways per ingenuity pathway analysis, which was consistent with the gene ontology analysis on biological process enrichment. These pathways included glycolysis I, gluconeogenesis I and pentose phosphate pathways; and the DEPs enriched in these pathways could form a tightly connected network. By analyzing the relative abundance of proteins and translating mRNAs, we found significantly positive correlation between exosomes and cells. The involved exosomal proteins were again focusing on sugar metabolism. In conclusion, motile HCC cells tend to preferentially export more sugar metabolism-associated proteins via exosomes that differentiate them from non-motile HCC cells.

### Keywords
Signaling pathway, Exosome, Super silac, Proteomics, Translatomics

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University
Jinan University

### Submitter
Zhang Jing

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University


