### Accession
PXD027563

### Title
Quantification of isoaspartate levels in human serum albumin of blood samples

### Description
We measured the isoaspartate levels in human serum albumin of blood samples from 20 patients with Alzheimer's disease and 20 healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
A nano-liquid chromatography system Ultimate 3000 connected in-line to a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both – Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Reversed phase LC-separation of the peptides (Gradient A: water with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and Gradient B: acetonitrile with 2% water and 0.1% formic acid) was performed on a 50 cm long EASY spray column (PepMap, C18, 3μm, 100Å) for 240 min per sample. The gradient was set up as follows: 5% B for 5 min, 1–30% B in 95 min, 31–95% B in 5 min, 95% B for 5 min and 1% (B) for 10min. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. Precursor ion fragmentation was performed with simultaneous higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD; collision energy: 27%, resolution 15,000, AGC target 5.0e4, maximum injection time 200 ms) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD; “collision energy”: 40%, resolution 15,000, AGC target 5.0e4, maximum injection time 200 ms).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted using a home-written program RAW to MGF and the resultant .mgf files were searched on Mascot to get .dat files. The data were processed on another in-house software Quanti to quantify the isoAsp occupancy of the Asn-containing peptides in human serum albumin.

### Publication Abstract
Isoaspartate (isoAsp) is a damaging amino acid residue formed in proteins mostly as a result of spontaneous deamidation of asparaginyl residues. An association has been found between isoAsp in human serum albumin (HSA) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we report on a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb) 1A3 with excellent specificity to isoAsp in the functionally important domain of HSA. Based on 1A3 mAb, an indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed, and the isoAsp occupancy in 100 healthy plasma samples was quantified for the first time, providing the average value of (0.74 &#xb1; 0.13)%. These results suggest potential of isoAsp measurements for supplementary AD diagnostics as well as for assessing the freshness of stored donor blood and its suitability for transfusion.

### Keywords
Human serum albumin, Isoaspartate, Mass spectrometry, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biophysics and Biochemistry, Karolinska Institute
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Jijing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Department of Medical Biophysics and Biochemistry, Karolinska Institute


