### Accession
PXD015660

### Title
Proteome analysis of HeLa cells knocked down for EXT1 expression

### Description
Exostosin-1 (EXT1) is an ER-resident glycosyltransferase known to polymerize heparan sulfate chain by sequential addition of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine molecules. This reaction results in heavily glycosylated proteoglycans (PG) at the plasma membrane, which form cell-type specific complexes and play vital roles in cell-cell and cell-pathogens interactions, cell growth, plasticity and proliferation in the local tissue environment. Different evolutionary forces drive the structure and function of protein glycosylation between the inside and outside of the plasma membrane, and an understanding of how the proteome composition of internal cell membranes is regulated remains a fundamental question in biology. In addition, potential interplays between whole cell proteome and membrane composition are completely unknown. We performed EXT1 knockdown in HeLa cells using shRNA, isolated ER microsomes, performed label-free mass spectrometry, and processed the data with byonic 3.5 software to identify glycoproteins. We identified a total of 1080 proteins, 226 with altered expression, 51 phosphoproteins, 25 O-glycosylated and 97 N-glycosylated membrane proteins. We also performed stable isotope labeling amino acids in cell culture comparing proteomes from HeLa knocked down for EXT1 and control cells. We identified a total 5215 proteins, with 3713 proteins having a SILAC ratio and 396 proteins out of total with a significant p-value (p-value <0.05). Our study demonstrate that the glycosyltransferase enzyme contributes to the heterogeneity of intracellular membrane proteins, particularly proteins controlling ER membrane morphologies in response to different cell types and states.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells (ATCC# CCL-2) were transduced with lentiviruses made using the vector of interest (shEXT1-TRCN0000039993 or shCTRL-SHC005 from Sigma), pVSV-G (PT3343-5, Clontech) and psPAX2 (#12260, Addgene). After 72 h, the cells were selected for puromycin (ant-pr-1 Puromycin, Invivogen) for 3-4 days and antibiotics were added in culture medium every 3 weeks.  For ER proteomes analysis, microsomes were isolated using the Endoplasmic Reticulum isolation kit ER-0100 from Sigma. The proteins were then reduced, alkylated, TCA precipitated and trypsinated. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed over 140 min using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-32% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 100 min, 32%-60% solvent B for 10 min, 60%-95% solvent B for 1 min and holding at 95% for the last 6 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer using a high-low data-dependent scan routine for protein identification and an acquisition strategy termed HCD product-dependent EThcD/CID (ThermoFisher Scientific) for glycopeptides analysis. For whole cells proteomes quantification, SILAC labeling was performed using L-Lysine-2HCl (light) and 13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl (heavy) amino acids according to the SILAC kit from Thermo Scientific (catalog number A33969). Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific catalog number 89900) and samples processed by nano LC/MS/MS. For the SILAC analysis, the samples were pooled 1:1 and 20 μg was separated on a 4-12% Bis-Tris Novex minigel (Invitrogen) using the MOPS buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and the lanes excised into 40 equal segments using a grid. For mass spectrometry the gel digests were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min. Both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively

### Data Protocol
For ER proteomes analysis, the peptides were subjected to NSI source and were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting as 28 and detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30.000. If predefined glycan oxonium ions were detected in the low m/z region it triggered an automated EThcD and CID spectra on the glycopeptide precursors in the Orbitrap. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan every 3 seconds and MS/MS scans was applied for the top precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 5E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. For glycopeptide identification the resulting MS/MS data was processed using Byonic 3.5 (Protein Metrics) search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.3 against a human database obtained from Uniprot, the glycan database was set to “N-glycan 182 human no multiple fucose or O-glycan 70 human”. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and up to 7 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) were considered as variable modifications on Cys. Glycopeptides with a Byoinic score >= 300 and with a Log Prob >= 4.0 were retained and their identification was manually validated. For whole cells proteomes quantification by SILAC, data were processed through the MaxQuant software 1.5.3.0 (www.maxquant.org) which served several functions such as the recalibration of MS data, the filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), the calculation of SILAC heavy:light ratios and data normalization. Data were searched using a local copy of Andromeda with the following parameters, Enzyme set as trypsin, database set as Swissprot Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminant proteins), fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), 13C6 (K) and fragment Mass Tolerance: 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a central eukaryotic organelle with a tubular network made of hairpin proteins linked by hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate nucleotides. Among posttranslational modifications initiated at the ER level, glycosylation is the most common reaction. However, our understanding of the impact of glycosylation on the ER structure remains unclear. Here, we show that exostosin-1 (EXT1) glycosyltransferase, an enzyme involved in <i>N</i>-glycosylation, is a key regulator of ER morphology and dynamics. We have integrated multiomics and superresolution imaging to characterize the broad effect of <i>EXT1</i> inactivation, including the ER shape-dynamics-function relationships in mammalian cells. We have observed that inactivating <i>EXT1</i> induces cell enlargement and enhances metabolic switches such as protein secretion. In particular, suppressing <i>EXT1</i> in mouse thymocytes causes developmental dysfunctions associated with the ER network extension. Last, our data illuminate the physical and functional aspects of the ER proteome-glycome-lipidome structure axis, with implications in biotechnology and medicine.

### Keywords
Human, Glycosylation, Silac, Orbitrap, Microsomes

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
GIGA-Molecular Biology of Diseases-Viral Interactomes Network, Unniversité de Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Claude Twizere
GIGA-Molecular Biology of Diseases-Viral Interactomes Network, Unniversité de Liège, Belgium


