### Accession
PXD034608

### Title
Combined Effects of Multiple Stresses on Pancreatic Human Islet β-Cell Response: New Insights into the Pathways Involved

### Description
This study used multiple common chemical stresses in human islets, mimicking the conditions experienced by dysfunctional β-cells. Proteomic alterations upon exposure of human islets to these stressors were profiled with TMT-based quantitative proteomics and further verified using label-free quantitative proteomics. The differentially expressed proteins under stress conditions were selected for in-depth bioinformatic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Human islets were cultured and treated with variety of chemically unrelated stressors. To evaluate the synergistic effects, we also treated the human islets using each stressor in the presence or absence of high glucose. Following these treatment effects, we applied a peptide level isobaric labeling-based quantitative proteomics strategy to accurately profile the proteomic changes in human islets in response to glucotoxicity, inflammation, ER stress, and mitochondria stresses under these variety of cultured conditions.

### Data Protocol
The exported protein abundance values were analyzed and visualized using Perseus software. To ensure high confidence in statistical analysis, data was further filtered. The quantitative protein data was log2 transformed and further normalized using median centering  followed by batch effect correction using ComBat algorism (R software embedded in Perseus). Pearson’s correlation coefficient, histogram distribution and boxplots were performed to evaluate the reproducibility of samples. Two-tailed student’s t-test was applied for comparisons between two conditions (FDR < 0.05, by Permutation-based FDR) to determine if each treatment group was significantly different from the control group. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis was performed to generate a visual heat map. GraphPad Prism (version 9.3.0, GraphPad software, San Diego, CA) were applied for further statistical analysis of results with a p value < 0.05 considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction is an early hallmark of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Among the potentially critical factors that cause &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction are cytokine attack, glucotoxicity, induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or mitochondria stress. However, the exact molecular mechanism underlying &#x3b2;-cell's inability to maintain glucose homeostasis under severe stresses is unknown. This study used proinflammatory cytokines, thapsigargin, and rotenone in the presence of high concentration glucose to mimicking the conditions experienced by dysfunctional &#x3b2;-cells in human pancreatic islets, and profiled the alterations to the islet proteome with TMT-based proteomics. The results were further verified with label-free quantitative proteomics. The differentially expressed proteins under stress conditions reveal that immune related pathways are mostly perturbed by cytokines, while the respiratory electron transport chains and protein processing in ER pathways by rotenone. Thapsigargin together with high glucose induces dramatic increases of proteins in lipid synthesis and peroxisomal protein import pathways, with energy metabolism and vesicle secretion related pathways downregulated. High concentration glucose, on the other hand, alleviated complex I inhibition induced by rotenone. Our results contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular events involved in &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction.

### Keywords
Endoplasmic reticulum (er) stress; mitochondria stress; human islet, Thapsigargin, Tmtpro quantitative proteomics, Cytokine, Glucose, Rotenone

### Affiliations
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina 27402, United States; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina 28081, United States

### Submitter
Mehari Weldemariam

### Lab Head
Dr Qibin Zhang
Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina 27402, United States; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina 28081, United States


