### Accession
PXD023704

### Title
Retinal proteomics of a mouse model of dystroglycanopathies shows changes in different photoreceptor regions

### Description
Mutations in the POMT1 gene, encoding  a protein O-mannosyltransferase essential for alpha-dystroglycan (α-DG) glycosylation, are frequently observed in a group of rare congenital muscular dystrophies, collectively known as dystroglycanopathies. However, it is hitherto unclear whether the effects seen in affected patients can be fully ascribed to α-DG hypoglycosylation. To study this, we here used comparative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and immunofluorescence microscopy, in order to investigate the changes in retina of mice in which Pomt1 is specifically knocked out in photoreceptor cells. Our results demonstrate significant proteomic changes and associated structural alteration in photoreceptor cells of Pomt1 cKO mice. In addition to effects related to impaired α-DG O-mannosylation, we observed morphological impairments in the outer segment that are associated with dysregulation of a relatively understudied POMT1 substrate (KIAA1549), BBSome proteins and retinal stress markers. In conclusion, our study provides new hypotheses to explain the phenotypic changes that are observed in the retina of patients with dystroglycanopathies.

### Sample Protocol
Mice The strategy used to generate the Pomt1 conditional knockout (Pomt1 cKO) mice was published previously 17. In brief, the Cre/loxP system was used to obtaining a mouse carrying homozygous Pomt1 floxed alleles and the Crx-Cre transgene 18. In those animals the Cre recombinase activity was driven by the promoter of the cone-rod homeobox (Crx) gene, encoding a transcription factor essential for the development of photoreceptors. All procedures were performed according to the Spanish and European legislation, and experiments were approved by the Ethics Committees of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid.   Protein Sample Preparation and Dimethyl Isotope Labeling.  Neural retinas (both eyes) of control and Pomt1 cKO mice (6 months old) were dissected from the eyecups and stored at -20°C. Retinal tissues were homogenized in extraction buffer (5% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6; 150 μl per 25 mg of tissue), incubated at 95°C for 4 min, sonicated on ice (20% output; 20 sec), and subjected to BCA protein assays. Dithiothreitol (DTT, 0.5M) was then added to a final concentration of 100 mM and proteins were reduced by incubating the samples at 95°C for 4 min. From each sample, 150-200 μg of total protein was transferred to a 30 kDa filter unit (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min. Then, 200 μl of solution A (8 M UREA in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was added to the filter and samples were centrifuged again. Next, 100 μl of fresh IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in solution A) was added, mixed, and then incubated for 10 min at room temperature. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min, 100 μl solution B (8M UREA in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) was added to the filter, and samples were centrifuged one more time. This step was repeated two times. Then, 40 μl of solution B containing 10 μg of endoLys-C was added to the filter. Following mixing at 600 rpm for 1 min, samples were incubated in a wet chamber (a 50 mL tube containing a few drops of water) overnight at room temperature. The filters were then transferred to a new collection tube, and 120 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10 μg trypsin was added, mixed thoroughly, incubated at room temperature for 4 h, and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min. Finally, 50 µl 0.5 M NaCl was added to the filters to elute the peptides by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min, in a clean collection tube. Subsequently 40 µg of peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Oasis (HLB, Waters Inc.) and subsequently derivatized on column by dimethyl labeling 23 using light (+28 Da) and heavy (+32 Da) labels, respectively. Samples were then combined and stored at -80 °C.  Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography (SCX). For SCX separations 24, the derivatized peptides were fractionated with a homemade SCX column (320 μm inner diameter, 15 cm, polysulfoethyl A 3 μm, Poly LC), run at 4 μl/min. Gradients were run for 10 min at 100% solvent A (100% water/0.1% TFA), after which a linear gradient started to reach 100% solvent B (250 mm KCl, 35% ACN/0.1% TFA) over 15 min, followed by 100% solvent C (500 mM KCl, 35% ACN/0.1% TFA) over the next 15 min. The gradient remained at 100% solvent C for 5 min and then switched again to 100% solvent A. Fifteen 4-μl fractions were collected in vials prefilled with 100 μl 95/3/0.1 water/ACN/FA v/v/v.   NanoLC-MS/MS Each SCX fraction was analyzed via on-line C18-nano-HPLC-MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC (Thermo Scientific), and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 50% solvent B (100/0.1 water/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 20 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a ∼5 μm tip and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in top10-mode. Parameters were resolution 70,000 at an AGC target value of 3 million maximum fill time of 20 ms (full scan), and resolution 17,500 at an AGC target value of 100,000/maximum fill time of 60 ms for MS/MS at an intensity threshold of 17,000. Apex trigger was set to 1 to 10 seconds, and allowed charges were 1-6.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Mus musculus database (52015 entries) using Mascot Version 2.2.07 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: 10 ppm and 20 milli mass units deviation for precursor and fragment masses, respectively; trypsin was set as enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were oxidation (on Met) and acetylation on the protein N-terminus. In addition, light (dimethyl reductive amination) and medium (dimethyl reductive amination d4) dimethyl modifications on Lys and the peptide N-terminus were set as variable modification. All searches and subsequent data analysis, including Percolator 25 and relative quantification, were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Peptide-spectrum matches were adjusted to a 1% FDR. STRING analysis was performed at https://string-db.org/.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the <i>POMT</i>1 gene, encoding a protein <i>O</i>-mannosyltransferase essential for &#x3b1;-dystroglycan (&#x3b1;-DG) glycosylation, are frequently observed in a group of rare congenital muscular dystrophies, collectively known as dystroglycanopathies. However, it is hitherto unclear whether the effects seen in affected patients can be fully ascribed to &#x3b1;-DG hypoglycosylation. To study this, here we used comparative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and immunofluorescence microscopy and investigated the changes in the retina of mice in which <i>Pomt</i>1 is specifically knocked out in photoreceptor cells. Our results demonstrate significant proteomic changes and associated structural alteration in photoreceptor cells of <i>Pomt</i>1 cKO mice. In addition to the effects related to impaired &#x3b1;-DG <i>O</i>-mannosylation, we observed morphological alterations in the outer segment that are associated with dysregulation of a relatively understudied POMT1 substrate (KIAA1549), BBSome proteins, and retinal stress markers. In conclusion, our study provides new hypotheses to explain the phenotypic changes that are observed in the retina of patients with dystroglycanopathies.

### Keywords
Photoreceptor, Dystroglycanopathies, Mouse model

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics; Leiden University Medical Center; 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics; Leiden University Medical Center; 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands


