### Accession
PXD022738

### Title
Physiological responses of Aspergills niger challenged with itraconazole

### Description
Aspergillus niger is an opportunistic pathogen commonly found in a variety of indoor and out-door environments. Environmental isolates of A. niger taken from a pig farm were resistant to itraconazole and in-depth investigations were conducted to better understand cellular re-sponses during growth when exposed to an antifungal.       Using a combination of cultivation techniques, antibiotic stress-testing, and label-free pro-teomics, this study has investigated the physiological and metabolic responses of A. niger to differing levels of antifungal stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell suspensions by applying focused ultrasonication. The proteins were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid, followed by an in solution digestion using trypsin, and a desalting using modified stage TIP protocol was applied to all samples.  Tryptic peptides were analysed by an automated LC–ESI–MS/MS. A top 20 method was used to acquire the MS data, an MS1 with an injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 60,000, an MS2 with an injection time of 45 ms and resolution of 15,000, using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and the normalised collision energy was set to 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43), using standard settings and ap-plying the label-free quantification (LFQ) feature. Data were cross-referenced with three data-bases. An in-house constructed proteome from Aspergillus niger isolate-351 and two reference proteomes of Aspergillus niger, An76 (UP000068243) and ATCC 1015 (UP000009038), downloaded from UniProt (accessed 20th of October 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Fungi, Aspergillus, Ergosterol, Triazole, Antifungal, Proteomic

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg East, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg East, Denmark


