### Accession
PXD011268

### Title
Proteomics of psychrotolerant Trichococcus patagoniensis and characterization of the produced exopolysaccharides as inulin

### Description
The psychrotolerant Trichococcus patagoniensis was previously reported to produce exopolysaccharides (EPS) that covers the cells, when grown at a low temperature. Although, T. patagoniensis has an optimal growth at 30 ºC, it still can grow at -5 ºC. This capability of T. patagoniensis to grow at subzero temperatures is expected to be reflected in the proteome, membrane lipid composition and/or EPS production. This study aimed to get insight into the cold adaptation mechanisms of T. patagoniensis. We compared the proteomes of cells grown at 0 and 30 ºC and the EPS that is formed.

### Sample Protocol
Trichococcus patagoniensis (DSM 18806T) was grown in quadruplicates at temperatures of 30˚C and 0˚C. Washed cells were lysed with French Press. 40 µg Protein, dissolved in SDS gel loading buffer, was loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and stained with Coomassie PageBlue. Proteins were reduced, and carbamidomethylated and each sample was divided into 4 slices which were cut and digested with trypsin. Peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Syntrophic anaerobic consortia comprised of fatty acid-degrading bacteria and hydrogen/formate-scavenging methanogenic archaea are of central importance for balanced and resilient natural and manufactured ecosystems: anoxic sediments, soils, and wastewater treatment bioreactors. Previously published studies investigated interaction between the syntrophic bi-cultures, but little information is available on the influence of fermentative bacteria on syntrophic fatty acid oxidation, even though fermentative organisms are always present together with syntrophic partners in the above-mentioned ecosystems. Here, we present experimental observations of stimulated butyrate oxidation and methane generation by a coculture of Syntrophomonas wolfei with any of the following methanogens: Methanospirillum hungatei, Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus, or Methanobacterium formicicum due to the addition of a fermentative Trichococcus flocculiformis strain ES5. The addition of <i>T. flocculiformis</i> ES5 to the syntrophic cocultures led to an increase in the rates of butyrate consumption (120%) and volumetric methane production (150%). Scanning electron microscopy of the most positively affected coculture (S. wolfei, <i>M. hungatei</i>, and <i>T. flocculiformis</i> ES5) revealed a tendency of <i>T. flocculiformis</i> ES5 to aggregate with the syntrophic partners. Analysis of coculture's proteome with or without addition of the fermentative bacterium points to a potential link with signal transducing systems of <i>M. hungatei</i>, as well as activation of additional butyryl coenzyme A dehydrogenase and an electron transfer flavoprotein in S. wolfei. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Results from the present study open doors to fascinating research on complex microbial cultures in anaerobic environments (of biotechnological and ecological relevance). Such studies of defined mixed populations are critical to understanding the highly intertwined natural and engineered microbial systems and to developing more reliable and trustable metabolic models. By investigating the existing cultured microbial consortia, like the ones described here, we can acquire knowledge on microbial interactions that go beyond "who feeds whom" relations but yet benefit the parties involved. Transfer of signaling compounds and stimulation of gene expression are examples of indirect influence that members of mixed communities can exert on each other. Understanding such microbial relationships will enable development of new sustainable biotechnologies with mixed microbial cocultures and contribute to the general understanding of the complex natural microbial interactions.

### Keywords
Psychrophilic, Cold-adaption, Genomics, Lipids, Glucose, Cold-shock, Sub-zero

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


