### Accession
PXD027582

### Title
Absence of COVID-19-associated Changes in Coagulation and Thrombosis in the Ferret Model

### Description
Many patients who are diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) suffer from venous thromboembolic complications despite the use of stringent anticoagulant prophylaxis. Studies on the exact mechanism(s) underlying thrombosis in COVID-19 are limited as animal models commonly used to study venous thrombosis pathophysiology (i.e. rats and mice) are naturally not susceptible to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Ferrets are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, successfully used to study virus transmission, and were previously used to study activation of coagulation and thrombosis during influenza virus infection. Here, we used plasma and lung material from SARS-CoV-2-inoculated ferrets to explore their use in studying COVID-19-associated changes in coagulation and thrombosis. Lungs of ferrets inoculated intranasally with SARS-CoV-2 demonstrated alveolar septa that were mildly expanded by macrophages, and diffuse interstitial histiocytic pneumonia. However, no macroscopical or microscopical evidence of vascular thrombosis in the lungs of SARS-CoV-2-inoculated ferrets was found. Longitudinal plasma profiling using a mass spectrometry-based approach revealed minor differences in plasma protein profiles in SARS-CoV-2-inoculated ferrets up to 2 weeks post-infection. Apart from fibrinogen, the majority of plasma coagulation factors were stable and demonstrated a low coefficient of variation. We conclude that while ferrets are an essential and well-suited animal model to study SARS-CoV-2 transmission, their use to study SARS-CoV-2-related changes relevant to thrombotic disease is limited.

### Sample Protocol
To permit plasma protein analysis outside BSL3 facilities, -80 °C stored and potentially hazardous plasma from virus infected ferrets was heat-inactivated (HI) at 56 °C for 1 hour and centrifuged 10 minutes at 2,500rpm. 10 µg HI-plasma protein was denatured, reduced and alkylated using 10 μl 1% Zwittergent 3-12 (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), 10 mM Tris(2-choloroethyl) phosphate (ThermoFisher, USA) and 40 mM Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). Proteins were digested overnight at 20°C using 250 ng MS-grade trypsin (Promega). Peptides were purified using C18 cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eluate was dried using a SpeedVac (Eppendorf), resuspended in 12μl 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid.  Tryptic peptides were analysed with Orbitrap Fusion (human samples) or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (ferret samples) mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) via a nano electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher). Acquisition was previously described for Orbitrap Fusion, with the exception of precursor scan window of 300 to 1600 m/z and ion count of 4 x105. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid method was comparable, with following modifications. Buffer A was composed of 0.1 % formic acid, buffer B of 0.1 % formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-27.5% (22-122 min) and 27.5-40% (122-132 min), followed by a 5-minute wash to 95 % and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4.0×105 ion count target. MS/MS was performed with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30%, and rapid scans in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3.0x104 and the max injection time was 20ms. Only precursors with charge states 2–4 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS files were acquired with XCalibur software (ThermoFisher) and processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10. Peptides were searched against the Mustela putorius furo (June 2021) or homo sapiens (February 2019) Uniprot database. Standard settings with the additional options match between runs. Output files were loaded in R 4.0.3. Proteins were filtered by “reverse” and “only identified by side” and LFQ-intensities were log2 transformed. Statistical significance was determined using the limma-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid-19, Proteomics, Ferrets, Mass spectrometry, Thrombosis

### Affiliations
Sanquin Reserach
Lab head

### Submitter
iris Kreft

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Lab head


