### Accession
PXD039218

### Title
Examining the Effect of Notocactus ottonis Cold Vacuum Isolated Cell Extract on Hair Growth

### Description
The biological and psychological importance of hair is recognized worldwide. Molecules that can promote the activation of hair follicle stem cells and initiation of the growth phase have been the subject of much research. Clarifying how hair regeneration is regulated may help to provide hair loss treatments, including cosmetic and even psychological interventions. This study focuses on the hair-growing effects of a cell extract (CE) obtained from the cactus Notocactus ottonis by a cold vacuum extraction protocol, with the aim of investigating its hair-growing effects and relevant mechanisms and potential factors therein. In an experiment using female C57BL/6 mice, a vehicle control group (VC: propylene glycol : ethanol : water), a positive control group (MXD : 3% minoxidil), and an experimental group (N-CE: 10% Notocactus ottonis CE) were applied topically to the backs of mice. Results showed that 3% MXD and 10% N-CE were more effective in promoting hair growth than the VC. Furthermore, an increase in the number of hair follicles was observed with 10% N-CE CE in hematoxylin-eosin-stained skin tissue. We also examined the metabolite composition of the N-CE. Additionally, the whole genome DNA microarray and total protein profiling was carried out on the skin samples to suggest molecular factors underlying the hair-promoting effects of N-CE. This study raises the possibility of using the newly described Notocactus ottonis cell extract as a hair-growth promoting agent.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5). After sonication of the sample for 3 min and heating at 99°C for 30 min, denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30-kDa spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5) to a final volume of 300 μL. The buffer was washed and exchanged three times using 300 μL of UA buffer by centrifugation at 14,000 g for removal of SDS. After removing SDS from the samples, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through the addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was exchanged with UA buffer to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) in a spin filter unit. The protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 50 mM TEAB buffer containing 5% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37°C overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. The peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Moreover, we performed further sample preparation including peptides labeling and fractionation for MS analysis. TMT labeling of digest peptides was performed and followed by the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, each TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in 120 μL of anhydrous ACN, of which 25 μL was added to each channel of samples. Prior to incubation each sample sets, additional ACN was added as 30% of final concentration. After incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Finally, combined samples at equal amounts across all samples and lyophilized the sample to near dryness and subjected to the desalting procedure. The pooled TMT-labeled peptides were desalted using the HLB OASIS column according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Consequently, dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Prior to load the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptides were loaded and 12 fractions were subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution containing 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 35, 41, 44, 60, 80, and 100% ACN as described previously. Finally, the 12 fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80℃ until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) was used to apply for a database search. All the three technical replicates of matured and seed filling stage samples were cross-referenced against the Rat (Rattus norvegicus) and Mouse (Mus musculus) database (36,180 and 86,074 entries, respectively, https:// https://www.uniprot.org/). TMT data processing of two different data was performed using default precursor mass tolerances set by the Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Reporter mass tolerance has to set the minimum as 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter precursor ion fraction (PIF) was set as 0.5. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.6.17.0). The normalization of reporter ion intensities followed by the IRS methods. Briefly, we employed the multiple normalizations through Bioconductor of R program in which first sample loading (SL) normalization among the samples was conducted for corrections of sample loading errors using calculating by mean from sum value of each column and second internal reference scaling (IRS) method was applied among the technical replicates represented by separate MS runs. Missing values imputation was carried out from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8) using Perseus software. Multiple Sample test controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.5-fold change).

### Publication Abstract
The biological and psychological importance of hair is recognized worldwide. Molecules that can promote the activation of hair follicle stem cells and the initiation of the growth phase have been subjects of research. Clarifying how hair regeneration is regulated may help to provide hair loss treatments, including cosmetic and even psychological interventions. We examined the hair-growing effects of a cell extract (CE) obtained from cactus <i>Notocactus ottonis</i> by the cold vacuum extraction protocol, by investigating its hair-growing effects, relevant mechanisms, and potential factors therein. Using male C57BL/6 mice, vehicle control (VC: propylene glycol: ethanol: water), MXD (minoxidil, positive control), and <i>N. ottonis</i> CE (N-CE, experimental) were applied topically to the backs of mice. The results showed that MXD and N-CE were more effective in promoting hair growth than VC. An increase in number of hair follicles was observed with N-CE in hematoxylin-eosin-stained skin tissue. The metabolite composition of N-CE revealed the presence of growth-promoting factors. Using mouse back whole-skin tissue samples, whole-genome DNA microarray (4 &#xd7; 44 K, Agilent) and proteomics (TMT-based liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analyses were carried out, suggesting the molecular factors underlying hair-promoting effects of N-CE. This study raises the possibility of using the newly described <i>N. ottonis</i> CE as a hair-growth-promoting agent.

### Keywords
Animal model, Notocactus ottonis, Cold vacuum extraction, Cactus, Hair growth

### Affiliations
Institute of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8574, Ibaraki, Japan
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba

### Submitter
Randeep Rakwal

### Lab Head
Dr Randeep Rakwal
Institute of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8574, Ibaraki, Japan


