### Accession
PXD042224

### Title
Quantitative ChIP-MS analysis of histone modifications present on H3K4me1- and H3K4me3-enriched mono-nucleosomes purified from crosslinked IMR-90 cells

### Description
The INO80 complex is a chromatin remodeler that regulates DNA replication, repair, and transcription. Although the INO80 complex plays a crucial role in various chromatin-associated processes, the mechanism of its recruitment to specific genomic loci is not well understood. Here we used a native ChIP-MS approach to quantitatively profile modifications present on nucleosomes co-purified with INO80 from MNAse-digested HeLa chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
IMR90 human fibroblast cells were cultured at 37˚C with 5% CO 2 in DMEM containing 4.5 mg/ml glucose, 10% fetal calf serum, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1% pen/strep, and 1% L-glutamine. Cells were washed three times with PBS and cross-linked on the plate with 1.25 µM EGS and 0.75 µM DSG in PBS for 30 min. at RT. After the first cross-linking reaction, cells were washed twice with PBS and cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde in PBS at RT for 10 min. Cross-linking reactions were quenched by the addition of glycine solution in PBS to a final concentration of 125 mM and incubation at RT for 5 min. Cells were then washed three times with ice-cold PBS, harvested by scraping and pelleted by centrifugation (1,000 g, 5 min., 4°C). Cells were lysed in a hypotonic buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 5 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 ) supplemented with 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors cocktail,10 mM sodium butyrate, and 1mM DTT using a Dounce homogenizer as described previously. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation (3,000g, 5 min., 4°C), washed in hypotonic buffer supplemented with 300 mM NaCl and pelleted again (3,000 g, 5 min., 4°C). Nuclei were resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer (15 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 10% glycerol, 1% SDS) and incubated for 5 min. on ice. Chromatin was pelleted by centrifugation (5,000 g, 5 min., 4°C), washed in a chromatin washing buffer (15 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 300 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% Triton-X-100), pelleted again (5,000 g, 5 min., 4°C), and resuspended in ChIP buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.01% SDS) supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail and 10 mM sodium butyrate. DNA was fragmented to an average size of 150-300 bp by sonication (Qsonica Q800R2, 70% amp, 10 sec “off”, 10 sec “on”, 40 min. active sonication time, 4°C). Chromatin debris was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min., 4°C). 25 µl of supernatant were used for DNA purification to check the average DNA fragment size and another 25 µl supernatant aliquot was transferred to a fresh tube, de-crosslinked as described below, and stored at 4°C until it was later used as an “input” sample for histone PTM analysis to define the average levels of core histone PTMs in bulk chromatin. Approximately 0.2 mg chromatin (as measured by DNA content) was used for each ChIP reaction with the following antibodies: anti-H3K4me1 (Abcam, ab8895), anti-H3K4me3 (Millipore, 17-614), anti-H3 (Active motif, 39163), anti-H4 (Abcam, ab31830). For H3K4me3 ChIP reactions 0.6 mg chromatin was used. The antibody-chromatin mixture was incubated overnight on a rotation wheel (25 rpm) at 4 °C. Antibodies were captured using a 1:1 mixture of protein A and protein G Dynabeads™ (ThermoFisher Scientific); 40 µl of beads mixture were used per ChIP sample. Beads were washed three times with ice-cold ChIP buffer and twice with ice-cold ChIP buffer supplemented with NaCl to a final concentration of 500mM. Antibodies and co-bound chromatin were eluted by boiling the beads in 30 µl of Laemmli sample buffer containing 1% SDS and supplemented with 300 mM NaCl for 10 min. at 95°C. The eluate was transferred to a fresh tube and incubated in a thermomixer at 65°C and 500 rpm for 12 h. For the histone PTM proteomic analysis, eluted proteins as well as the “input“ samples (see above) were resolved on a 4-20% polyacrylamide gel, histone bands were excised, in-gel derivatized, digested with trypsin, and subjected to LC-MS analysis as described below.  Histone proteins were prepared for LC-MS analysis using the hybrid chemical derivatization (Maile et al, 2015) protocol adopted for in-gel sample preparation.   For LC-MS analysis of modified histone proteins the acidified histone peptide digests were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled in-line to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Briefly, samples were automatically loaded onto an in-house packed 2 cm 100 µm ID C18 pre-column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then eluted and separated on an in-house packed Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) analytical column (20 cm x 75 µm ID) using a 35 min. linear gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1,000) and MS/MS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 or 15,000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. Up to twenty most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity. Dynamic exclusion was disabled.

### Data Protocol
For the identification and quantification of histone PTMs, MS raw data files were manually analyzed using Skyline software version 20.1.0.31 6 (MacLean et al. 2010). Briefly, a list of unmodified as well as differentially modified histone H3 and H4 peptides was manually compiled and used to evaluate the modification status of histones in each sample. All lysine residues not bearing acetylation or methylation were considered to be propionylated and all peptide N-termini. The relative quantification for a given peptide was obtained by dividing its quantification by the sum of all quantifications of all peptides sharing the same amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k4me1, Histone ptms, H3k4me3, Chip-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


