### Accession
PXD010768

### Title
Trypanosoma cruzi LC-MSMS - Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiologic agent of Chagas disease, cycles through different life stages characterized by defined molecular traits associated with the proliferative or differentiation state

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi, the etiologic agent of Chagas disease, cycles through different life stages characterized by defined molecular traits associated with the proliferative or differentiation state. In particular, T. cruzi epimastigotes are the replicative forms that colonize the intestine of the Triatomine insect vector before entering the stationary phase that is crucial for differentiation into metacyclic trypomastigotes, which are the infective forms of mammalian hosts. The transition from proliferative exponential phase to quiescent stationary phase represents an important step that recapitulates the early molecular events of metacyclogenesis, opening new possibilities for understanding this process. In this study, we report a quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis of the T. cruzi epimastigote in the exponential and stationary growth phases. More than 3000 proteins were detected and quantified, highlighting the regulation of proteins involved in different subcellular compartments. Ribosomal proteins were upregulated in the exponential phase, supporting the higher replication rate of this growth phase. Autophagy-related proteins were upregulated in the stationary growth phase, indicating the onset of the metacyclogenesis process. Moreover, this study reports the regulation of N-terminally acetylated proteins during growth phase transitioning, adding a new layer of regulation to this process. Taken together, this study reports a proteome-wide rewiring during T. cruzi transit from the replicative exponential phase to the stationary growth phase, which is the preparatory phase for differentiation

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on an EASY-Spray PepMap® 50 cm × 75 um C18 Column using an Easy nLC1000 nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) gradient was 5–25% solvent B (A 0.1% formic acid; B 100% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific); the maximum total cycle time was confined to 3 s. The most intense precursors selected from the FT MS1 full scan (resolution 120,000 full width at half-maximum (FWHM) @ m/z 200) were quadrupole-isolated and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) and detected in the dual-pressure linear ion trap (LIT) with 30 s normalized collision energy. The MS1 scan range was between 380–1500 m/z, the ion count target was set to 2×105, the MS2 ion count target was set to 1×104, and the max injection time was 50 ms and 35 ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 10 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Two liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) experiments were performed for each biological replicates of the two life cycle stages of T. cruzi

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 [22] for identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins and peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against the combined Uniprot T. cruzi CL Brener (downloaded, February 2018; 19,244 entries) and common contaminants protein database with a mass tolerance level of 4.5 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.0215 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da), deamidation NQ (+ 0.9840 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.0105 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues. The match between runs feature of MaxQuant, which enables peptide identifications between samples based on their accurate mass and retention time, was applied with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. All of the identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% [23–25].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma cruzi; metacyclogenesis; exponential and stationary phases; quantitative proteomics; gim5a; n-acetyltransferases; protein n-terminal acetylation; autophagy

### Affiliations
Universidade de São Paulo
Glycoproteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Universidade of Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Simon Mule

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Mule
Glycoproteomics Laboratory, Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Universidade of Sao Paulo


