### Accession
PXD018779

### Title
Label-Free Proteomics Profiling of Nanovesicles Isolated from Cultured Salivary Glands Isolated from Partially-Fed Adult Female Ixodes scapularis

### Description
Ticks are ectoparasites that have co-evolved with their hosts for millions of years. Unlike other blood-feeders, hard ticks take several days to complete a blood-meal, which makes them especially susceptible to the detection by host immune responses. To overcome this, ticks have developed a vast array of salivary effectors with immune modulatory properties. These effectors not only benefit tick survival but also influence pathogen transmission. We have characterized the extracellular vesicle protein cargo secreted within tick saliva. Extracellular vesicles were purified through density gradient from salivary gland cultures dissected from partially fed adult female Ixodes scapularis. Molecules present in the vesicles were then characterized using label-free proteomics. In this protein dataset, we have identified several tick immune modulatory proteins. This dataset demonstrates that arthropods secrete extracellular vesicles for the translocation of effectors during blood-feeding.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary nanovesicles were purified from ex vivo salivary gland cultures from partially engorged I. scapularis adult females. Partially fed adult females ticks were dissected 1-2 days post feeding upon New Zealand white Rabbits.  Salivary glands were dissected out, cultured in 24-well cell culture plates, and allowed to secrete vesicles for 24 hours. Nanovesicles were concentrated in L15C300 vesicle-free media using a 300 kDa Vivaspin500 filter, followed by a sucrose gradient purification. These vesicles were then washed with PBS and ultracentrifuged for 70 minutes at 24,000 RPM at 4⁰C. Nanovesicles were then resuspended in RIPA buffer for fractionation by SDS-PAGE and in gel trypsin digest. Nanovesicle pellets derived from two independent experiments were processed for proteomic analysis after fractionation on a 4% to 12% gradient NuPAGE™ Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). Gel was stained with Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry Kit (Pierce) and pieces of the gel were cut out and de-stained and washed according to the kit’s protocol. Gel pieces were reduced at 55°C for 1 hour with 20 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and alkylated for 50 minutes at room temperature in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Proteins were digested with trypsin and Lys-C mix (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Following digestion, samples were evaporated to 100ul and desalted and concentrated with a C18 ZipTip (Millipore).  The tryptic peptides were further sequenced and analyzed by nanoLC–ESI–MS/MS using Q Exactive quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The Q Exactive quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer was coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source.  Peptides were separated on a C18 analytical column (100 µm internal diameter, x 20 cm length) packed with 2.7 µm Phenomenex Cortecs particles.  The solution of peptides was equilibrated with 3 µL 5% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, before being separated using optimized 180 min linear gradients employing 2% to 32% acetonitrile in a buffer with 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 400nL/min.   The LC mobile phase solvents and the sample dilutions contained 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile (Buffer B) (Optima™ LC/MS, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).   Data acquisition was performed using the instrument provided Xcalibur™ (version 3.0) software. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion ionization and data–dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full MS scans were obtained with a range of m/z 300 to 2000, at a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and a target value of 1.00E+06 with the maximum injection time of 50 ms.  HCD collision was performed on the 15 most significant peaks, and tandem mass spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00E+05 with the maximum injection time of 110 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 20s. The normalized collision energy was optimized for 32-34%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were “de novo” sequenced and assigned with protein ID using Peaks 8.5/X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the “Ixodes scapularis” in SwissProt database (January 2018; 21974 entries and updated December 2020 TrEMBL 62856 entries (38 reviewed by SwissProt). The following search parameters were applied for protein ID analysis:  trypsin, Lys-C, as restriction enzymes and two allowed missed cleavages at both peptides ends.  For the data acquired on QEHF, the parent mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS 8.5/X+ as a fixed modification. Methionine, histidine, and tryptophan oxidations (+15.99 on MHW), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98), and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications.   To account for the possible redox stress induced post-translational modifications during ticks feeding we further used additional variable modification: Lys->Allysine (-1.03; K);  Lys->AminoadipicAcid (+14.96; K);  Amino (Y) (+15.01, Y); Trp->Oxolactone (W) (+13.98, W);  Pro->Pyrrolidone (P) (-27.99; P);  Pro->Pyrrolidinone (P) (-30.01; P);  Arg->GluSA (-43.05; R);  Dehydrated 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE-Delta:H(2)O(H)) (+138.21, C,H,K); reduced 4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE+Delta:H(2) (H)) (+158.13, C,H,K);  HNE (+156.12, C,H,K); 4-Oxononenal (ONE) (4-ONE) (+154.10, C,H,K); dehydrated 4-Oxononenal Michael adduct (4-ONE+Delta:H(-2)O(-1)) (+136.09; C,H,K); Carboxymethylation (CML, CMA) (+58.005; K, R);  Carboxyethylation (CEL) (+72.021; K, R). All MS data were first validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS 8.5/X+ (which uses the decoy fusion method). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be assigned a confidence score (-10lgP)>20 and (-10lgP)>20 for peptides (corresponding to p-values<0.01).  The FDR for proteins was further adjusted to less than 3% after removing contaminants like keratins and allowing a minimum of 1 peptide per identified protein.  An independent validation of the MS/MS-based peptides and protein identification was performed with the Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.2 and 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc.) using the compatible “.mzid” files of each sample exported from PEAKS versions 8.5 and X+.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.   These settings ensured the attained 0.13% Decoy FDR for peptides and 0.7% FDR for proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salivary glands ixodes scapularis; label free proteomics; qexactive nano-lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medicine
Department of Microbiology and Immunology University of Maryland School of Medicine USA

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Joao Pedra
Department of Microbiology and Immunology University of Maryland School of Medicine USA


