### Accession
PXD030418

### Title
METTL8 is required for 3-methylcytosine modification in human mitochondrial tRNAs

### Description
A subset of eukaryotic tRNAs is methylated in the anticodon loop to form the 3-methylcytosine (m3C) modification. In mammals, the number of tRNAs containing m3C has expanded to include mitochondrial (mt) tRNA-Ser-UGA and mt-tRNA-Thr-UGU. Whereas the enzymes catalyzing m3C formation in nuclear-encoded cytoplasmic tRNAs have been identified, the proteins responsible for m3C modification in mt-tRNAs are unknown. Here, we show that m3C formation in human mt-tRNAs is dependent upon the Methyltransferase-Like 8 (METTL8) enzyme. We find that METTL8 is a mitochondria-associated protein that interacts with mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase along with mt-tRNAs containing m3C. Human cells deficient in METTL8 exhibit loss of m3C modification in mt-tRNAs but not nuclear-encoded tRNAs. Consistent with the mitochondrial import of METTL8, the formation of m3C in METTL8-deficient cells can be rescued by re-expression of wildtype METTL8 but not by a METTL8 variant lacking the N-terminal mitochondrial localization signal. Notably, METTL8-deficiency in human cells causes alterations in the native migration pattern of mt-tRNA-Ser-UGA suggesting a role for m3C in tRNA folding. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that METTL8 is required for m3C formation in mitochondrial tRNAs and uncover a potential role for m3C modification in mitochondrial tRNA structure.

### Sample Protocol
Vector control or METTL8-Strep stably integrated 293T cell lines were seeded on two 150 × 25 mm tissue culture dishes plates and grown until 70% confluency before cells of each line were combined and harvested for protein extraction. Cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of hypotonic lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT) per 150 × 25 mm tissue culture plate. Cells were kept on ice for 5 min and then underwent a freeze-thaw cycle three times to ensure proper detergent-independent cell lysis. NaCl was then added to the extracts at a concentration of 0.4 M and subsequently incubated on ice for 5 mins and spun down at 14,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. In all, 1 ml of Hypotonic Lysis buffer supplemented with 0.2% NP-40 was added to 500 μl of the supernatant extract. Strep tagged proteins were then purified by incubating whole cell lysates with MagStrep “type3” XT beads (IBA Life Sciences) for five-six hours at 4 °C. Magnetic resin was washed three times in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 0.2 M NaCl, 0.1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM DTT. Proteins were eluted with 1X Buffer BX (IBA LifeSciences) which contains 10 mM D-biotin. To ensure all protein was efficiently eluted off of the magnetic resin, the beads were left rotating in Buffer BX overnight at 4°C. Two one-hour elutions were completed the following day and all elutions were pooled together for each individual sample. The total eluate was then placed on a Spin-X UF 500 μl Centrifugal Concentrator (Corning) and spun at 15,000 × g for approximately 1 hour and 15 min at 4 °C. For protein separation, 15 μl of concentrated eluate was fractionated on a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris Protein gel (ThermoFisher). The gel was fixed overnight in 40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid. The gel was incubated in Sensitizing Solution (30% ethanol, 0.2% sodium thiosulphate and 6.8% sodium acetate) for 30 minutes before being washed three times with water for 5 min each wash. The gel was then stained in 0.25% silver nitrate for 20 min and washed twice more with water for 1 min each time. The bands were visualized by developing in 2.5% sodium carbonate and 0.015% formaldehyde and allowed to incubate until bands appeared. The remainder of each eluate (~65 μl) was loaded on a NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris protein gel and briefly fractionated to yield a single gel band corresponding to the majority of proteins within each purification. Gel bands were excised using a razor blade and subject to in gel reduction, alkylation and trypsin digest. Peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 m beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in water, Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 30% B over 13 minutes, increased to 70% over 2 minutes and held for 3 minutes, then returned to 3% B in 2 minutes and re-equilibrated for 8 minutes, for a total run time of 30 minutes. For peptides isolated from the single gel band corresponding to the majority of proteins, the gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 30% B over 41 minutes, increased to 70% over 3 minutes and held for 4 minutes, then returned to 3% B in 2 minutes and re-equilibrated for 8 minutes, for a total run time of 60 minutes. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with a full MS1 scan followed by 8 data-dependent MS2 scans. The full scan was done over a range of 400-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The isolation width was 1.5 m/z, with an offset of 0.3 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27 was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science), within the Proteome Discoverer software platform (Thermo Fisher), using the SwissProt human database that was downloaded in December of 2015. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 25 mmu. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Percolator was used as the FDR calculator, filtering out peptides which had a q-value greater than 0.01(The et al. 2016). The Mascot scores of individual peptides were calculated as the absolute probability that the observed peptide match is a random event when matching spectra to all the expected spectra of a given proteome(Koenig et al. 2008). The Mascot score of a given peptide is equal to: -10 x Log10(P), where P is the absolute probability. The Mascot scores for individual proteins were then calculated based upon the summation of the individual peptides for all peptides matching a given protein. The LC-MS analysis was performed once with each sample.

### Publication Abstract
A subset of eukaryotic tRNAs is methylated in the anticodon loop, forming 3-methylcytosine (m<sup>3</sup>C) modifications. In mammals, the number of tRNAs containing m<sup>3</sup>C modifications has been expanded to include mitochondrial (mt) tRNA-Ser-UGA and mt-tRNA-Thr-UGU. However, whereas the enzymes catalyzing m<sup>3</sup>C formation in nuclear-encoded tRNAs have been identified, the proteins responsible for m<sup>3</sup>C modification in mt-tRNAs are unknown. Here, we show that m<sup>3</sup>C formation in human mt-tRNAs is dependent upon the methyltransferase-Like 8 (METTL8) enzyme. We find that METTL8 is a mitochondria-associated protein that interacts with mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase, as well as with mt-tRNAs containing m<sup>3</sup>C. We demonstrate that human cells deficient in METTL8 exhibit loss of m<sup>3</sup>C modification in mt-tRNAs, but not nuclear-encoded tRNAs. Consistent with the mitochondrial import of METTL8, the formation of m<sup>3</sup>C in METTL8-deficient cells could be rescued by re-expression of WT METTL8, but not by a METTL8 variant lacking the N-terminal mitochondrial localization signal. Notably, we found METTL8-deficiency in human cells causes alterations in the native migration pattern of mt-tRNA-Ser-UGA, suggesting a role for m<sup>3</sup>C in tRNA folding. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that METTL8 is required for m<sup>3</sup>C formation in mt-tRNAs and uncover a potential function for m<sup>3</sup>C modification in mitochondrial tRNA structure.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Trna, M3c, Trna modification, Mettl8, 3-methylcytosine

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Center for RNA Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, United States of America
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Dragony Fu
Department of Biology, Center for RNA Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, United States of America


