### Accession
PXD042499

### Title
Ezrin inhibition overcomes acquired resistance to vemurafenib in BRAFV600E-mutated colon cancer and melanoma cells in vitro

### Description
In spite of the advancements in targeted therapy for BRAFV600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), the development of resistance to BRAFV600E inhibition limits the response rate and durability of the treatment. Better understanding of the resistance mechanisms to BRAF inhibitors will facilitate the design of novel pharmacological strategies for BRAF-mutated mCRC. The aim of this study was to identify novel protein candidates involved in acquired resistance to BRAFV600E inhibitor vemurafenib in BRAFV600E-mutated colon cancer cells using an integrated proteomics approach. Our study suggests a role of ezrin in acquired resistance to vemurafenib in colon cancer and melanoma cells carrying BRAFV600E mutation and supports further pre-clinical and clinical studies to explore the benefits of combined BRAF inhibitors and actin-targeting drugs as a potential therapeutic approach for BRAFV600E-mutated cancers.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample the volume corresponding to 20 µg of protein was taken and processed usin the single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3). In short, protein purification, digest and peptide clean-up were performed using a KingFisher Flex System and Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles. Samples were diluted with 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 50% ethanol. Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat and peptide elution from the magnetic beads using MilliQ water. The digest solution and water elution were combined and dried to completeness and re-solubilized in MS sample buffer. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Digital PicoView source and coupled to a M-Class UPLC. Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample 2 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) followed by ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. After a 3 min initial hold at 5% B, a gradient from 5 to 24 % B in 80 min and 24 to 36 % B in an additional 10 min was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95 % B and holding 95 % B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode on the top12 most abundant ions using Xcalibur. Full-scan MS spectra (350−1’500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 100’000 or for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursors with an intensity above 4’500 were selected for MS/MS. Ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with 1.2 m/z isolationwindow and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 28 %. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 35’000 and a maximum injectiontime of 54 ms. Charge state screening was enabled, and singly, unassigned charge states and charge states higher than seven were excluded. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, applying a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was se to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design templat, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the advancements in targeted therapy for BRAFV600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC), the development of resistance to BRAFV600E inhibition limits the response rate and durability of the treatment. Better understanding of the resistance mechanisms to BRAF inhibitors will facilitate the design of novel pharmacological strategies for BRAF-mutated mCRC. The aim of this study was to identify novel protein candidates involved in acquired resistance to BRAFV600E inhibitor vemurafenib in BRAFV600E-mutated colon cancer cells using an integrated proteomics approach. Bioinformatic analysis of obtained proteomics data indicated actin-cytoskeleton linker protein ezrin as a highly ranked protein significantly associated with vemurafenib resistance whose overexpression in the resistant cells was additionally confirmed at the gene and protein level. Ezrin inhibition by NSC305787 increased anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of vemurafenib in the resistant cells in an additive manner, which was accompanied by downregulation of CD44 expression and inhibition of AKT/c-Myc activities. We also detected an increased ezrin expression in vemurafenib-resistant melanoma cells harbouring the BRAFV600E mutation. Importantly, ezrin inhibition potentiated anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of vemurafenib in the resistant melanoma cells in a synergistic manner. Altogether, our study suggests a role of ezrin in acquired resistance to vemurafenib in colon cancer and melanoma cells carrying the BRAFV600E mutation and supports further pre-clinical and clinical studies to explore the benefits of combined BRAF inhibitors and actin-targeting drugs as a potential therapeutic approach for BRAFV600E-mutated cancers.

### Keywords
Ezrin inhibitor, Vemurafenib, Nsc305787, Colon cancer, Ezrin, Melanoma, Actin cytoskeleton, Brafv600e, Braf inhibitor

### Affiliations
ETH
Centre for Applied Bioanthropology, Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Mirela Sedic
Centre for Applied Bioanthropology, Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia


