### Accession
PXD034446

### Title
Total protein abundances upon Mcm6 knockdown in the murine CH12 cells

### Description
Chromosomal translocations result from joining of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and frequently cause cancer. Yet, the steps linking DSB formation to DSB ligation remain undeciphered. We report that DNA replication timing (RT) directly regulates lymphomagenic Myc translocations during antibody maturation in B-cells downstream of DSBs and independently of DSB frequency. Depletion of minichromosome-maintenance (MCM) complexes alters replication origin activity, decreases translocations and abrogates global RT. Ablating a single origin at Myc causes an early-to-late RT switch, loss of translocations and reduced nuclear proximity with a translocation partner locus, phenotypes that were reversed by restoring early RT. Disruption of shared early RT also reduced tumorigenic translocations in human leukemic cells. Thus, RT constitutes a new, unprecedented mechanism in translocation biogenesis linking DSB formation to DSB ligation

### Sample Protocol
CH12 cells were infected with shLacZ or shMcm6 and were collected for analysis 4 days after infection. Nuclei were prepared by resuspending cells in cold sucrose buffer (0.32 M sucrose, 3 mM CaCl2, 2 mM Mg-acetate, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.5% NP-40 and 1 mM DTT). Following centrifugation at 700 g and 4°C, the pelleted nuclei were washed in cold sucrose buffer. Nuclei were lysed and subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) mass spectrometric analysis at the IMP/IMBA Protein Chemistry facility. A complete protocol is available upon request.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.383, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). The RAW-files were searched against the created sub-databases called 7SpikeIn-proteins.fasta (7 sequences; 2,933 residues), mouse_uniprot_reference_2020-06-22.fasta (21,963 sequences; 11,719,000 residues).The following search parameters were used: Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, sixplex tandem mass tag® on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Additional high quality filtering by setting a minimum MS Amanda Score of 150 on peptide and PSM level was applied. Proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 2 PSMs in at least 1 sample.

### Publication Abstract
Chromosomal translocations result from the joining of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and frequently cause cancer. However, the steps linking DSB formation to DSB ligation remain undeciphered. We report that DNA replication timing (RT) directly regulates lymphomagenic <i>Myc</i> translocations during antibody maturation in B cells downstream of DSBs and independently of DSB frequency. Depletion of minichromosome maintenance complexes alters replication origin activity, decreases translocations, and deregulates global RT. Ablating a single origin at <i>Myc</i> causes an early-to-late RT switch, loss of translocations, and reduced proximity with the immunoglobulin heavy chain (<i>Igh</i>) gene, its major translocation partner. These phenotypes were reversed by restoring early RT. Disruption of early RT also reduced tumorigenic translocations in human leukemic cells. Thus, RT constitutes a general mechanism in translocation biogenesis linking DSB formation to DSB ligation.

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Mcm6 knockdown, Murine ch12 cells

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter-1, Vienna Biocenter, 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Rushad Rusi Pavri
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter-1, Vienna Biocenter, 1030 Vienna, Austria


