### Accession
PXD002026

### Title
Proteome of microparticles derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected macrophages

### Description
Microparticles (MP) are small membranous particles (100-1000 nm) released under normal steady-state conditions and are thought to provide a communication network between host cells. Previous studies demonstrated that Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) infection of macrophages increased the release of MPs, and these MPs induced a proinflammatory response from uninfected macrophages in vitro and in vivo following their transfer into uninfected mice. To determine how M.tb infection modulates the protein composition of the MPs, and if this contributes to their proinflammatory properties, we compared the proteomes of MPs derived from M.tb-infected (TBinf-MP) and uninfected human THP-1 monocytic cells. MP proteins were analysed by GeLC-MS/MS with spectral counting revealing 68 proteins with statistically significant differential abundances. The 42 proteins increased in abundance in TBinf-MPs included proteins associated with immune function (7), lysosomal/endosomal maturation (4), vesicular formation (12), nucleosome proteins (4) and antigen processing (9). Prominent among these were the type I interferon inducible proteins, ISG15, IFIT1, IFIT2, and IFIT3. Exposure of uninfected THP-1 cells to TBinf-MPs induced increased gene expression of isg15, ifit1, ifit2, and ifit3 and the release of proinflammatory cytokines. These proteins may regulate the proinflammatory potential of the MPs and provide candidate biomarkers for M.tb infection.

### Sample Protocol
Differentiated THP-1 cells were cultured at 2 × 10^7 cells per flask for sufficient yields of MPs. Cells were infected with M. tb H37Rv for 4 h at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 or left uninfected, washed twice to remove extracellular bacteria, cultured for 72 h. Isolation, quantitation and size distribution of MPs were performed according to the established protocol of Walters et al 2013, J. Immunol. Proteins were extracted from MPs by resuspension and lysis in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitors. Protein concentrations of MP samples were estimated by BCA protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 20 µg of protein from M.tb-infected THP-1 cell-derived MPs (TBinf-MP) and uninfected THP-1 cell derived MPs (UI-MP) were separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into 12 individual gel slices of equal size, were reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested overnight at 37oC. Peptide samples were concentrated and desalted using prefabricated microcolumns containing Poros R2 resin (Perseptive Biosystems, Framingham MA). Peptides were subjected to reversed phase LC−MS/MS using either an automated Agilent 1100 nanoflow LC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara CA) coupled to a QSTAR Elite mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems) or an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).  Analysis using the 1100/ QSTAR Elite MS instrumentation setup was conducted on a total of six biological replicates. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.3 mm x 5 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å), washed with buffer A (0.1% v/v formic acid (FA)) and subsequently loaded onto an analytical column (Agilent Zorbax 300SB-C18, 0.1 mm x 150 mm, 3.5 µm, 300 Å pore size). Peptides were eluted over 120 min using a gradient of 5-90% buffer B (0.1% v/v FA, 100% acetonitrile (ACN)) at a nanoflow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoﬂow ESI MS/MS in an information dependent acquisition mode (IDA). MS survey scans were performed over the m/z range of 400-1800 (three scans), with the 3 most intense ions sequentially subjected to MS/MS scans. Further analysis to achieve greater proteomic coverage depth using an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC /LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS setup was performed as follows. Samples were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 pre-column (500 µm x 2 mm, Michrom Bioresources; Auburn, CA, USA) with 2% ACN /0.05% trifluoroacetic acid at 15 µl per min. After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port valve; Dionex) into line with a fritless nano column (75 µm,10 cm) containing C18 media (5 µm, 200 A ̊ Magic; Michrom). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 2% ACN /0.1% formic acid to 36% ACN /0.1% formic acid at 250 nl /min over 30 min. High voltage (2000 V) was applied to low volume tee (Upchurch Scientific) and the column tip positioned, 0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T = 280oC) of an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron; Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Orbitrap operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A survey scan m/z 350–1750 was acquired in the Orbitrap (Resolution=30,000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions) with lockmass enabled. Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>5,000 counts) with charge states >+2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented within the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation with an activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms at a target value of 30,000 ions. M/z ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from QSTAR Elite data using Analyst (version 2.0, Applied Biosystems) or from Orbitrap velos data by Mascot Daemon/extract_msn (Matrix Science, Thermo; London, UK), using the default parameters. All MS/MS data were submitted to Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.0) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) and searched against the SwissProt_2013_09 database (selected for Homo sapiens, 20272 entries), with trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme and a single possible missed cleavage. Fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.20 Da or 0.40 Da, and parent ion tolerances of 0.20 Da or 4 ppm were selected for QSTAR and Orbitrap data respectively. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine and propionamide of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.   Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.0.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds. Mascot identifications required at least ion scores must be greater than both the associated identity scores and 30, 40 and 50 for, doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. X! Tandem identifications required at least -Log(Expect Scores) scores of greater than 4.0. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from gene_association.goa_human (downloaded 08/07/2013) (Ashburner et al, 2000, Nat Genet, 25:25). Spectral counting was performed to determine differentially abundant proteins with the inverted β-binomial test applied to QSTAR-MS data to determine statistical significance for paired data (Pham et al, 2012, Bioinformatics, 28:i596). Only pairs containing count data in both paired members could be included in the test and hence paired data containing a zero count were excluded from the test. Data were filtered for proteins with a fold change > 1.5 or < -1.5 and a p-value < 0.05. Where a protein was uniquely detected in either the infected or uninfected THP-1 derived MP then it was required to have been detected in at least 2 replicates to be considered for further analysis. The additional biological replicate analysed by LTQ Orbitrap-MS was aligned to further corroborate statistically significant results from the QSTAR-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Microparticles (MPs) are small membranous particles (100-1000 nm) released under normal steady-state conditions and are thought to provide a communication network between host cells. Previous studies demonstrated that Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) infection of macrophages increased the release of MPs, and these MPs induced a proinflammatory response from uninfected macrophages in vitro and in vivo following their transfer into uninfected mice. To determine how M. tb infection modulates the protein composition of the MPs, and if this contributes to their proinflammatory properties, we compared the proteomes of MPs derived from M. tb-infected (TBinf-MP) and uninfected human THP-1 monocytic cells. MP proteins were analyzed by GeLC-MS/MS with spectral counting revealing 68 proteins with statistically significant differential abundances. The 42 proteins increased in abundance in TBinf-MPs included proteins associated with immune function (7), lysosomal/endosomal maturation (4), vesicular formation (12), nucleosome proteins (4), and antigen processing (9). Prominent among these were the type I interferon inducible proteins, ISG15, IFIT1, IFIT2, and IFIT3. Exposure of uninfected THP-1 cells to TBinf-MPs induced increased gene expression of isg15, ifit1, ifit2, and ifit3 and the release of proinflammatory cytokines. These proteins may regulate the proinflammatory potential of the MPs and provide candidate biomarkers for M. tb infection.

### Keywords
Gelc/ms, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Microparticle, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Tuberculosis Research Program, Centenary Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
Centenary Institute of Cancer Medicine and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Nathan Hare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Bernadette Saunders
Tuberculosis Research Program, Centenary Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of Medical Sciences, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia


