### Accession
PXD040658

### Title
Profiling of the Cellular Proteome and Phosphoproteome of Klebsiella pneumoniae under Iron Limited and Iron Replete Conditions

### Description
Klebsiella pneumoniae was compared across iron limited and iron replete conditions to assess changes within the cellular proteome and phosphoproteome using quantitative mass spectrometry. These comparative proteomic data provide insight into cellular response to nutrient limitation and how nutrient requirements could be exploited to provide potential antimicrobial targets.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, cell pellets were processed as previously described (10). Briefly, cells were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; final concentration) and proteinase inhibitor and phosSTOP tablets. Cells were lysed using probe sonication (30 s on/ 30 s off in an ice bath, 30% power) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 95°C for 10 min (shaking at 800 rpm), alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature (in the dark), and precipitated overnight in acetone (final concentration, 80%) at -20°C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm for 10 min, resuspended in 8 M urea/ 40 mM HEPES buffer and protein concentration was assessed using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay (12) to confirm concentration of at least 800 µg. Samples were digested overnight at room temperature with 1:50  trypsin/LysC:protein. A 10% aliquot of sample (approx. 80 µg) was collected and stored on ice; the remaining sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment (Thermo Fisher Scientific; cat no A32993) using TiO2 columns as per manufacturer’s instructions to enrich for phosphorylated peptides. Total peptides and phospho-enriched peptides were purified on STop And Go (STAGE) tips (13), 3 µg of peptides was loaded onto evotips (14) according to manufacturer’s instructions, and measured on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer using a 44-mingradient (88-min for total proteome) on a 15 cm PepSep column. Precursor range was set at 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an intensity threshold of 2.5e4. Charge states 2-8 were included.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were processed using MaxQuant v2.2.0.0 (15) (default parameters except as noted below) with the Andromeda search engine (16) against K. pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae K52 serotype (5126 sequences; Dec. 2, 2022) from Uniprot. Modifications for phosphorylation: variable STY and a neutral loss of H3O4P (mass 97.9768950 Da; D and H amino acids); abundance normalized to the total proteome. Modified and unmodified peptides were included for protein quantification using label-free quantification (LFQ) (ratio count set to 1), minimum peptide = 2 and match between runs was enabled (17). The output files were assessed in Perseus v2.0.7.0 (18); data was filtered to remove reverse peptides, peptides only identified by site, potential contaminants, and valid values (proteins present in 3 of 4 replicates in least one condition). Phosphopeptides were filtered for localization probability greater than 75%, statiscal analysis with Student’s t-test, p-value < 0.05; false discovery rate = 0.05; S0=1.For the total proteome dataset, 1,895 proteins were identified (37% of encoded proteome) and 18 phosphorylated proteins were measured (Table 1). Notably, given the acidic phospho-enrichment conditions, which limit phosphor-group identification in positive ion mode on the mass spectrometer, phosphohistidine and phosphoaspartate are underrepresented in the dataset (19–21). Therefore, the extended analysis from the total proteome dataset for DH modifications identified an additional five phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Invadopodia, Protein-protein interactions, Cancer

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E. Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E. Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


