### Accession
PXD024227

### Title
USP32 regulates non-proteolytic LAMTOR1 ubiquitination and Ragulator function

### Description
Ubiquitination is among the most prevalent post-translational modifications regulating a great number of cellular functions, and defects in such processes contribute to many diseases. Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are essential to control the precise outcome of ubiquitin signals. The ubiquitin-specific protease 32 (USP32) differs from all other DUBs as it comprises in addition to its catalytic USP domain and the DUSP domain also multiple EF hands and a C-terminal prenylation site. This unique domain architecture offers various features for the regulation of specific signaling processes by USP32. A SILAC-based proteomic analysis of purified lysosomes revealed an increase in lysosomal hydrolases in organelles isolated from USP32 KO cells as compared to WT cells, suggesting that hydrolases are not sorted correctly to their destination in the absence of USP32.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomal proteome analysis was performed from SILAC labeled U2OS ctrl or USP32KO cells. In brief, lysosomes were purified by density gradient centrifugation (Lysosome Enrichment Kit for Tissues and Cultured Cells, 89839, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The lysosomal fraction was separated on a SDS-PAGE and in-gel protein digest was performed with trypsin. Peptides were concentrated and purified for LC-MS analysis by C18 STAGE tip enrichment. Peptides were loaded with an easy nLC1200 onto a self made 15 cm column filled with 1.7µm C18 particles. The peptides were separated with a 23 minutes gradient from 10 to 38% B (B being 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile and A being 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile in water.). The eluting peptides were directly injected into an Q Exactive HF operating in DDA mode. In brief after a survey scan 60,000 resolution the 15 most abundant precursor ions were fragmented by HCD and the resulting fragments analyzed with 30,000 resolution. Only precursors with charge states 2-7 were taken into account for fragmentation and afterwards dynamically excluded for 20 seconds.  After the gradient, the column was washed with 100% B and reequilibrated  for a total analysis time of 35 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was done with MaxQuant 1.5.1 against the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome database with standard settings and activated SILAC quantification (K8, R10). Differentially abundant proteins (p<0.05) were detected with a One-sided T-Test with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The endosomal-lysosomal system is a series of organelles in the endocytic pathway that executes trafficking and degradation of proteins and lipids and mediates the internalization of nutrients and growth factors to ensure cell survival, growth, and differentiation. Here, we reveal regulatory, non-proteolytic ubiquitin signals in this complex system that are controlled by the enigmatic deubiquitinase USP32. Knockout (KO) of USP32 in primary hTERT-RPE1 cells results among others in hyperubiquitination of the Ragulator complex subunit LAMTOR1. Accumulation of LAMTOR1 ubiquitination impairs its interaction with the vacuolar H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, reduces Ragulator function, and ultimately limits mTORC1 recruitment. Consistently, in USP32 KO cells, less mTOR kinase localizes to lysosomes, mTORC1 activity is decreased, and autophagy is induced. Furthermore, we demonstrate that depletion of USP32 homolog CYK-3 in Caenorhabditis elegans results in mTOR inhibition and autophagy induction. In summary, we identify a control mechanism of the mTORC1 activation cascade at lysosomes via USP32-regulated LAMTOR1 ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lysosomes

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Bremm
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


