### Accession
PXD019415

### Title
Interactome of NOP58 WT vs KA_AR mutant

### Description
The PAQosome is composed of the HSP90/R2TP chaperone and a prefoldin-like module. It promotes the biogenesis of cellular machineries but it is unclear how it discriminates closely related client proteins. Among the main PAQosome clients are C/D snoRNPs and in particular their core protein NOP58. Using NOP58 mutants and proteomic experiments, we identify different assembly intermediates and show that C12ORF45, which we rename NOPCHAP1, acts as a bridge between NOP58 and PAQosome. NOPCHAP1 makes direct physical interactions with the CC-NOP domain of NOP58 and the RUVBL1/RUVBL2 AAA+ ATPases. Interestingly, NOPCHAP1 binds several RUVBL1/2 mutants except those unable to hydrolyze ATP. Moreover, while it robustly binds both yeast and human NOP58, it makes only weak interactions with NOP56 and PRPF31, two other closely related CC-NOP proteins. Transient expression of NOP58, but not NOP56 or PRPF31, is decreased in NOPCHAP1 KO cells. We propose that NOPCHAP1 is a client-loading PAQosome cofactor that select NOP58 to promote box C/D snoRNP assembly.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa Flp-In cells were grown for 15 days in each isotopically labeled media (CIL/Eurisotop), to ensure complete incorporation of isotopically labeled arginine and lysine (light label (R0K0, L) or semi-heavy label L-Lysine-2HCl (2H4, 96–98%)/L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 99%) (R6K4, M) or L-Lysine-2HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N2, 99%)/L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 99%; 15N4, 99%) heavy label (R10K8, H) (percentages represent the isotopic purity of the labeled amino acids). Eight 15-cm diameter plates were used per SILAC condition. Cells were rinsed with PBS, trypsinized and cryogrinded (Domanski et al., 2012) and powder was resuspended in HNT lysis buffer (20?mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150?mM NaCl, 0.5% triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche). Extracts were incubated 20?min at 4?°C and clarified by centrifugation for 10?min at 20,000?x g. For RNase treated extract, RNase A was added in the lysis buffer at 10 mg/mL final concentration before incubation. For all IP experiments, extracts were pre-cleared by incubation with Protein G Sepharose beads (GE healthcare) for 1?hr at 4°C. The control was extracted from the SILAC light condition prepared from parental HeLa cells that did not express the GFP fusion. Each extract was then incubated with 50?µL of GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) for 1.5 hr at 4°C, washed 5 times with HNT buffer, and beads from the different isotopic conditions were finally pooled. Bound proteins were eluted by adding 1% SDS to the beads and boiling for 10?min. Proteomic analysis was performed as previously described (Maurizy et al., 2018). Reduction and alkylation were performed on the eluate with DTT (BDH 443553B, 10 mM) for 2 min at 95 °C followed by iodoacetamide treatment (Sigma I1149, 50 mM) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and in gel-digested with trypsin in 20 mM NH4HCO3 (Trypsin Gold, Promega V5280). Ten slices were cut, and extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution before being analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to Fourier transform tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-FT-MS/MS) using a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap precolumn (0.3 mm 10 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient consisting of 2–40% buffer B (B=99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 3–33 min) and 40–80% B (33–34 min) was used to separate peptides at 300 nL/min from a Pepmap capillary reversed-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired using a top-20 collision-induced dissociation (CID) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The Orbitrap was programmed to perform a FT 400–1,400 Th mass scan (60,000 resolution) with the top 20 ions in intensity selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) datadependent acquisition (DDA) MS/MS in the LTQ. FT spectra were internally calibrated using a single lock mass (445.1200 Th). Target ion numbers were 500,000 for FT full scan on the Orbitrap and 10,000 MSn on the LTQ. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed using the program MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8;http://www. maxquant.org/). Few parameters were not default: database: human reference proteome set (canonical isoforms downloaded from Expasy on May 29th 2017); enzyme specificity trypsin/P; variable modifications: methionine oxidation and protein N-Acetylation; Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation; MS/ MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; False Discovery Rate (FDR): 1%. In addition to the FDR, proteins were considered to be identified if they had at least two peptides including one unique/Razor peptide and they were considered quantified if they had at least one quantified SILAC pairs. Proteins labeled as REV (non-real proteins from the reverse database) and CONT (contaminants) were automatically discarded, as well as proteins that did not show any SILAC M/L, H/L and H/M ratio. B Significance calculation were done with the software Perseus v1.4.2, as previously described 57 to highlight statistically significant protein ratios (pvalue < 0.05)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apms; silac; lc-msms

### Affiliations
IGF, CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France
IGMM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Franck Vandermoere

### Lab Head
Dr Edouard Bertrand
IGMM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France


