### Accession
PXD016634

### Title
ADAMTSL5 is an epigenetically activated oncogene conferring tumorigenic properties in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
The remarkable molecular heterogeneity in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) continues to challenge development of effective treatments and biomarkers. Here we report that the gene encoding a secreted glycoprotein, ADAMTSL5, is overexpressed and displays hypermethylated CpG islands in its gene body region in a clinically relevant mouse genetic model of HCC as well as in a significant proportion of human HCC patients. Immunohistological analysis of human HCCs revealed strong ADAMTSL5 immunostaining in tumour cells and histiocytes, in contrast to normal liver. Functional targeting of ADAMTSL5 in oncogenesis using shRNA interfered with tumorigenic properties of HCC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, ADAMTSL5 overexpression conferred tumorigenic capability to genetically sensitized, non-transformed hepatocytes in nude mice. Mechanistically, ADAMTSL5 abrogation led to reduction of several oncogenic inputs, including the receptor tyrosine kinases MET, EGFR, PDGFRβ, IGF1Rβ, and FGFR4, suggesting it as a master regulator of HCC tumorigenicity when overexpressed.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and secretome preparation for mass spectrometry analysis. Alb-R26Met HCC cell lines (HCC13) were established from tumours dissected from Alb-R26Met mice, cut into approximately 1-mm pieces and cells were dissociated using collagenase type II, and DNase I. Cells were then resuspended in William’s E medium with 10% foetal calf serum, penicillin-streptomycin, glutamine, fungizone, glucose (0.25%), dexamethasone (0.4 µg/ml), insulin (10 µg/ml), EGF (0.02 µg/ml), and HGF (0.01 µg/ml;). Downregulation of Adamtsl5 was carried out using shRNA (sh3: TRCN0000033236), by lentiviral infection. After 1 week of puromycin selection, knockdown in resistant clones was verified by RT-qPCR and western blot. Clone sh3.7 and shControl cells were used for secretome studies. Conditioned medium for secretome studies was obtained from Alb-R26Met HCC clone sh3.7 and shControl cells after 24hr culture in medium without serum. 10 ml of each conditioned medium for secretome analysis was collected and cell debris removed by centrifugation (10000g, 20min) before storage of the supernatant at -80°C. 5 paired replicates were prepared at different dates. After thawing, secretomes were then dialyzed against 50mM ammonium bicarbonate using Amicon® Ultra 15ml Centrifugal Filters, 3kDa cut-off (Millipore) and concentrated to 1.5 ml according to manufacturer instructions. 10% of the total volume was dried using a vacuum concentrator and set aside for SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining. The remaining 90% was dried and protein pellets were resuspended in NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies). A volume of protein corresponding to 20% of each initial medium volume was loaded on Novex NuPAGE Bis-Tris acryl acrylamide 4–12% gels (Life Technologies). Sample were submitted to electrophoresis for 6min at 80V using a 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS)-based running buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in order to stack proteins on the top of the gel. Proteins were stained with Imperial blue staining (Life Technologies) overnight and extensively destained with water. Protein bands corresponding to whole sample were then excised with a scalpel and prepared for liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated using iodoacetamide and digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) before mass spectrometry analysis according to1. Protein bands corresponding to whole sample were then excised with a scalpel and prepared for liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated in presence of iodoacetamide and digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) before mass spectrometry analysis according to1. Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein identification and quantification was performed using liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer in-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Each secretome (5 biological replicates for HCCshAdamtsl5 clone sh3.7 and for HCCshControl) was injected three times in order to produce data from three technical replicates of each biological replicate. First, peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2cm × 100µm I.D, 100Å pore size, 5µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50cm × 75µm I.D, 100Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300nL/min flow rate and 40°C. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two-step linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 90min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 20min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 2.2kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. The Advanced Peak Determination (APD) algorithm was used for real time determination of charges states and monoisotopic peaks in complexe MS spectra. The mass spectrometer was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired in the range m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 200 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0.105 with a 50 ms maximum injection time. The most abundant precursor ions were selected and collision induced dissociation fragmentation at 35% was performed and analysed in the ion trap using the “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable time” option with a dynamic maximum injection time. Charge state screening was enabled to include precursors with 2 and 7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and duration of 60s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm2 (MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4)3. The 30 LC-MS raw acquisitions were processed by the Andromeda search engine4. Spectra were searched against the Mouse database (UniProt Proteome reference, date 2019.12; 17021 entries). This database was supplemented with a set of 245 proteins that are commonly found as contaminants and 238 major proteins present in calf serum used for cell culture. The following parameters were used for this search: 1) trypsin cleavage authorization before prolines; 2) authorization of two failed cleavages; 3) fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da), variable modification of methionines by oxidation (+15.99491), and N-terminal proteins by acetylation (+42.0116); 4) authorization of 5 modifications per peptide; 5) minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.1.3) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 75% of the samples in one or more condition. Missing values were imputed by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given protein abundance differed specifically or not, a two-sample t-test was done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.001 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 25. References. 1 Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O. & Mann, M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68, 850-858, doi:10.1021/ac950914h (1996). 2 Cox, J. et al. Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 13, 2513-2526, doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.031591 (2014). 3 Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology 26, 1367-1372, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 (2008). 4 Cox, J. et al. Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res 10, 1794-1805, doi:10.1021/pr101065j (2011). 5 Tusher, V. G., Tibshirani, R. & Chu, G. Significance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing radiation response (vol 98, pg 5116, 2001). P Natl Acad Sci USA 98, 10515-10515 (2001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Damtsl5; hepatocellular carcinoma, Hepatocellular carcinoma; oncogene; receptor tyrosine kinase; extracellular matrix; proteoglycans ., Secretome

### Affiliations
Marseille proteomic,  Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Audebert Stephane
Marseille proteomic,  Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France


