### Accession
PXD005698

### Title
Phosphoproteomics Profiling of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells Treated with a Novel Phosphatase Activator

### Description
Activation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a promising anti-cancer therapeutic strategy given this tumor suppressor’s ability to coordinately downregulate multiple pathways involved with growth and proliferation.Here, we studied the global signaling response signature of a novel small molecule activator of PP2A (SMAP). Through an exploration of the global phosphoproteomicalterations of two KRAS mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (A549 and H358)in the context of PP2A activation, we sought to identify the pathway-level perturbations and uncover candidate proteins that are potentially key targets of SMAP regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from the previous step were pulse sonicated in 2% SDS, 50mM Tris buffer, pH 8 over ice and in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich). The samples were centrifuged, and the supernatants were reduced (25mM DTT for 1 hour at 37C), alkylated (25mM iodoacetamide for 30min at room temperature in the dark), and cleared of SDS using the previously-published FASP protocol (29). The protein concentration in the cleaned supernatant was then measured using a protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Eight hundred micrograms of protein per sample was then digested with Lys-C for 1 hour at 37°C, followed by Trypsin overnight at 37°C (1:20 enzyme (g) to protein (g) ratio for each enzyme; final mixture concentrations were adjusted to 2M Urea and 50mM Tris buffer, pH 8). Digested peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Oasis 1cc  HLB. Waters), eluted in 0.1% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile, and lyophilized for 1 hour. Samples were reconstituted with buffer containing 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 60% acetonitrile, and 13% lactic acid. Subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a titanium dioxide spin tips (Thermo Fisher, IL). Samples were eluted using 1.5% ammonium hydroxide and concentrated before combined with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in HPLC grade water.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into Rosetta Elucidator™ (Rosetta, 3.3.0.1.SP.25). The aligned and normalized peaks were annotated at the feature level by generating database search files (*.dta).  The files were searched by Mascot (version 2.3.01) against the human Universal Protein Resources (UniProt) (20,233 sequences) database using the following search parameters: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 10 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications; oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modification; and 1 missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a promising anticancer therapeutic strategy, as this tumor suppressor has the ability to coordinately downregulate multiple pathways involved in the regulation of cellular growth and proliferation. In order to understand the systems-level perturbations mediated by PP2A activation, we carried out mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomic analysis of two KRAS mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (A549 and H358) treated with a novel small molecule activator of PP2A (SMAP). Overall, this permitted quantification of differential signaling across over 1600 phosphoproteins and 3000 phosphosites. Kinase activity assessment and pathway enrichment implicate collective downregulation of RAS and cell cycle kinases in the case of both cell lines upon PP2A activation. However, the effects on RAS-related signaling are attenuated for A549 compared to H358, while the effects on cell cycle-related kinases are noticeably more prominent in A549. Network-based analyses and validation experiments confirm these detailed differences in signaling. These studies reveal the power of phosphoproteomics studies, coupled to computational systems biology, to elucidate global patterns of phosphatase activation and understand the variations in response to PP2A activation across genetically similar NSCLC cell lines.

### Keywords
Signaling response signatures, Non-small cell lung cancer, Functional network analysis, Phosphatase activation, Label-free phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Director, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics Charles W. and Iona A. Mathias Professor of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Danica Wiredja

### Lab Head
Dr Mark R. Chance
Director, Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics Charles W. and Iona A. Mathias Professor of Cancer Research


