### Accession
PXD012806

### Title
Proteomics of diphtheria toxoid vaccines reveals multiple proteins that are immunogenic and may contribute to protection of humans against Corynebacterium diphtheriae

### Description
Introduced for mass immunization in the 1920s, vaccines against diphtheria are among the oldest and safest vaccines known. The basic principle of their production is the inactivation of purified diphtheria toxin by formaldehyde cross-linking, which converts the potentially fatal toxin in a completely harmless protein aggregate, which is still immunogenic. Since in addition to diphtheria toxin also other proteins may be secreted by Corynebacterium diphtheriae during cultivation, we assumed that diphtheria toxoid might not be the only component present in the vaccine. In this study, we established a protocol to reverse formaldehyde cross-linking and carried out mass spectrometric analyses. Different secreted, membrane-associated and cytoplasmic proteins of C. diphtheriae were detected in several vaccine preparations from across the world. Western blot analyses indicated that at least some of these are immunogenic and may therefore support protection against C. diphtheriae. In frame of this study, we could show that the C. diphtheriae toxoid vaccines also induce antibodies directed against diphtheria toxin secreted by Corynebacterium ulcerans, an emerging pathogen which is outnumbering C. diphtheriae as cause of diphtheria-like illness in Western Europe, but do not induce immune reaction against other C. ulcerans proteins.

### Sample Protocol
One vaccine dose oft he vaccine were precipitated with 10 % (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to remove aluminium salts (Link and LaBaer, 2009). After incubating over-night at 4 °C the samples were centrifuged at 8000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The precipitated proteins were dried on ice and resuspended in rehydration buffer (2 % sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0). To reverse the formaldehyde cross-linking of the inactivated toxins, the samples were incubated for 20 min at 95 °C (Herzberg et al., 2007). About 10 µg soluble proteins were transferred to 10 kDa vivacon 500 membrane filters and the flow-through was discarded by centrifugation for 30 min at 12,000 x g. The tryptic digest occur within modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009). The proteins were reduced by addition of 200 µl of reduction buffer (25 mM DTT, 8 M urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB)) for 30 min at 37 °C. Alkylation of sulfhydryl groups was carried out with 200 µl alkylation buffer (25 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB) for additional 30 min on a shaker at 600 rpm in the dark. The proteins were subsequently washed with 300 µl of 8 M urea in 50 mM TEAB followed by another washing step with 200 µl 6 M urea in 50 mM TEAB. Afterwards 0.5 µg mass spectrometry grade LysC endopeptidase was added onto the filter unit and incubated on a shaker at 37 °C and 600 rpm for 3 h, followed by a second digest with 1 µg trypsin and 250 µl dilution buffer (50 mM TEAB) to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea. The sample was incubated over-night at 37 °C at 600 rpm on a shaker. Peptides were then collected by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 20 min. For acidification of the peptide solution 20 µl of 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to reach a final concentration of 0.5 % TFA. To desalt the peptides a clean-up with C18 stage tips were performed. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Resulting vaccine peptides (approx. 250 ng) were loaded on a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for separation on EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 μm particle size, 50 cm x 75 μm) with a flow rate of 200 nl/min by increasing acetonitrile concentrations over 120 min. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the previously described MS/MS settings (Kraner et al., 2017). In short, the mass spectrometer was operating with 2000 V spray voltage, 300–2000 (m/z) scan range, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an AGC target of 400.000 for first stage of mass analysis (MS1). The most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation with collision energy of 35 %, a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target of 100 for second stage of mass analysis (MS2).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed against C. diphtheriae ATCC 700971 / NCTC 13129 / Biotype gravis database (Proteome Id: UP000002198) comprised in UniProt (www.uniprot/proteomes) using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Theoretical masses for peptides were generated by trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and their product ions were compared to the measured spectra with the following parameters: carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for survey scans and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements. For protein identification the thresholds were set on 1 % false discovery rate (FDR). For quantification the peak area which correlates with the concentration of peptides was used to determine the quantity of proteins present in the vaccines. Only peaks ranged from 2 x 107 up to 1011 where used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Introduced for mass immunization in the 1920s, vaccines against diphtheria are among the oldest and safest vaccines known. The basic principle of their production is the inactivation of purified diphtheria toxin by formaldehyde cross-linking, which converts the potentially fatal toxin in a completely harmless protein aggregate, which is still immunogenic. Since in addition to diphtheria toxin also other proteins may be secreted by Corynebacterium diphtheriae during cultivation, we assumed that diphtheria toxoid might not be the only component present in the vaccine. To address this question, we established a protocol to reverse formaldehyde cross-linking and carried out mass spectrometric analyses. Different secreted, membrane-associated and cytoplasmic proteins of C. diphtheriae were detected in several vaccine preparations from across the world. Based on these results, bioinformatics and Western blot analyses were applied to characterize if these proteins are immunogenic and may therefore support protection against C. diphtheriae. In frame of this study, we could show that the C. diphtheriae toxoid vaccines induce antibodies against different C. diphtheriae proteins and against diphtheria toxin secreted by Corynebacterium ulcerans, an emerging pathogen which is outnumbering C. diphtheriae as cause of diphtheria-like illness in Western Europe.

### Keywords
Exoproteome, Vaccination, Proteomics, Coryebacteria, Secretome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen
Department Biologie Professur für Mikrobiologie

### Submitter
Jens Möller

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Burkovski
Department Biologie Professur für Mikrobiologie


