### Accession
PXD031964

### Title
UBQLN2 restrains the domesticated retrotransposon PEG10 to maintain neuronal health in ALS

### Description
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a rare neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor neuron dysfunction and loss, leading to progressive paralysis and death. A portion of ALS cases is caused by mutation of the proteasome shuttle factor Ubiquilin 2 (UBQLN2), but the molecular pathway leading from UBQLN2 dysfunction to neurodegenerative disease remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate a major function of UBQLN2 in regulating activity of the domesticated gag-pol retrotransposon ‘paternally expressed gene 10’ (PEG10) in human cells and tissues. UBQLN2 exclusively facilitates degradation of the frameshifted gag-pol form of PEG10 through recognition of a unique polyproline repeat. In cells, the PEG10 gag-pol protein cleaves itself in a mechanism reminiscent of retrotransposon self-processing to generate a liberated ‘nucleocapsid’ fragment, which uniquely localizes to the nucleus. Overexpression of the nucleocapsid fragment upregulates transcription of neuronal genes involved in axon remodeling, which were also affected in sporadic ALS (sALS) patient tissues. Finally, proteomics of spinal cords from ALS patients revealed that PEG10 gag-pol is significantly elevated in disease compared to healthy controls. These findings implicate the retrotransposon-like activity of PEG10 as a contributing mechanism in ALS through regulation of neuronal gene expression, and restraint of PEG10 as a primary function of UBQLN2.

### Sample Protocol
Human tissue samples were acquired from the Target ALS Multicenter Human Postmortem TissueCore. Unfixed, full-thickness sections of lumbar spinal cord were obtained from two non-neurological controls, one ALS patient with a pathogenic UBQLN2 mutation, and seven sporadicALS cases. All cases were from females.  Human spinal cord samples were first sectioned on a cryostat (Leica) to ensure even tissue representation of protein sample. Ten to twenty 15 µm-thickness sections from each patient were homogenized in 8M urea lysis buffer, lysate was spun at 15,000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4º C to remove insoluble material, and supernatant protein content was quantified by BCA analysis (Pierce). Separately, HEK cells were transfected with Homo sapiens HA-PEG10 gag-pol, lysed 48 hours later, and mixed in a 95:5 ratio of sALS spinal cord lysate to HEK cell lysate. Approximately 100-200 g of each sample was aliquoted and delivered to the Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility in the Department of Biochemistry at the University of Colorado, Boulder, for TMT labeling.  Human lumbar spinal cord tissue samples in 8M urea were reduced and alkylated with the addition of 5% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine) (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 and incubated shaking at 1000 rpm at room temperature for 60 minutes then cleared via centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes at 25°C. Lysates were digested using the SP3 method58. Briefly, 200 µg carboxylate-functionalized speedbeads (Cytiva Life Sciences) were added to approximately 100 µg protein lysate. Addition of acetonitrile to 80% (v/v) induced binding to the beads, then the beads were washed twice with 80% (v/v) ethanol and twice with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were digested in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5, with 1 µg Lys-C/Trypsin (Promega) and incubated at 37˚ C overnight. Tryptic peptides were desalted using HLB Oasis 1cc (10mg) cartridges (Waters) according to the manufactures instructions and dried in a speedvac vacuum centrifuge. Approximately 30 µg of tryptic peptide from each human tissue sample was labeled with TMT 10 plex (Thermo Scientific) reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The multiplexed sample was cleaned up with a HLB Oasis 1cc (10mg) cartridge. Approximately 50 µg multiplexed peptides were fractionated with high pH reversed-phase C18 UPLC using a 0.5 mm X 200 mm custom packed UChrom C18 1.8 µm 120Å (nanolcms) column with mobile phases 10mM aqueous ammonia, pH10 in water and acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were gradient eluted at 20 µL/minute from 2 to 40% ACN in 40 minutes concatenating for 12 fractions using a Waters M-class UPLC (Waters). Peptide fractions were then dried in a speedvac vacuum centrifuge an stored at -20°C until analysis. High pH peptide fractions were suspended in 3% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and approximately 1 µg tryptic peptides were directly injected onto a reversed-phase C18 1.7 µm, 130 Å, 75 mm X 250 mm M-class column (Waters), using an Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC (Thermos Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/minute with a gradient from 4% to 16% ACN over 120 minutes then to 25% ACN in 5 minutes and detected using a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 from 350 to 1500 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. Precursor peptide ion isolation width for MS2 fragment scans was 0.7 m/z with a 0.2 m/z offset, and the top 15 most intense ions were sequenced. All MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 45,000 with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 32% normalized collision energy. An AGC target of 1E5 and 100 milliseconds maximum injection time was used. Dynamic exclusion was set for 20 secondswith a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Uniprot Human database UP000005640 downloaded November 2, 2020 using MaxQuant v.1.6.14.0. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications. All peptide and protein identifications were thresholded at a 1%false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Als, Tmt, Q-exactive hf-x, Human spinal cord

### Affiliations
Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
University of Colorado, Boulder

### Submitter
Shannon Leslie

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Whiteley
Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder


