### Accession
PXD022228

### Title
ULK1/2 DKO MEF phosphoproteomics

### Description
Autophagy is a mechanism by which intracellular cargo are catabolised in the lysosome. It involves the formation of double membraned organelles termed autophagosomes, a complex process orchestrated by the serine/threonine kinase ULK complex and class III PI3 kinase VPS34. Unbiased screens for ULK substrates revealed that the phosphoproteome is significantly altered upon loss of Ulk1/2 and yielded a high confidence list of substrates, including VPS34 complex member VPS15 and AMPK complex member PRKAG2. We identified 6 new ULK substrate residues in the VPS15. Mutation of these VPS15 phosphoacceptors reduces autophagosome formation and autophagic flux in cells, and VPS34 activity in vitro. ULK phosphorylation of the major phosphosite in VPS15, serine 861, decreases both autophagy initiation and autophagic flux. Analysis of VPS15 knockout cells and the ULK substrate VPS34 serine 249 revealed two novel ULK-dependent phenotypes downstream of VPS15 removal: starvation-independent accumulation of ULK substrates and kinase activity-regulated recruitment of autophagy proteins to ubiquitin-positive structures, both of which occur upon VPS15 ablation and can be partially recapitulated by chronic VPS34 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Sample processing protocol: WT and ULK DKO MEFs were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS (Invitrogen) supplemented with a combination of either 100 mg per litre of light (14N,12C) or heavy (15N,13C) lysine and arginine (CK Isotopes), with full label incorporation confirmed by mass spectrometry before use. Cells were treated with EBSS or with SILAC media supplemented with Torin 1 (100nM) for 2 hrs to induce ULK activation. Cells were detached and mixed in a 1:1 ratio heavy:light and 5mg total protein per mixture was used per experiment. Proteins were digested using a combination of trypsin and LysC and peptides were fractionated using Strong Cation Exchange chromatography using a Poly LC PolySULFOETHYL A 100 x 4.6mm 5um 200A column. The flow rate was 1ml/min and the gradients used volatile buffers A: 10 mM Ammonium Formate, 25% ©, pH 3.0 and B: 500 mM Ammonium Formate, 25% ACN, pH 6.8. All fractions collected were taken to dryness by vacuum centrifugation. 5mg of Titansphere titanium dioxide beads were used per SCX fraction for phosphopeptide enrichment as describe previously [102]. Dried phosphopeptides from the titanium dioxide enrichment were cleaned up in preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis using C18 Stage Tips and taken to dryness by vacuum centrifugation. Each sample was resuspended in 35ul 1% TFA, sonicated for 15 mins and injected 3 times (10ul per injection). Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm, 75um I.D. Pepmap column over a 3 hr gradient and eluted directly into a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The instrument ran in data dependent acquisition mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by either CID, MSA or HCD fragmentation techniques (one fragmentation technique per injection).  TMT Sample processing protocol: To generate samples for TMT analysis, SV40 immortalized WT and ULK DKO MEFs were starved for various time points as indicated before trypsinisation, washing in 0.1% (w/v) BSA PBS and pelleting via centrifugation (3000rcf, 1 minute). Cell pellets were resuspended in ice cold PBS, then pelleted again for lysis in 200µl 8M Urea lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50mM HEPES pH8.2, 75mM NaCl, 1X PhosStop (Roche), 1X Complete EDTA-Free Protease Inhibitor). Lysates were sonicated and protein concentration was measured before 220µg aliquots of each sample were digested in a combination of trypsin and LysC. Next, individual digests were cleaned and concentrated using Nest Group C18 MacroSpin columns. Peptide labelling with TMT reagent was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (TMT 10plexTM, #90110, Thermo). For peptide enrichment the Thermo Scientific High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (A32992) was used as described here (https://star-protocols.cell.com/protocols/66). Phosphopeptides eluted from the procedure were dried by vacuum centrifugation and subjected to fractionation using the High pH Reversed Phase Fractionation kit (Pierce, 84868). The resulting dried TMT labelled phosphopeptides were resuspended in 1% TFA and separated on a 50 cm, 75um I.D. Pepmap column over a 2-4 hr gradient at 40°C and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos). The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
SILAC data processing: MaxQuant and Perseus were used for data processing with false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% set at the protein, peptide and phosphosite level. TMT data processing: MaxQuant v1.6.x was used to process the raw data acquired with a reporter ion quantification method. A protein, peptide and phosphosite estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used with the mus musculus Uniprot KB database used for database searching. Reporter ion intensities were imported into Perseus from the Phospho STY Sites table for further downstream processing. To analyse the dataset three variables were defined to describe both the starvation- and the ULK-dependence of the phosphorylation events. The comparisons selected were: WT 0 mins–WT 60 mins (increase in phosphorylation after 60 mins starvation in WT MEFs), WT 60 mins–DKO 60mins (decrease in phosphorylation in DKO compared to WT MEFs at 60 mins starvation) and WT 60 mins–WT 60 mins Refed (decrease in phosphorylation when full media was replenished in WT MEFs). Threshold values for each variable were established by trial and error and phosphopeptides simultaneously satisfying all three were brought forward preferentially. A fourth variable was used to annotate the dataset, statistical similarity to Prkab2 S38. As ULK substrates may display varied phosphorylation dynamics, peptides with a correlation coefficient of >0.7 were brought forward to maximise substrate identification (Pearson correlation coefficients of >0.8 are considered significant). Phosphopeptides satisfying the first three variables were given precedence when shortlisting putative ULK substrates as this was more stringent. However, as many of the sites shortlisted using the four variables did not display profiles indicative of direct ULK phosphorylation the dataset was curated manually with clear false positives removed.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is a process through which intracellular cargoes are catabolised inside lysosomes. It involves the formation of autophagosomes initiated by the serine/threonine kinase ULK and class III PI3 kinase VPS34 complexes. Here, unbiased phosphoproteomics screens in mouse embryonic fibroblasts deleted for Ulk1/2 reveal that ULK loss significantly alters the phosphoproteome, with novel high confidence substrates identified including VPS34 complex member VPS15 and AMPK complex subunit PRKAG2. We identify six ULK-dependent phosphorylation sites on VPS15, mutation of which reduces autophagosome formation in cells and VPS34 activity in vitro. Mutation of serine 861, the major VPS15 phosphosite, decreases both autophagy initiation and autophagic flux. Analysis of VPS15 knockout cells reveals two novel ULK-dependent phenotypes downstream of VPS15 removal that can be partially recapitulated by chronic VPS34 inhibition, starvation-independent accumulation of ULK substrates and kinase activity-regulated recruitment of autophagy proteins to ubiquitin-positive structures.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Amino acid starvation, Vps34, Vps15, Autophagy, Pi3 kinase, Ulk1, Orbitrap ulk1, Ulk2, Lc-ms/ms, P150, Tmt, Silac, Autophagosome, Mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Pik3r4, Prkag2

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK

### Submitter
Helen Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics The Francis Crick Institute Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK


