### Accession
PXD032155

### Title
GBA1 interactome for understanding pathological mechanisms

### Description
Compound heterozygous or homozygous GBA1 mutations lead to Gaucher disease. Furthermore, GBA1 mutations are the most frequent risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. To get a better understanding of the pathological mechanisms, we generated inducible V5-Flag-Tag, V5-Flag-tagged WT, E326K and L444P mutant Flp-In™T-REx™-HEK293 and performed interatomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In™T-REx™-HEK293 cell lines were treated with 50 ng/ml Doxycycline for 48 hrs. Pellets were lysed in 1x TBS (pH 7.4) containing 0.5% NP40 and protease and phosphatase inhibitor.  Anti-Flag M2 affinity gel was used for the Flag Co-IP for the interactome studyThen eluates were labelled with TMT11plex Isobaric Label Reagent. Samples were measured with an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process data. The Uniprot Homo sapiens database was used as proteome database. Criteria for protein identification were detection of at least 2 unique peptides and peptide length had to be at least 7 amino acids. Candidate proteins were increased by at least fold change (FC) of 1.5 compared to control and the FDR was ≤ 0.2. For hit proteins a minimum FC of 2 and an FDR of ≤ 0.05 was set. For the identification of hits or candidates a limma analysis was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in GBA1, the gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme &#x3b2;-glucocerebrosidase (GCase), which cause Gaucher's disease, are the most frequent genetic risk factor for Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we employ global proteomic and single-cell genomic approaches in stable cell lines as well as induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons and midbrain organoids to dissect the mechanisms underlying GCase-related neurodegeneration. We demonstrate that GCase can be imported from the cytosol into the mitochondria via recognition of internal mitochondrial targeting sequence-like signals. In mitochondria, GCase promotes the maintenance of mitochondrial complex I (CI) integrity and function. Furthermore, GCase interacts with the mitochondrial quality control proteins HSP60 and LONP1. Disease-associated mutations impair CI stability and function and enhance the interaction with the mitochondrial quality control machinery. These findings reveal a mitochondrial role of GCase and suggest that defective CI activity and energy metabolism may drive the pathogenesis of GCase-linked neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Tmt lc-ms, Interactome, Inducible t-rex hek, Proteome, Gba1

### Affiliations
EMBL
Mitochondria and Inflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases.  German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE),  Tuebingen, Germany.

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Michela Deleidi
Mitochondria and Inflammation in Neurodegenerative Diseases.  German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE),  Tuebingen, Germany.


