### Accession
PXD043010

### Title
Discovery, Verification, and Validation of Walnut Protein Marker Peptides Using LC-MS/MS Approaches

### Description
A key requirement of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based allergenic food protein analysis methods is to use protein marker peptides with good analytical performances in LC-MS analysis of commercial processed foods. In this study, we developed a multistage walnut protein marker peptide selection strategy involving marker peptide discovery and verification and LC-MS validation of chemically equivalent stable isotope-labeled peptides. This strategy proposed three walnut protein marker peptides, including two new marker peptides. Our LC-MS-based walnut protein analysis method using the three stable isotope-labeled peptides showed acceptable linearity (R2 >0.99), matrix effects (coefficient of variation <±15%), sensitivity (limit of detection >0.3 pg/μL, limit of quantification >0.8 pg/μL), recovery (85.1–103.4%), accuracy, and precision (coefficient of variation <10%). In conclusion, our multistage marker peptide selection strategy effectively selects specific protein marker peptides for sensitive detection and absolute quantification of walnut proteins in LC-MS analysis of commercial processed foods.

### Sample Protocol
For DDA, a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) with the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Separation was performed using Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (75 μm × 2 cm, particle size 3 μm; Dionex, Bremen, Germany) as the trapping column and Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (75 μm × 15 cm, particle size 3 μm) as the analytical column. The mobile phase buffers were HPLC grade water/0.1% formic acid (v/v) (Buffer A) and HPLC grade ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) (Buffer B). The following gradient was used at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min for 60 min: 2% B for 0–10 min, 2–40% B from 10 to 40 min, 40–90% B from 40 to 44 min, 90% B until 49 min, and re-equilibration at 2% B from 49 to 60 min. In terms of the full MS settings for peptide identification, the source parameters were as follows: capillary temperature, 320°C; sheath gas flow rate, 8 arbitrary units; S-lens RF level, 70; and spray voltage, 2.3 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with positive mode and a mass range of 450–2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 × 106, an injection time (IT) of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 2 Da. Resolution of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was set to 17,500. For MS/MS, a high-energy collisional dissociation cell was used with normalized collision energy (NCE) fixed at 25, an AGC target of 1 × 105, and an IT of 100 ms. The injection amount of walnut powder digests was set to 0.2 µg.

### Data Protocol
The database search was analyzed using the following conditions with Proteome Discoverer™ (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific): the database was set to Juglans regia (taxonomy of walnut) UniProtKB (more details are provided in Supplementary Table 2), with no missed cleavage allowed, dynamic modification containing carbamidomethyl-cysteine and oxidation of methionine, precursor tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Moreover, false discovery rates for peptide and protein identifications were set to 1%. Identified peptides lacked methionine (M) and cysteine (C), and their length was 8–25 amino acids. The specificity of the peptides was proven by a NCBI BLASTp search. Peptides whose specificity was confirmed could be selected as final marker peptide candidates (Supplementary Table 3).

### Publication Abstract
A key requirement of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based allergenic food protein analysis methods is to use protein marker peptides with good analytical performances in LC-MS analysis of commercial processed foods. In this study, we developed a multi-stage walnut protein marker peptide selection strategy involving marker peptide discovery and verification and LC-MS validation of chemically equivalent stable isotope-labeled peptides. This strategy proposed three walnut protein marker peptides, including two new marker peptides. Our LC-MS-based walnut protein analysis method using the three stable isotope-labeled peptides showed acceptable linearity (R<sup>2</sup>&#xa0;&gt;0.99), matrix effects (coefficient of variation &lt;&#xb1;15%), sensitivity (limit of detection&#xa0;&gt;0.3&#xa0;pg/&#x3bc;L, limit of quantification&#xa0;&gt;0.8&#xa0;pg/&#x3bc;L), recovery (85.1-103.4%), accuracy, and precision (coefficient of variation&#xa0;&lt;10%). In conclusion, our multi-stage marker peptide selection strategy effectively selects specific protein marker peptides for sensitive detection and absolute quantification of walnut proteins in LC-MS analysis of commercial processed foods.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Validation, Food allergy, Walnut marker peptide

### Affiliations
Gwnagju Institute of Science and Technology
School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Cheomdangwagiro123, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Kyungdo Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Zee-yong Park
School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Cheomdangwagiro123, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea


