### Accession
PXD023211

### Title
Multiplexed complexome profiling using tandem mass tags

### Description
Complexome profiling is a rapidly spreading, powerful approach to gain insight into the nature of protein complexes. It identifies and quantifies protein complexes separated into multiple fractions of increasing molecular mass using mass spectrometry-based, label-free bottom-up proteomics. Complexome profiling enables a sophisticated and thorough characterization of the composition, molecular mass, assembly and interactions of protein complexes. However, in practice, its application is limited by the large number of samples it generates and the related time and costs of mass spectrometry analyses. Here we implemented tandem mass tags for multiplexing complexome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Human osteosarcoma 143B cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 0.1 mg/ml uridine 1% antibiotic/antimycotic solution in a humidified, 5% carbon dioxide atmosphere at 37°C. Cells were grown with or without 50 mg for five days. After the fifth day, cells were washed twice with phosphate buffer saline and harvested or further cultured in fresh DMEM without chloramphenicol for 4, 6, 8, and 24 h, and then harvested. Cells were disrupted by 10 strokes passing them through a 20G needle in 0.25 M sucrose, 5 mM Tris/HCl-, 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 7.4, and mitochondria were enriched by differential centrifugation at 4°C. 0.2 mg protein were separated by blue-native electrophoresis in 4-12% polyacrylamide gradient gels. After electrophoresis, the gel was fixed with 50% methanol, 10% acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate and stained with Coomassie blue in 10% acetic acid. Entire gel lanes were washed with HPLC grade water, sliced into 60 even pieces and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Each slice was cut into 1 mm3 cubes and transferred to a MultiScreen-BV, 1.2 µm filter 96-well plate (Millipore). Gel pieces were repeatedly destained by incubation for 30 min at room temperature (RT) with 50% methanol, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich, 18597), pH 8.0, followed by centrifugation at 600 g for 2 min until the Coomassie dye was completely removed. Gel pieces were incubated first in 5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM TEAB for 60 min at RT followed by a centrifugation step at 600 g for 2 min, then in 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 50 mM TEAB for 45 min at RT followed by centrifugation at 600 g for 2 min, and last in 50% methanol, 50 mM TEAB for 15 min at RT. After centrifugation, gel pieces were allowed to dry at RT for 30 min and rehydrated with 20 µl 5 µg/ml trypsin (Promega), 1 mM CaCl2, 50 mM TEAB for 30 min at 4°C. After addition of 50 µl 50 mM TEAB, plates were sealed and incubated over night at 37°C. Peptide solution were recovered by centrifugation for 2 min at 600 g into a PCR plate and gel pieces containing remaining peptides were washed with 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% formic acid and collected by centrifugation into the same PCR plate. Peptide solutions were dried for 2.5 h at 45 °C in a Concentrator plus (Eppendorf). Peptides were dissolved in 10 µl 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and incubated for 1 hour at RT after addition of 4 µl 1.5 g/l tandem mass tag (TMT6plex) reagent solutions in acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific, 90061). Labeling reactions were stopped by adding 2 µl of 0.167% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 438227) in HPLC grade water. Samples from 6 plates (in total 360 wells; 60 samples per condition) were pooled into one plate (60 wells) and dried for 1 h at 45°C in a Concentrator plus. Labelled peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against the reviewed human protein database downloaded from Uniprot (release January 2019, 20399 entries) processed with the Andromeda algorithm included in the MaxQuant software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.6.2.10). The 6-Plex TMT labelling quantification option was used. Trypsin was selected as enzyme used to generate peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid were set as variable modifications. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification. The error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm, for the following main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Complexome profiling is a rapidly spreading, powerful technique to gain insight into the nature of protein complexes. It identifies and quantifies protein complexes separated into multiple fractions of increasing molecular mass using mass spectrometry-based, label-free bottom-up proteomics. Complexome profiling enables a sophisticated and thorough characterization of the composition, molecular mass, assembly, and interactions of protein complexes. However, in practice, its application is limited by the large number of samples it generates and the related time of mass spectrometry analyses. Here, we report an improved process workflow that implements tandem mass tags for multiplexing complexome profiling. This workflow substantially reduces the number of samples and measuring time without compromising protein identification or quantification reliability. In profiles from mitochondrial fractions of cells recovering from chloramphenicol treatment, tandem mass tags-multiplexed complexome profiling exhibited migration patterns of mature ATP synthase (complex V) and assembly intermediates that were consistent in composition and abundance with profiles obtained by the label-free approach. Reporter ion quantifications of proteins and complexes unaffected by the chloramphenicol treatment presented less variation in comparison to the label-free method. Incorporation of tandem mass tags enabled an efficient and robust complexome profiling analysis and may foster broader application for protein complex profiling in biomedical research and diagnostics.

### Keywords
Complexome profiling; multiplexed complexomics; tandem mass tags; protein complexes

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
University Children‘s Research@Kinder-UKE University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf 20246, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Guerrero-Castillo
University Children‘s Research@Kinder-UKE University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf 20246, Hamburg, Germany


