### Accession
PXD004655

### Title
SILAC-Tp (12 importins) -  Extensive cargo identification reveals distinct biological roles of the 12 importin pathways

### Description
Importin-beta family proteins are nucleocytoplasmic transport receptors (NTRs), and they transport most nuclear proteins as their cargoes into and out of the nuclei. Human cells have 20 species of importin-beta family NTRs, of which 10 (importin-beta, transportin-1, -2, -SR, importin-4, -5, -7, -8, -9, and -11) are nuclear import receptors and 2 (importin-13, and exportin-4) are bi-directional receptors. Here, we identified the import cargo proteins of these 12 NTRs by a method called SILAC-Tp, which employs stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), an in vitro reconstituted transport system, and LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were labeled with u-13C6 Lys and u-13C6 Arg by SILAC and permeabilized. A pair of in vitro reconstituted transport reactions was carried out side-by-side; in one reaction (+NTR), proteins in an unlabeled nuclear extract were imported into the nuclei of the permeabilized cells by one particular NTR, and the other was the control reaction without the NTR. The +NTR and control samples were separately analyzed. Proteins were extracted from the recipient nuclei, digested by trypsin and Lys-C endopeptidase, fractionated by cation exchange chromatography into four fractions, and analyzed (identified and quantified) by LC-MS/MS (EASY-nLC 1000 with C18 and Q Exactive). For the selection of candidate cargoes, Light/Heavy (L/H) ratios of the identified proteins are calculated, and the ratio of L/H(+NTR) and L/H(control) for a protein can be used as the index for the cargo potentiality of the protein. In this project, transport reactions for two NTRs were performed side-by-side with one control reaction. The simultaneously processed NTRs sharing a control were importin-beta and -13, transportin-1 and -2, importin-7 and -8, importin-9 and -11, and transportin-SR and importin-5, and the reactions for importin-4 and exportin-4 were carried out individually with a control. All the transport and LC-MS/MS were triplicated.

### Data Protocol
Using Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4) and MASCOT (ver. 2.4.1), the data were searched against Swiss-Prot (2014_07-2016_01). Search parameters: taxonomy, Homo sapiens; enzyme, trypsin; static modifications, carbamidomethyl (Cys); dynamic modifications, oxidation (Met); precursor mass tolerance, ± 6 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ± 20 mDa; maximum missed cleavages, 1; quantitation, SILAC (R6, K6); FDR for identification, <5%.

### Publication Abstract
Vast numbers of proteins are transported into and out of the nuclei by approximately 20 species of importin-&#x3b2; family nucleocytoplasmic transport receptors. However, the significance of the multiple parallel transport pathways that the receptors constitute is poorly understood because only limited numbers of cargo proteins have been reported. Here, we identified cargo proteins specific to the 12 species of human import receptors with a high-throughput method that employs stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture, an in vitro reconstituted transport system, and quantitative mass spectrometry. The identified cargoes illuminated the manner of cargo allocation to the receptors. The redundancies of the receptors vary widely depending on the cargo protein. Cargoes of the same receptor are functionally related to one another, and the predominant protein groups in the cargo cohorts differ among the receptors. Thus, the receptors are linked to distinct biological processes by the nature of their cargoes.

### Keywords
Human, Cargo, Transportin, Importin, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Nuclear transport

### Affiliations
RIKEN
Cellular Dynamics Laboratory, RIKEN, Japan

### Submitter
Makoto Kimura

### Lab Head
Dr Naoko Imamoto
Cellular Dynamics Laboratory, RIKEN, Japan


