### Accession
PXD026596

### Title
Proteome and  differential proteomic analysis of ramie stem bark

### Description
According to a previous study on the microscopic examination of stem barks in ramie, bast fibers from different parts of stem bark showed distinct differences at the developmental level: specifically, the barks in the top part of stem (TPS) did not initiate fiber growth, whereas barks in the middle part of stem (MPS) had a large number of fibers with thickening secondary walls. We have performed the Proteome analysis for the tissues of TPS and MPS, and then carried out the comparison of Proteomic level of proteins between two tissues, thereby to identified differentially Proteomic proteins. These datasets represent the raw UHPLC spectra for Proteome of ramie TPS and MPS.

### Sample Protocol
Zhongzhu 1 was one of the most popular cultivars in China, and was used in this study. The seedlings of Zhongzhu 1 were planted in the experimental farm of the Institute of Bast Fiber Crops, Yuanjiang, China in June 2016. As shown in Fig S1, the TPS and MPS barks were separately collected from five individuals of Zhongzhu 1 (30-day-old) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Three replicates were sampled for TPS and MPS barks. Sample powder grinded by liquid nitrogen was sonicated in lysis buffer. Then, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol was added and the mixture was further vortexed. After centrifugation, the proteins were precipitated using the ammonium sulfate-saturated. Finally, the protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to perform the UHPLC-MS/MS analysis, the extracted proteins were carried out a treatment. First, the proteins were digested using the trypsin, according to the description of Ye et al. (2015). The tryptic peptides of each sample were labeled by tandem mass tags (TMT) using the TMT kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and then, were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column. Subsequently, to perform the proteome analysis, these fractionated peptides were used to enrich the modified peptides, using IMAC microspheres suspension. Thereafter, LC-MS/MS system was used to perform the proteome analysis, for the enriched peptides. In brief, peptides were separated by dissolving them in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. After separating, peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC, with the parameters as followers: scan range, 350 to 1800 m/z; resolution, 70,000. Peptides were also selected for MS/MS using NCE with a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data generated from the proteome analysis were processed using the program Maxquant (v.1.5.2.8; Tyanova et al., 2016). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the protein sequences annotated from the genome of ramie (Luan et al., 2018), with the following parameters: only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 20 ppm (first search) and 5 ppm (main search) mass tolerances for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethyl on cysteine as a fixed modification; and protein N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, and protein_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) permitted as variable modifications (Ye et al., 2015). FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Only proteins that have at least two peptides with at least one unique peptide were reserved for further analysis.  The abundance of normalization Proteomic protein was counted according to the following two steps. First, we used the abundance of spike-in samples (quantified by TMT) to adjust the abundance among three replicates. Thereafter, each TMT quantification channel within an individual replicate was normalized based on the total reporter ion intensity. Pearson correlation analysis was performed to evaluate the reproducibility among three replicates. Fold change of one protein site in Proteomic level was estimated by calculating the ratio of the normalized abundance of modified peptide between MPS and TPS. A site of protein with more than 2-fold change was defined as a significantly differential site (p < 0.001).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Ramie

### Affiliations
Hu Nan

### Submitter
Zeng Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zeng Zheng
Hu Nan


