### Accession
PXD029250

### Title
The proteomic response of Clostridioides difficile to the atypical tetracycline amidochelocardin and concomitant dissipation of its proton motive force

### Description
Amidochelocardin is an atypical tetracycline which was previously shown to target the bacterial cell membrane although its detailed mode-of-action is still unknown. To gain insight into Clostridioides difficile’s response to membrane targeting antibiotics and to further study the mode-of-action of Amidochelocardin, the stress response of C. difficile 630 to sublethal doses of amidochelocardin were studied on the proteome level. The results and results from downstream experiments, such as quantification of the membrane potential, cellular localization assays and transmission electron microscopy analysis, suggest that amidochelocardin kills bacteria such as C. difficile by dissipating their membrane potential. Furthermore, the data suggest that C. difficile responds to dissipation of the membrane potential by induction of biosynthesis of an hitherto unknown aromatic compound.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630 was grown in CDMM medium (Neumann-Schaal et al., 2015) to mid-exponential phase. Subsequently, cells were stressed with three increasing concentrations of amidochelocardin (0.75, 1 and 1.5 µg/ml) and were grown in the presence of the antibiotics for further 90 minutes. Treated cells and untreated cells were harvested by centrifugation and proteins were extracted by mechanical disruption in a FastPrep-25 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, California, USA; three cycles at 6.5 m/s à 30 s). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm and 4 °C. Protein extracts were stored at -70 °C. Protein concentrations were determined using Roti®-Nanoquant (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterwards, 50 µg of each protein extract were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), alkylated with 20 mM IAA (IAA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and acidified with phosphoric acid (Carl Roth®, Karlsruhe, Germany). For tryptic digestion, samples were loaded on S-traps (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) and proteins were digested according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Tryptic peptides were purified and fractionated by a high pH reversed-phase workflow on self-packed C18 columns as done previously (Mücke et al., 2020). Peptide samples were loaded onto self-packed analytical columns with integrated emitter (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 reverse phase material (3 µm, Dr. Maisch) of an EASY nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) and were eluted using a 85 min gradient from 5 to 50 % of acetonitrile, 0.1 % acetic acid at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by analysis on a Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer. Full survey scans were performed with a resolution of 60,000 in the range of 333 – 1650 m/z and MS/MS scans were performed for the fifteen most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s. Internal lock mass calibration was applied (lock mass 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against a strain specific protein database (3762 entries, obtained from Uniprot on March 15th, 2021 (UP000001978) plus common contaminants and reverse sequences added by the software) using the Andromeda based search engine MaxQuant ((Cox et al., 2011); version 1.6.17.0). A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages was assumed, oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Default parameters were used for protein identification. Label-free protein quantification was performed for unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2. Match between runs was enabled with default settings within each sample group. To be considered for downstream analysis, C. difficile proteins had to be identified with at least two unique peptides in at least two out of three biological replicates. Averaged LFQ intensities were used to calculate log2 fold changes. Finally, statistical analysis was performed using the R package DEqMS (Zhu et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phenazine biosynthesis, Antibiotic resistance, Antibiotic therapy, Amidochelocardin, Dissipation of the proton motive force, Clostridioides difficile, Tetracycline

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


