### Accession
PXD014141

### Title
Global impact of diet and temperature over aquaculture of Octopus vulgaris paralarvae from a transcriptomic approach

### Description
Common octopus, Octopus vulgaris, is an economically important cephalopod species. However, its rearing under captivity is currently challenged by massive mortalities previous to their juvenile stage due to nutritional and environmental factors. Dissecting the genetic basis and regulatory mechanism behind this mortality requires genomic background knowledge. A transcriptomic sequencing of 10 dph octopus paralarvae from different experimental conditions was constructed via RNA-seq. A total of 613,767,530 raw reads were filtered and de novo assembled into 363,527 contigs of which 82,513 were annotated in UniProt carrying also their GO and KEGG information. Differential gene expression analysis was carried out on paralarvae reared under different diet regimes and temperatures, also including wild paralarvae. Genes related to lipid metabolism exhibited higher transcriptional levels in individuals whose diet includes crustacean zoeas, which had an impact over their development and immune response capability. High temperature induces acclimation processes at the time that increase metabolic demands and oxidative stress. Wild individuals show an expression profile unexpectedly similar to Artemia fed individuals. Proteomic results support the hypothesis revealed by transcriptional analysis. The comparative study of the O. vulgaris transcriptomic profiles allowed the identification of genes that deserve to be further studied as candidates for biomarkers of development and health. The results obtained here on the transcriptional variations of genes caused by diet and temperature will provide new perspectives in understanding the molecular mechanisms behind nutritional and temperature requirements of common octopus that will open new opportunities to deepen in paralarvae rearing requirements.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from whole individual paralarvae of 10 dph obtained from the same experimental groups analyzed at transcriptomic level were extracted in 100µL Lysis buffer from 2D Grinding kit (GE Healthcare®) and quantified by RC_DC protein kit (BioRAD®). The protein profiles of the 24 samples (6 individuals for each of the 4 experimental groups) were evaluated with a 1D SDS PAGE gel. To prepare the library for the SWATH method 100 µg of total proteins extracts were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer 1X and denatured 5 min to 95oC. Protein mix was loaded into a 1D SDS PAGE gel to visualize the protein profile and to eliminate contaminants. The gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie to visualize proteins. Each library career coming from the individual samples was excised into 4 fragments to increase protein identification and perform complete library of octopus paralarvae. Each gel fraction was excised and digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega®) following Shevchenko et al. (1996)44 to obtain the purified protein fraction. Protein digestion was stopped with 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid), followed by a double extraction with ACN (acetonitrile) was done and all peptide solutions dried in a rotatory evaporator. Samples were resuspended with 2% of ACN and 0.1 % TFA. Spectral Library LCMSMS analysis Sample desalting was carried out on an analytical column (LC column, Nikkyo®) equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA) using 0.1% TFA. Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5-35% ACN, 0.1% FA for 180 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nano ESIqQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). TripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 250 msTOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z was performed followed by 150 ms product ion scans from 350-1500 m/z on the 25 most intense 2-5 charged ions. The rolling collision energies equations were set for all ions as for 2+ ions.  SWATH LCMSMS analysis The TripleTOF was operated in SWATH mode in which a 0.05 s TOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.08 s product ion scan from 350-1250 m/z on the 32 defined windows (3.05 sec/cycle) of 15 Da.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTOF data and generate a list of 1,984 proteins which were identified with a FDR of 1% without taxonomy restriction using Expasy protein database. The search (identification) was conducted against an O. vulgaris paralarvae protein database previously generated (a total of 107,557 sequences obtained after translation to 6-reading frames, from the de novo transcriptome generated in this study, based on TransDecoder pipeline). The data obtained from SWATH were analyzed by Peak View in order to obtain quantitative information which could be analyzed with Marker View. PCA was performed as preliminary analysis of samples. The analysis of the data was performed using a multiple regression model with Elastic Net penalty by the use of the R library glmnet

### Publication Abstract
Common octopus, Octopus vulgaris, is an economically important cephalopod species. However, its rearing under captivity is currently challenged by massive mortalities previous to their juvenile stage due to nutritional and environmental factors. Dissecting the genetic basis and regulatory mechanism behind this mortality requires genomic background knowledge. A transcriptomic sequencing of 10 dph octopus paralarvae from different experimental conditions was constructed via RNA-seq. A total of 613,767,530 raw reads were filtered and de novo assembled into 363,527 contigs of which 82,513 were annotated in UniProt carrying also their GO and KEGG information. Differential gene expression analysis was carried out on paralarvae reared under different diet regimes and temperatures, also including wild paralarvae. Genes related to lipid metabolism exhibited higher transcriptional levels in individuals whose diet includes crustacean zoeas, which had an impact over their development and immune response capability. High temperature induces acclimation processes at the time that increase metabolic demands and oxidative stress. Wild individuals show an expression profile unexpectedly similar to Artemia fed individuals. Proteomic results support the hypothesis revealed by transcriptional analysis. The comparative study of the O. vulgaris transcriptomic profiles allowed the identification of genes that deserve to be further studied as candidates for biomarkers of development and health. The results obtained here on the transcriptional variations of genes caused by diet and temperature will provide new perspectives in understanding the molecular mechanisms behind nutritional and temperature requirements of common octopus that will open new opportunities to deepen in paralarvae rearing requirements.

### Keywords
Cephalopod; transcriptome; proteome; aquaculture; paralarvae

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC). Castellón, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Inmaculada Varó
Instituto de Acuicultura Torre de la Sal (IATS-CSIC). Castellón, Spain


