### Accession
PXD007771

### Title
SWATH-MS based quantitative proteomics analysis reveals that curcumin alters the metabolic enzyme profile of CML cells by affecting the activity of miR-22/IPO7/HIF-1α axis.

### Description
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder caused by expression of the chimeric BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase oncogene, resulting from the t(9;22) chromosomal  translocation. Imatinib (gleevec, STI-571) is a selective inhibitor of Bcr-Abl activity highly effective in the treatment of CML. However, even though almost all CML patients respond to treatment with imatinib or third generation inhibitors. These drugs are not curative and need to be taken indefinitely or until patients become resistant. Therefore, to get a definitive eradication of leukemic cells, it is necessary to find novel therapeutic combinations, for achieving greater efficacy and fewer side effects.  Nutraceuticals play an increasingly important role in the treatment of cancer. Curcumin is an Indian spice with several therapeutic properties: anti-oxidant, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic and anti-cancer. In cancer disease, it acts by blocking cell transformation, proliferation, and invasion and by inducing cell apoptosis. In the present study, byapplying a quantitative proteomic SWATH-MS strategy we evaluated the effect of curcumin onK562 cells. Our findings revealed that the most relevant effect induced by curcumin was a consistent decrease of several proteins involved in glucose metabolism, most of which were HIF-1α targets, concomitant with the up-regulation of functional and structural mitochondrial proteins. The mechanism by which curcumin affects metabolic enzyme profile  was associated with the reduction of HIF-1α activity, due  to the miR-22-mediated down-regulation of importin 7 (IPO7) expression. Finally, the ability of curcumin to enhance in vitro the efficiency of imatinib was reported. In summary, our data indicates that the miR-22/IPO7/HIF-1α axis may be considered as a novel molecular target of curcumin adding new insights for better defining therapeutic activity and anticancer properties of this natural compound.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion. DMSO- and curcumin-treated K562 cells (respectively Ctrl-K562 and Curcu-K562) were lysed in RIPA buffer (NaCl 5M, Tris HCl pH 7.6 1M, 5% Triton X-100) following standard protocol and protein concentration was determined by Bradford method. After precipitation using the 2-D Clean-Up Kit cell lysates were suspended buffer (Tris HCl 100mM and UREA 8M) and subjected to trypsin in-solution digestion following standard procedures. Before injection, extracted peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Macrospin Columns. For each sample, two biological replicates were prepared and used for the following proteomic analysis.  Generation of the reference spectral library. Approximately 2μg of pooled tryptic peptides from each biological replicates of Ctrl-K562 and Curcu-K562 were subjected to Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) analysis. The resulting list of protein/peptides was used for construction of the SWATH reference spectral library. The sample was analyzed via reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry using a TripleTOF® 5600 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoLC Eksigent 425 system. RP-HPLC was performed with a trap and elution configuration using a Nano cHiPLC Trap column 200µm x 0.5mm ChromXP C18-CL 3µm 120Å and a Nano cHiPLC column 75µm x 15cm ChromXP C18-CL 3µm 120Å. The reverse-phase LC solvents were: solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (2% water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The sample was loaded in the trap column at a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min in a solvent containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v TFA in water and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient method: 1. solvent B from 10% to 28% within 120 min and to 60% within 30 min; 2 phase B to 95.2% within 2 min; 3. phase B decreased to 94.8% for 10 min (to rinse the column); phase B decreased to 10% over 2 min. Finally the column was equilibrated for 36 min (200 min total run time). The eluting peptides were on-line sprayed in the Triple TOF 5600 Plus mass spectrometer, that it is controlled by Analysts 1.6.1 software. The pooled sample used to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library was subjected to DDA run. For these three experiments, the mass range for MS scan was set to m/z 350–1250 and the MS/MS scan mass range was set to m/z 230–1,500. Using the mass spectrometer, a 0.25 s survey scan (MS) was performed, and the top 25 ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS experiments employing an accumulation time of 0.15 s per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 4.0504 s. Precursor ions were selected in high resolution mode (>30,000), tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15,000). The selection criteria for parent ions included an intensity of greater than 50 cps and a charge state ranging from + 2 to + 5. A 15 s dynamic exclusion was used. The ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and CES was set to 2. The DDA MS raw files were combined and subjected to database searches in unison using ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software with the Paragon algorithm by using the following parameters: iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, digestion by trypsin and no special factors. The search was conducted through identification efforts in a UniProt database (with 137216 protein sequence entries) containing whole Homo sapiens proteins. A false discovery rate analysis was performed.  SWATH-MS analysis and targeted data extraction. The two biological replicates of Ctrl-K562 and Curcu-K562 were twice run and subjected to the cyclic data independent acquisition (DIA) of mass spectra. Data were acquired by repeatedly cycling through 34 consecutive 25-Da precursor isolation windows (swaths). For these experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated using a 0.05 s survey scan (MS). The subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed across the mass range of 350 to 1250 m/z on all precursors in a cyclic manner using an accumulation time of 0.0898 s per SWATH window for a total cycle time of 3.3335 s. Ions were fragmented for each MS/MS experiment in the collision cell using rolling collision energy, and CES was set to 15. The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA samples were performed using PeakView v.2.2  with the reference spectral library. All eight DIA files were loaded and exported in .txt format in unison using an extraction window of 15 min and the following parameters: ten peptides/protein, seven transitions/peptide, peptide confidence level of 90%, excluded shared and modifies peptides, and XIC width set at 0.05 Da. For each protein, seven individual ion intensities were summed as peptide intensity, ten peptides intensities were summed as protein intensity. The protein list with FDR lower than 5% generated by analyzing SWATH data with PeakView 2.2, was exported to MarkerView 1.2.1 for the following statistical analysis.

### Data Protocol
The experimental design and workflow based on application of SWATH label-free proteomics quantitative technology are illustrated in Figure 1. To maximize the number of protein identification, we pooled the peptide mixtures of both control (Ctrl-K562) and curcumin-treated K562 cells (Curcu-K562) that was run using a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) method. Then, in order to build the spectral library needed for the following SWATH quantitation, the DDA data set was search against the Homo sapiens UniProt fasta database by using ProteinPilot 4.5 at a 1% critical false discovery rate (FDR), at both protein and peptide levels. To highlight protein profile modulation induced by curcumin-treatment, we applied a SWATH-MS strategy. Following ion extraction, peak alignment and normalization were performed using Peakview 2.2 software and the above reference spectral library. Leucine-rich PPR motif-containing protein, mitochondrial (LRPPRC) peptides were used to generate the retention time calibration curve between the library and the SWATH runs. The peptides were filtered using a FDR threshold of ≤ 5% over our eight runs (the two technical replicates for each of the two biological replicate of both untreated and curcumin-treated cells).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swath-ms; cml cells; curcumin

### Affiliations
University of Palermo - DiBiMed
Dept of Biopathology and Medical Biotechnologies, section of Biology and Genetics - University of Palermo Via Divisi 83, 90133 Palermo

### Submitter
SIMONA FONTANA

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Fontana
Dept of Biopathology and Medical Biotechnologies, section of Biology and Genetics - University of Palermo Via Divisi 83, 90133 Palermo


