### Accession
PXD033430

### Title
Dysregulated cellular redox status during hyperammonemia causes mitochondrial dysfunction by inhibiting sirtuin mediated deacetylation

### Description
Perturbed metabolism of ammonia, an endogenous cytotoxic molecule, causes mitochondrial dysfunction with decreased nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) in skeletal muscle. Consistent with our previous report of enrichment of NAD metabolism and sirtuin pathways during hyperammonemia, NAD+-dependent Sirtuin3 (Sirt3) expression and deacetylase activity weredecreased with increased muscle protein acetylation in murine and human skeletal muscle/myotubes. Acetylomics and cell fractions showed hyperammonemia-induced hyperacetylation of critical mitochondrial and signaling molecules. Overexpression of mitochondrial targeted Lactobacillus brevis NADH oxidase (MitoLbNOX) reversed ammonia-induced oxidative dysfunction, electron transport chain (ETC) supercomplex disassembly, lower ATP content, NAD+, and redox ratio (NAD+/NADH). Protein hyperacetylation, post-mitotic senescence and lower mitochondrial sirtuin (Sirt3) expressionduring hyperammonemia were also reversed by MitoLbNOX. Sirt3 overexpression alone did not reverse ammonia-induced redox or mitochondrial dysfunction but reversed hyperacetylation and senescence. These data show that targeting redox ratio, rather than Sirt3, more consistently restores mitochondrial homeostasis and protein acetylation during hyperammonemia.

### Sample Protocol
Each cell sample was lysed in ~500µl of Urea Lysis Buffer, 20mM HEPES, 9M urea, 1X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, pH 8.0. Protein concentrations of the samples were estimated by BCA. Aliquots of 10 mg of the protein extract from each sample was taken for in-solution trypsin digestion. The protein extracts were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide. Sequencing grade trypsin was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature overnight. After digestion, peptides were purified (desalted) with Sep-Pak® C18 columns (Waters Corporation, WAT 051910) and then lyophilized with a Labconco Freeze Dryer. Each lyophilized sample was spiked with acetylated Peptide Standard Mixture I * (Protea Biosciences Group, Inc., # PS-540-1) which contains 8 pmol of each of the three acetylated peptides. Equal amount of peptide from each sample was lyophilized and enriched using PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit (Cell Signaling #13416), and the eluted peptides were dried immediately in a SpeedVac. Each sample was reconstituted in 30 μL 1% acetic acid, and spiked in 10 μL 50 fmole/ μL Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture (12.5 fmole/ μL final concentration) as reference.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a ThermoScientific Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed- phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The data were analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search the mouse SwissProtKB databases with the program Sequest. The resulting peptides were filtered based on a FDR of <1% using a decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Perturbed metabolism of ammonia, an endogenous cytotoxin, causes mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced NAD<sup>+</sup> /NADH (redox) ratio, and postmitotic senescence. Sirtuins are NAD<sup>+</sup> -dependent deacetylases that delay senescence. In multiomics analyses, NAD metabolism and sirtuin pathways are enriched during hyperammonemia. Consistently, NAD<sup>+</sup> -dependent Sirtuin3 (Sirt3) expression and deacetylase activity were decreased, and protein acetylation was increased in human and murine skeletal muscle/myotubes. Global acetylomics and subcellular fractions from myotubes showed hyperammonemia-induced hyperacetylation of cellular signaling and mitochondrial proteins. We dissected the mechanisms and consequences of hyperammonemia-induced NAD metabolism by complementary genetic and chemical approaches. Hyperammonemia inhibited electron transport chain components, specifically complex I that oxidizes NADH to NAD<sup>+</sup> , that resulted in lower redox ratio. Ammonia also caused mitochondrial oxidative dysfunction, lower mitochondrial NAD<sup>+</sup> -sensor Sirt3, protein hyperacetylation, and postmitotic senescence. Mitochondrial-targeted Lactobacillus brevis NADH oxidase (MitoLbNOX), but not NAD+ precursor nicotinamide riboside, reversed ammonia-induced oxidative dysfunction, electron transport chain supercomplex disassembly, lower ATP and NAD<sup>+</sup> content, protein hyperacetylation, Sirt3 dysfunction and postmitotic senescence in myotubes. Even though Sirt3 overexpression reversed ammonia-induced hyperacetylation, lower redox status or mitochondrial oxidative dysfunction were not reversed. These data show that acetylation is a consequence of, but is not the mechanism of, lower redox status or oxidative dysfunction during hyperammonemia. Targeting NADH oxidation is a potential approach to reverse and potentially prevent ammonia-induced postmitotic senescence in skeletal muscle. Since dysregulated ammonia metabolism occurs with aging, and NAD<sup>+</sup> biosynthesis is reduced in sarcopenia, our studies provide a biochemical basis for cellular senescence and have relevance in multiple tissues.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Redox ratio, Hyperacetylation, Multiomic, Sirtuin

### Affiliations
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasan Dasarathy
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio


