### Accession
PXD042396

### Title
Initiation of B-type starch granules in wheat endosperm requires the plastidial α-glucan phosphorylase PHS1.

### Description
PHS1 is a plastidial α-glucan phosphorylase that can elongate and degrade maltooligosaccharides (MOS), but its exact physiological role in plants is poorly understood. Here, we discover a specialised role of PHS1 in establishing the unique bimodal characteristic of starch granules in the wheat endosperm. Wheat endosperm contains large A-type granules that initiate at early grain development, and small B-type granules that initiate in later grain development. We demonstrate that PHS1 interacts with BGC1 – a carbohydrate-binding protein essential for normal B-type granule initiation. Mutants of tetraploid durum wheat deficient in all homeologs of PHS1 had normal A-type granules, but fewer and larger B-type granules. Further, using a double mutant defective in both PHS1 and BGC1, we show that PHS1 is exclusively involved in B-type granule initiation. Grain size and starch content were not affected by the mutations. In leaves, the total starch content and number of starch granules per chloroplast were not affected by loss of PHS1, suggesting that its role in granule initiation in wheat is limited to the endosperm. We therefore propose that the initiation of A- and B-type granules occur by distinct biochemical mechanisms, where PHS1 plays an exclusive role in B-type granule initiation.

### Sample Protocol
For the pulldown assay to identify proteins associating with BGC1, the bait protein (recombinant His-tagged BGC1) was expressed in E. coli as described in Hawkins et al. (2020) and purified in its native state using Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen) as previously described (Seung et al., 2013). To produce endosperm extract, endosperms were dissected from developing grains (collected at 18 dpa) of wild-type Kronos plants and homogenised in ice-cold extraction medium [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 1 mM DTT, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, and Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail] at a rate of 1 mL buffer per 100 mg tissue. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at full speed for 5 min at 4°C, and proteins were collected in the supernatant. Recombinant BGC1-His protein (2.5 µg) was added to the supernatant (1 mL) and was incubated for 1 h at 4°C. µMACS magnetic beads conjugated to anti-His (Miltenyi Biotec) were added and incubated for 1 h at 4°C to retrieve the bait protein together with interacting proteins. The beads were captured with a µColumn on a magnetic stand (Miltenyi Biotec), washed three times with wash medium [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH  8, 1 mM DTT, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 300 mM NaCl, and Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail], then three times with wash medium without Triton X-100, before eluting the bound proteins with elution medium [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, and 2% (w/v) SDS].  The eluted proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol according to (Pankow et al., 2016). Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µl of 2.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC; Merck) in 0.2 M EPPS-buffer (Merck), pH 8.5 and reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin in the SDC buffer according to standard procedures. After the digest, the SDC was precipitated by adjusting to 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the clear supernatant subjected to C18 SPE. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #SPD120) and the peptides dissolved in 0.1%TFA/3% acetonitrile. Peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer with a FAIMS Pro Duo source, coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The samples were loaded and trapped using a trap cartridge (Pepmap Neo C18, 5 µm, 300 µm x 5 mm, Thermo) with 0.1% TFA at 15 µl min-1 for 3 min. The trap was then switched in-line with the analytical column (nanoEase M/Z column, HSS C18 T3, 100 Å, 1.8 µm; Waters, Wilmslow, UK) for separation using the following gradient of solvents A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1 : 0-3 min 3% B (during trapping); 3-10 min linear increase B to 7%; 10-100 min increase B to 32%; 100-148 min increase B to 50%; followed by a ramp to 99% B and re-equilibration to 3% B, for a total running time of 180 minutes. Mass spectrometry data were acquired with the FAIMS device set to three compensation voltages (-35V, -50V, -65V) at standard resolution for 1 s each with the following MS settings in positive ion mode: MS1/OT: resolution 120K, profile mode, mass range m/z 300-1800, spray voltage 2800 V, AGC 4e5, maximum injection time 50 ms; MS2/IT: data dependent analysis was performed using HCD fragmentation with the following parameters: cycle time of 1 s in IT turbo for each FAIMS CV, centroid mode, isolation window 1.0 Da, charge states 2-5, threshold 1.0e4, CE = 30, normalised AGC target 100%, max. inject time set to Auto, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 15 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed and quantified in Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo) using the incorporated search engine CHIMERYS® (MSAID® Munich, Germany). The processing workflow included recalibration of MS1 spectra (RC) and the Minora Feature Detector for quantification with min. trace length=7 and S/N threshold=3. The Top N Peak Filter (10 per 100 Da) was applied and the CHIMERYS® search was performed with the prediction model inferys_2.1_fragmentation, enzyme trypsin with 2 missed cleavages, peptide length 7-25, fragment tolerance 0.5 Da, variable modification oxidation (M), fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (C). Percolator was used for validation using q-value and FDR 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). In the consensus workflow quantification was performed with a maximum RT Shift of 3 min and a mass tolerance of 4 ppm between runs. Protein quantification was based on the top 3 most abundant unique peptides per protein group. Missing values were replaced by low abundance resampling. Protein abundance ratios were calculated from the 3 replicates per sample. The hypothesis test was performed by a background-based t-test and the p-values adjusted according to BH.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phs1/pho1, A- and b-type granules, Bgc1, Wheat

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Group Leader  Department of Biochemistry and Metabolism John Innes Centre Norwich Research Park Norwich NR4 7UH, UK

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr David Seung
Group Leader  Department of Biochemistry and Metabolism John Innes Centre Norwich Research Park Norwich NR4 7UH, UK


