### Accession
PXD018034

### Title
Maturation kinetics of a multiprotein complex revealed by metabolic labeling

### Description
The project aims at computing in vivo co-assembly kinetics from metabolomic-inspired approaches. In short, we performed reciprocal pull-down experiments from complex cellular components at different time points following pulsed-SILAC metabolic labeling. We applied the method to 320 pairs of yeast nucleoporin (NUP) proteins constituting the ~ 50 MDa Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC). Our analysis reveals a hierarchical principle of the NPC biogenesis where individual subcomplexes form on a minute time-scale, followed by their co-assembly from central to peripheral subunits in a ~ 1 hour long maturation process.

### Sample Protocol
Ten proteins (MLP1, NSP1, NUP1, NUP133, NUP188, NUP57, NUP82, NUP84, NUP85, NUP159) components of the yeast Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC) were expressed with a ZZ-tag and pulled-down at various time points (0, 30, 60, 90 min) following a shift from light to a heavy medium containing isotopically-labeled lysine amino acids. After pull-down, the samples were loaded on SDS-PAGE, the protein band was excised and in-gel digested was performed with trypsin. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed either on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus or on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos instrument in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for library generation and in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode for quantification.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data was searched with Comet and Mascot, the results compiled with iProphet at 1% FDR. The spectral library was generated with spectraST and imported into Spectronaut for the targeted extraction of the DIA data. All post-processing was based on the fragment report from Spectronaut using R scripts to compute the kinetics of the labeling of the yeast nucleoporins and related proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maturation kinetics, Yeast, Nuclear pore complex, Data independent acquisition, Pulsed silac

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Onischenko
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


