### Accession
PXD015111

### Title
Decoding the stoichiometric composition and organization of bacterial metabolosomes C4PR_LIV

### Description
Self-assembly of proteins into complexes with defined stoichiometry and organization is fundamental to the structure and functionality of many molecular machines in biology. Some enteric bacteria including Salmonella have evolved the propanediol-utilizing microcompartment (Pdu MCP), a specialized proteinaceous organelle that is essential for 1,2-propanediol degradation and enteric pathogenesis. Pdu MCPs are a family of bacterial microcompartments that are self-assembled from thousands of protein molecules within the bacterial cytosol. Inside the Pdu MCP, several catalytical enzymes and cofactors involved in reactions for metabolizing 1,2-propanediol are encapsulated in a semi-permeable protein shell that comprises multi-subunit proteins in hexameric, pentameric, and trimeric states. Here, we seek a comprehensive understanding of the stoichiometric composition and organization of Pdu MCPs. We obtain accurate stoichiometry of shell proteins and internal enzymes of the natural Pdu MCP by QconCAT-driven quantitative mass spectrometry. Genetic deletion of the major shell protein and absolute stoichiometry analysis reveal the stoichiometric and structural remodeling of Pdu MCPs. Our new knowledge about the protein stoichiometry leads us to propose a model of the Pdu metabolosome structure. Moreover, atomic force microscopy of Pdu MCPs at the near-physiological condition illustrates the inherent flexibility of the Pdu MCP structure and the key role of cargo enzymes in maintaining mechanical stiffness of the biological architecture. These structural insights into the Pdu MCP will be critical for both delineating the general principles underlying bacterial organelle formation, structural robustness and function, and repurposing natural microcompartments using synthetic biology for biotechnological applications.

### Sample Protocol
Absolute quantification of protein components in the active Pdu MCPs and a PduA deletion mutant from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) LT2, was performed by quantitative mass spectrometry using a QconCAT (concatamer of standard peptides for absolute quantification) standard to define the stoichiometry of individual shell proteins and interiors within the Pdu MCP. Pdu MCPs (4 wild type, and 4 deltaPduA) were isolated by differential centrifugation. Each bioreplicate was co-digested with stable-isotope labeled QconCAT generated by cell-free synthesis. Peptides were analysed by high resolution MS (240,000, MS1 only) on a QExactive HF. QconCAT amounts in each bioreplicate (fmol/microlitre) were determined by the addition of unlabelled Glufibrinopeptide quantification peptide to the digests. The encapsulation of Pdu enzymes within the Pdu MCP, and the structural flexibility of Pdu MCPs, were characterized by live-cell confocal microscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported into Skyline (version 4.1.0.18169) for the extraction of time-intensity chromatograms for MS1 scans of Pdu MCP (unlabelled) and QconCAT (labelled) peptide pairs to determine peak area ratios. To determine the absolute amount of QconCAT and therefore surrogate analyte peptide in each digest, a known amount of unlabelled glufibrinopeptide, was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with each digest and from the ratio of peak areas to a corresponding labeled quantification peptide, calculated using Skyline open source software, the amount of Pdu peptide (femtomole) was determined

### Publication Abstract
Some enteric bacteria including Salmonella have evolved the propanediol-utilising microcompartment (Pdu MCP), a specialised proteinaceous organelle that is essential for 1,2-propanediol degradation and enteric pathogenesis. Pdu MCPs are a family of bacterial microcompartments that are self-assembled from hundreds of proteins within the bacterial cytosol. Here, we seek a comprehensive understanding of the stoichiometric composition and organisation of Pdu MCPs. We obtain accurate stoichiometry of shell proteins and internal enzymes of the natural Pdu MCP by QconCAT-driven quantitative mass spectrometry. Genetic deletion of the major shell protein and absolute quantification reveal the stoichiometric and structural remodelling of metabolically functional Pdu MCPs. Decoding the precise protein stoichiometry allows us to develop an organisational model of the Pdu metabolosome. The structural insights into the Pdu MCP are critical for both delineating the general principles underlying bacterial organelle formation, structural robustness and function, and repurposing natural microcompartments using synthetic biology for biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Pdu mcp, Propanediol-utilising microcompartment, Qconcat

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Chair of Microbial Bioenergetics and Bioengineering Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool,Crown Street, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Deborah Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Lu-Ning Lui
Chair of Microbial Bioenergetics and Bioengineering Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool,Crown Street, Liverpool L69 7ZB, United Kingdom


