### Accession
PXD039573

### Title
Differential contribution of nitrifying prokaryotes to nitrification in groundwater

### Description
The ecophysiology of complete ammonia oxidizing Nitrospira (CMX) and their widespread occurrence in groundwater suggests that CMX bacteria have a competitive advantage over ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and archaea (AOA) in these environments. However, the relevance of their activity from the ecosystem-level process perspective has remained unclear. We investigated oligotrophic carbonate rock aquifers as a model system to assess the contribution of CMX, AOA and AOB to nitrification and to identify the environmental drivers of their niche differentiation at different levels of ammonium and oxygen. CMX accounted for up to 95% of the ammonia oxidizer communities. Nitrification rates were positively correlated to CMX clade A-associated phylotypes and AOB affiliated with Nitrosomonas ureae. Surprisingly, short-term incubations amended with the nitrification inhibitors allylthiourea and chlorate suggested that AOB contributed more than 90% to overall ammonia oxidation, while metaproteomics analysis confirmed an active role of CMX in both ammonia and nitrite oxidation. Ecophysiological niche differentiation of CMX clades A and B, AOA and AOB was linked to their requirements for ammonium, oxygen tolerance, and metabolic versatility. Our results demonstrate that despite numerical predominance of CMX, the first step of nitrification in oligotrophic groundwater is primarily governed by AOB. Higher growth yields at lower NH4+ turnover rates and energy derived from nitrite oxidation most likely enable CMX to maintain consistently high populations. Activity measurements combined with differential inhibition allowed a refined understanding of ammonia oxidizer coexistence, competition and cooperation beyond the insights from molecular data alone.

### Sample Protocol
Groundwater was obtained from karstic limestone aquifers at the Hainich Critical Zone Exploratory (CZE) in Thuringia (Germany) within the framework of the Collaborative Research Center AquaDiva. Further details about location and geological setting are reported elsewhere. Sampling wells H14, H32, H42, H43, H52 and H53 at varying depths give access to oxygen-deficient (less than 15 µM DO) groundwater from an upper mudstone-dominated low-flow aquifer (HTU) and oxic groundwater from wells H13, H31, H41 and H51 (mean values 154 to 672 µM DO) accessing a lower fast-flow limestone-dominated karstified aquifer assemblage (HTL). The main recharge zone for groundwater is located at the hilltop of the transect near wells H13 and H14. Groundwater collected from regular monthly sampling between 2018 to 2021 was obtained using submersible motor pumps (Grundfos, Denmark). Additional groundwater samples for metaproteomic analysis were collected from wells H14, H41, H43 and H52 in January 2019 and filtered through 0.2 µm pore size filters (Merck Millipore, Germany). All filters were immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until extraction. Proteins were extracted from filters using a phenol-chloroform based protocol as previously described [48]. Proteins were subjected to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, subsequently in-gel tryptic cleavage and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed (please see associated publication). Translated amino acid sequences from all genes of the MAGs obtained from the metagenomic datasets were used as a reference database for protein identification. Taxonomic and functional annotations of identified peptides were transferred from the metagenomic dataset. For metaproteomic analysis, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (v:v) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in LC chip coupling mode, equipped with a TriVersa NanoMate source (Advion Ltd., Ithaca, NY, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data was analysed with the Sequest HT search algorithm in Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The following parameters were used: enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as static modification and oxidation (methionine) as dynamic modification, and peptide ion and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Peptides were considered identified upon scoring a q-value < 1% based on a decoy database and obtaining a peptide rank of 1. Statistical analysis was performed in R 4.12 (R Core Team, 2020) using packages FSA, ComplexHeatmap and vegan. Shapiro-Wilk test was applied to test for normal distribution of data before conducting either parametric or non-parametric tests. Significant differences of groundwater hydrochemical properties and gene abundances between groundwater wells were determined using Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test and Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc test with R package FSA. Correlations between hydrochemical properties, total amoA abundances and absolute amoA read abundances of OTUs were calculated using Spearman’s rank correlation and heatmap construction with R ComplexHeatmap package. Ordination analyses were performed with R vegan For redundancy analysis, the absolute amoA read abundances of OTUs were standardized using Hellinger method and hydrochemical parameters were log-transformed before performing rda function from vegan. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling using Bray-Curtis distance matrix was performed to show dissimilarity of ammonia oxidizing communities between groundwater from different wells. Anosim function from vegan was used to verify the significance of observed differentiation.

### Publication Abstract
The ecophysiology of complete ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (CMX) of the genus Nitrospira and their widespread occurrence in groundwater suggests that CMX bacteria have a competitive advantage over ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and archaea (AOA) in these environments. However, the specific contribution of their activity to nitrification processes has remained unclear. We aimed to disentangle the contribution of CMX, AOA and AOB to nitrification and to identify the environmental drivers of their niche differentiation at different levels of ammonium and oxygen in oligotrophic carbonate rock aquifers. CMX ammonia monooxygenase sub-unit A (amoA) genes accounted on average for 16 to 75% of the total groundwater amoA genes detected. Nitrification rates were positively correlated to CMX clade A associated phylotypes and AOB affiliated with Nitrosomonas ureae. Short-term incubations amended with the nitrification inhibitors allylthiourea and chlorate suggested that AOB contributed a large fraction to overall ammonia oxidation, while metaproteomics analysis confirmed an active role of CMX in both ammonia and nitrite oxidation. Ecophysiological niche differentiation of CMX clades A and B, AOB and AOA was linked to their requirements for ammonium, oxygen tolerance, and metabolic versatility. Our results demonstrate that despite numerical predominance of CMX, the first step of nitrification in oligotrophic groundwater appears to be primarily governed by AOB. Higher growth yields at lower ammonia turnover rates and energy derived from nitrite oxidation most likely enable CMX to maintain consistently high populations.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Groundwater, Prokaryotes, Nitrification, Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ GmbH Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


