### Accession
PXD020456

### Title
Exoproteomics of emetic Bacillus cereus grown at low and high temperature.

### Description
This project contributes to the proteomic comparison of the dynamics of emetic Bacillus cereus grown at low (16°C) and high (30°C) temperature.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel, subjected to electrophoresis, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared using the LIMMA package for R.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular proteomes and exoproteomes are dynamic, allowing pathogens to respond to environmental conditions to sustain growth and virulence. <i>Bacillus cereus</i> is an important food-borne pathogen causing intoxication via emetic toxin and/or multiple protein exotoxins. Here, we compared the dynamics of the cellular proteome and exoproteome of emetic <i>B. cereus</i> cells grown at low (16 &#xb0;C) and high (30 &#xb0;C) temperature. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)-based shotgun proteomics analysis identified 2063 cellular proteins and 900 extracellular proteins. Hierarchical clustering following principal component analysis indicated that in <i>B. cereus</i> the abundance of a subset of these proteins-including cold-stress responders, and exotoxins non-hemolytic enterotoxin (NHE) and hemolysin I (cereolysin O (CLO))-decreased at low temperature, and that this subset governs the dynamics of the cellular proteome. NHE, and to a lesser extent CLO, also contributed significantly to exoproteome dynamics; with decreased abundances in the low-temperature exoproteome, especially in late growth stages. Our data therefore indicate that <i>B. cereus</i> may reduce its production of secreted protein toxins to maintain appropriate proteome dynamics, perhaps using catabolite repression to conserve energy for growth in cold-stress conditions, at the expense of virulence.

### Keywords
Virulence, Bacteria, Toxins, Shotgun proteomics, Emetic bacillus cereus, Dynamics of exoproteome.

### Affiliations
Li2D
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, INRAE, Département Médicaments et Technologies pour la Santé (DMTS), SPI, ProGénoMIX Platform, 30200 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France.

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, INRAE, Département Médicaments et Technologies pour la Santé (DMTS), SPI, ProGénoMIX Platform, 30200 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France.


