### Accession
PXD025289

### Title
Mitochondrial Proteostasis Requires Genes Encoded in a Neurodevelopmental Syndrome Locus

### Description
Eukaryotic cells maintain proteostasis through mechanisms that require cytoplasmic and mitochondrial translation. Genetic defects affecting cytoplasmic translation perturb synapse development, neurotransmission, and are causative of neurodevelopmental disorders such as Fragile X syndrome. In contrast, there is little indication that mitochondrial proteostasis, either in the form of mitochondrial protein translation and/or degradation, is required for synapse development and function. Here we focus on two genes deleted in a recurrent copy number variation causing neurodevelopmental disorders, the 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. We demonstrate that SLC25A1 and MRPL40, two genes present in the microdeleted segment and whose products localize to mitochondria, interact and are necessary for mitochondrial ribosomal integrity and proteostasis. Our Drosophila studies show that mitochondrial ribosome function is necessary for synapse neurodevelopment, function, and behavior. We propose that mitochondrial proteostasis perturbations, either by genetic or environmental factors, are a pathogenic mechanism for neurodevelopmental disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were diluted 1:1 with 8M urea, reduced with 1mM DTT and alkylated with 5mM IAA.  Endoproteinase LysC (2ug) was added and the samples were digested overnight.  Samples were then diluted 4-fold with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin (2ug) was added.  Digestion was allowed to progress overnight.  The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 1% formic acid and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  The acidified samples were then desalted using Water's 30mg HLB Prime 96-plates using a positive pressure manifold.  Afterwards, all samples were dried under vacuum using an speedvac and stored until run on the mass spectrometer.    Each sample was brought up in 20ul of sample buffer (water with 0.1% formic acid - also buffer A) and 3ul was loaded onto a 20cm 150ID column self-packed with Water's CSH 1.7um C18 resin.  The liquid chromatography (Thermo Easy-nLC 1200) was used to equilibrate the column with 6ul of buffer A and provide a gradient of 1% to 35% buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over a 55 minute timeframe.  A Thermo Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was used to seqeunce the peptide ions.  The mass spectrometry system was supplemented with a field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) PRO unit.  Three compensation voltages (CV) were used and each CV cycle was run at top speed for 1 second.  Full survey scans (375-1500 m/z scan range, 120,000 resolution, 50 ms max injection time and automatic gain control target of 400000) was collected in the Orbitrap.  Tandem scans (higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation, normalized collision energy of 35%, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, 35 ms max injection time, and AGC target of 10000) were collected in the ion trap.  Only ions with change states from 2-7 were selected and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched using Thermo's Proteome Discoverer suite with Sequest HT.  The spectra were searched against a mouse uniprot database downloaded on August 2020 (redundant seqeunces were removed in-house and 91413 target seqeunces were kept).  Search parameters included 20ppm precursor mass window, 0.6 Da product mass window, dynamic modifications methione (+15.995 Da), deamidated asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da), phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da), and static modifications for carbamidomethyl cysteines(+57.021 Da).  Percolator was used filter PSMs to 0.1%.  Only peptides that passed the 0.1% filter were used for quantitation.  The Minora feature detection node was used to quantify mass and charge matched peaks that were not sequenced by the machine.  Peptides were group using strict parsimony and only razor and unique peptides were used for protein level quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells maintain proteostasis through mechanisms that require cytoplasmic and mitochondrial translation. Genetic defects affecting cytoplasmic translation perturb synapse development, neurotransmission, and are causative of neurodevelopmental disorders, such as Fragile X syndrome. In contrast, there is little indication that mitochondrial proteostasis, either in the form of mitochondrial protein translation and/or degradation, is required for synapse development and function. Here we focus on two genes deleted in a recurrent copy number variation causing neurodevelopmental disorders, the 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. We demonstrate that SLC25A1 and MRPL40, two genes present in the microdeleted segment and whose products localize to mitochondria, interact and are necessary for mitochondrial ribosomal integrity and proteostasis. Our <i>Drosophila</i> studies show that mitochondrial ribosome function is necessary for synapse neurodevelopment, function, and behavior. We propose that mitochondrial proteostasis perturbations, either by genetic or environmental factors, are a pathogenic mechanism for neurodevelopmental disorders.<b>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</b> The balance between cytoplasmic protein synthesis and degradation, or cytoplasmic proteostasis, is required for normal synapse function and neurodevelopment. Cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ribosomes are necessary for two compartmentalized, yet interdependent, forms of proteostasis. Proteostasis dependent on cytoplasmic ribosomes is a well-established target of genetic defects that cause neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism. Here we show that the mitochondrial ribosome is a neurodevelopmentally regulated organelle whose function is required for synapse development and function. We propose that defective mitochondrial proteostasis is a mechanism with the potential to contribute to neurodevelopmental disease.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Orbitrap, Faims

### Affiliations
Victor Faundez MD, PhD Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Fuandez
Victor Faundez MD, PhD Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University


