### Accession
PXD005744

### Title
Purification and characterization of a novel allergenic walnut vicilin-like protein

### Description
Walnuts are potent inducers of food allergic symptoms. So far, five allergens were identified, among those, Jug r 2 belonging to the vicilin family. Based on the identification of an IgE-reactive clone from a cDNA library in 1999 (Teuber et al.), the sequence fragment of Jug r 2 was determined. However, only limited data is known about the natural form of the protein. Therefore, this study aimed to purify and characterize the natural Jug r 2. During the study we identified another vicilin with both, higher sequence identity to vicilins from related species and IgE cross reactivity as compared to Jug r 2.

### Sample Protocol
Walnuts were ground and defatted twice (1:5 w/v) by n-hexane. Proteins were extracted from walnut flour by 7 volumes of buffer (20mM Tris/HCl, 0.5M NaCl, 5% PVPP, 10mM DTT, pH=8) for 4 hours at 4°C. Subsequently, purification was performed starting with ConA affinity followed by anion exchange and size exclusion. The entire mass of purified protein was identified by MALDI-TOF and ESI-QTOF (SYNAPT G2, Waters) mass spectrometry. Optimized multi-enzymatic digestion was applied for extensive protein characterization including post-translational modifications analysis and de novo sequencing.

### Data Protocol
The identification by LC-MS (QExactive plus, Thermo Scientific,  an Orbitrap) resulted in the 89% sequence coverage calculated for the provided sequence coming from search against walnut transciptomic database. We applied sequence analysis at 1%, 0.1% and 0%FDR peptide. If we considered truncated protein (with the processing prediction typical for the protein family) we obtained 96.8% sequence coverage. Data that we submitted are coming from shotgun analysis but on a purified protein as steted in sample processing protocol.

### Publication Abstract
Walnuts are ranked high in the list of the culprit foods inducing severe allergic reactions. Jug r 2 has been identified as a major allergen in common walnut by cDNA cloning from a somatic cell line. So far, studies were performed on the allergenic activity of recombinant Jug r 2, yet there is still no evidence about the physicochemical characteristics of the natural allergen. Therefore, we aimed to purify and deeply characterize natural Jug r 2 and to assess IgE cross-reactivity among vicilins from different tree nuts. Extensive mass spectrometry analysis of the obtained purified vicilin allowed identification of the protein sequence that displayed only 44% identity to Jug r 2. The newly identified vicilin (Jug r 6) was recognized by IgE of 26% in walnut allergic patients' sera tested. In contrast to Jug r 2, Jug r 6 displayed a remarkable level of cross-reactivity when tested with homologues from hazelnut, sesame and pistachio. It is the first report showing the necessity of proteomic studies to improve allergy component resolved diagnosis.

### Keywords
Vicilin, Food allergy, Walnut

### Affiliations
Dept. of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research  Medical University of Vienna  AKH-EBO 3Q  Waehringer Guertel 18-20  A-1090 Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Pawel Dubiela

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Dubiela
Dept. of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research  Medical University of Vienna  AKH-EBO 3Q  Waehringer Guertel 18-20  A-1090 Vienna, Austria


