### Accession
PXD002535

### Title
Middle-down MS analysis of  intact and clipped histone H3 proteoforms

### Description
There is growing evidence that proteolytic cleavage of histone N-terminal tails, known as histone clipping, influences nucleosome dynamics and functional properties. Using middle-down MS analysis we characterized intact and proteolytically processed histone H3 proteoforms isolated from human hepatocarcinoma cell line HepG2/C3A grown in 3D culture.

### Sample Protocol
Acid-precipitated bulk histones were resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Then a 50-μg aliquot of histones was subjected to endoproteinase GluC digestion (Calbiochem, 1:20 enzyme to substrate ratio 1:20) performed for 8 hours at room temperature. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed in triplicate by the WCX/HILIC-MS/MS method adapted from our previous study (DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400084). Peptides were eluted directly into the ESI source of a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180-min linear gradient of 40–80% buffer B at flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) was used with a ESI voltage of 2.2 kV. Capillary temperature was 270 °C. Dynamic exclusion (DE) was disabled during data acquisition. Data acquisition was performed in the Orbitrap for both precursor ions and product ions, with a mass resolution of 60,000 (full-width at half-height) for MS and 30,000 for MS/MS. Precursor charge states 1+, 2+ and 3+ were excluded. Isolation width was set at 2 m/z. The six most intense ions with MS signal higher than 5,000 counts were isolated for fragmentation using ETD with an activation Q value of 0.25, activation time of 90 ms with charge state dependent ETD time enabled, and Supplemental activation. Three microscans were used for each MS/MS spectrum, and the AGC target was set to 2x105. Acquisition window was set at m/z 450-750, including charge states 5+ to 11+.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and searched with Mascot (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fischer Scientific) data analysis package. Spectra were deconvoluted by using Xtract (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following parameters: S/N threshold was set to 0, resolution at 400 m/z was 30,000 and monoisotopic mass only was true. The following parameters were used in the Mascot search: MS mass tolerance: 2.1 Da, to include possible errors in isotopic recognition; MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.01 Da; semi GluC specificity with no missed cleavage allowed; mono- and dimethylation (KR), trimethylation (K), acetylation (K) and phosphorylation (ST) were set as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched against histone human database, consisted of histone H3.1/H3.2 and H3.3 N-terminal sequences, covering residues 1-50, downloaded from Uniprot (updated September 2011). XML results file from Mascot were exported by ticking all the query level information and the start and end from the peptide match information (plus all the default settings). XML files were imported and processed using an in-house developed software Histone Coder (DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400084). Histone Coder was used with a tolerance of 30 ppm and only c/z fragment ions allowed. Only PTMs with at least one site-determining ion before and after the assigned PTM site were accepted. Peptide quantification was performed using in-house developed software IsoScale (DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400084).

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histone proteins play a fundamental role in regulation of DNA-templated processes. There is also growing evidence that proteolytic cleavage of histone N-terminal tails, known as histone clipping, influences nucleosome dynamics and functional properties. Using top-down and middle-down protein analysis by mass spectrometry, we report histone H2B and H3 N-terminal tail clipping in human hepatocytes and demonstrate a relationship between clipping and co-existing PTMs of histone H3. Histones H2B and H3 undergo proteolytic processing in primary human hepatocytes and the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2/C3A when grown in spheroid (3D) culture, but not in a flat (2D) culture. Using tandem mass spectrometry we localized four different clipping sites in H3 and one clipping site in H2B. We show that in spheroid culture clipped H3 proteoforms are mainly represented by canonical histone H3, whereas in primary hepatocytes over 90% of clipped H3 correspond to the histone variant H3.3. Comprehensive analysis of histone H3 modifications revealed a series of PTMs, including K14me1, K27me2/K27me3, and K36me1/me2, which are differentially abundant in clipped and intact H3. Analysis of co-existing PTMs revealed negative crosstalk between H3K36 methylation and H3K23 acetylation in clipped H3. Our data provide the first evidence of histone clipping in human hepatocytes and demonstrate that clipped H3 carry distinct co-existing PTMs different from those in intact H3.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Liver, Hepg2/c3a, Middle-down ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Ole Nørregaard Jensen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group, University of Southern Denmark


