### Accession
PXD031890

### Title
Regulation of stress signaling by SCD1

### Description
Cytotoxic stress activates stress-activated kinases, initiates adaptive mechanisms, including the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy, and induces programmed cell death. Fatty acid unsaturation, controlled by stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD)1, prevents cytotoxic stress but the mechanisms are diffuse. We found that SCD1 inhibition alters the levels of proteins phosphorylated at tyrosine in fibroblasts. Major regulated proteins were identified following immunoprecipitation using an anti-phospho-tyrosine antibody and subsequent proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation  NIH-3T3 cells (5×10^5/25 cm^2) were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or CAY10566 (CAY, 3 µM) for 48 h. After washing with ice-cold PBS pH 7.4 and scraping in 500 µl ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X 100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM EGTA, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride), cells were sonicated on ice (3 × 5 s). The lysate was centrifuged (14,000×g, 10 min, 4°C), and an aliquot (200 µl, 1 mg/ml total protein) was pre-cleared by incubating with 20 µl of protein A magnetic bead slurry (Cell Signaling, #73778) for 20 min at room temperature. The pre-cleared lysate was separated from the beads using a magnet and incubated with rabbit anti-phospho-tyrosine (p-Tyr-1000, #8954, 1:200) under rotation for 16 h at 4°C. The formed immunocomplexes were combined with washed protein A magnetic beads (20 µl of slurry). After 20 min at room temperature, beads were collected by magnetic separation and repeatedly washed with lysis buffer. Proteins were detached in SDS/PAGE sample loading buffer (20 µl) and subjected to SDS-PAGE and quantitative proteomics.  In-gel digestion of proteins  Protein bands of interest were cut out from the Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gels, cut into small pieces, washed several times with 25 mM aqueous NH4HCO3 and destained with 50% ACN / 25 mM aqueous NH4HCO3. The proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Destained, washed, and dehydrated gel pieces were rehydrated for 60 min in a solution of 12 ng/µl porcinetrypsin (Promega) in 25 mM aqueous NH4HCO3 at 4°C and incubated overnight at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were extracted from gel pieces using 75% ACN / 5% formic acid, and dried down in a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For nanoUPLC-MSE analysis samples were reconstructed in 30 μl aqueous 1% formic acid.  LC–MSE analysis  1 µL of each sample was injected onto an UPLC M-class system (Waters) online coupled to a Synapt G2-si mass spectrometer (Waters). Samples were first on-line pre-concentrated and desalted using a UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 180 µm × 20 mm, 5 µm particle size; Waters) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min (0.1% aqueous formic acid). Peptides were eluted onto a ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 analytical column (100 Å, 75 µm × 200 mm, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) ata flow rate of 350 nl/min using an increasing acetonitrile gradient with 2-10% B over 5 min, 10–40% B over 40 min, 40–70% B over 7 min, 70-95% B over 3 min, isocratic at 95% B for 2 min, and a return to 1% B (buffers: A, 0.1 % formic acid in water; B, 100 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid).  The eluted peptides were transferred into the mass spectrometer operated in V-mode with a resolving power of at least 20,000 full width at half height FWHM. All analyses were performed in a positive ESI mode. A solution of 100 fmol/µl human Glu-fibrinopeptide B in 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile (1:1 v/v) was infused at a flow rate of 1 μl/min through the reference sprayer every 45 seconds to compensate for mass shifts in MS and MS/MS fragmentation mode.  Data were acquired using data-independent acquisition (DIA), referred to as enhanced MSE. MS data were collected using MassLynx v4.1 software (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification  The acquired continuum LC-MSE data were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) version 2.5.2 (Waters) to generate product ion spectra for database searching according to Ion Accounting algorithm (Li, G. Z. et al., Proteomics, 2009). The processed data were searched against Swissprot database (2019_01). The database search was performed at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 2%. Following search parameters were applied for the minimum numbers of: fragments per peptide (3), peptides per protein (1), fragments per protein (7), and maximum number of missed tryptic cleavage sites (1). Searches were restricted to tryptic peptides with a fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines.  For quantification, a universal response factor was calculated from trypsin (the averaged intensity of the three most intense peptides) (Silva, J. C. et al., Mol Cell Proteomics, 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic stress activates stress-activated kinases, initiates adaptive mechanisms, including the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy, and induces programmed cell death. Fatty acid unsaturation, controlled by stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD)1, prevents cytotoxic stress but the mechanisms are diffuse. Here, we show that 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1'-myo-inositol) [PI(18:1/18:1)] is a SCD1-derived signaling lipid, which inhibits p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, counteracts UPR, endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation, and apoptosis, regulates autophagy, and maintains cell morphology and proliferation. SCD1 expression and the cellular PI(18:1/18:1) proportion decrease during the onset of cell death, thereby repressing protein phosphatase 2&#x2009;A and enhancing stress signaling. This counter-regulation applies to mechanistically diverse death-inducing conditions and is found in multiple human and mouse cell lines and tissues of Scd1-defective mice. PI(18:1/18:1) ratios reflect stress tolerance in tumorigenesis, chemoresistance, infection, high-fat diet, and immune aging. Together, PI(18:1/18:1) is a lipokine that links fatty acid unsaturation with stress responses, and its depletion evokes stress signaling.

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Stress signaling, Mouse fibroblasts, Phospholipid, Monounsaturated fatty acid

### Affiliations
Michael Popp Institute, University of Innsbruck, Austria
Michael Popp Institute, University of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Andreas Koeberle

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Koeberle
Michael Popp Institute, University of Innsbruck, Austria


