### Accession
PXD038051

### Title
Comprehensive Evaluation of Rapamycin’s Specificity as an mTOR inhibitor

### Description
Rapamycin is a naturally derived macrolide antibiotic that demonstrates immunosuppressive, chemotherapeutic, and anti-ageing effects in model organisms and humans. Importantly, Rapamycin and its analogues are currently used in the clinic against various cancers and neurological disorders. Although Rapamycin is widely perceived as a specific allosteric inhibitor of mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin), the master regulator of cellular and organismal physiology, its specificity has not been thoroughly evaluated so far. In fact, previous studies in cells and in mice suggested that Rapamycin may be also acting independently from mTOR to influence various cellular functions. Here, we generated a gene-edited cell line, expressing a Rapamycin-resistant mTOR mutant (mTORRR), and assessed the effects of Rapamycin treatment on the transcriptome and proteome of control and mTORRR-expressing cells. Our data reveal a striking specificity of Rapamycin towards mTOR, demonstrated by virtually no changes in mRNA or protein levels in Rapamycin-treated mTORRR cells, even following prolonged drug treatment. Overall, this study provides the first comprehensive and conclusive assessment of Rapamycin’s specificity, with important potential implications for ageing research and therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
TMTPro Labeling Tryptic peptides were eluted from STAGE tips with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) /0.1% formic acid (FA). Four micrograms of the eluted peptides were dried out and reconstituted in 9 µL of 0.1M TEAB. Tandem mass tag (TMTpro, Thermo Fisher Scientific cat. No A44522) labeling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.5 mg of TMTPro reagent was re-suspended with 33 µL of anhydrous ACN.  Seven microliters of TMTPro reagent in ACN was added to 9 µL of clean peptide in 0.1M TEAB. The final ACN concentration was 43.75% and the ratio of peptides to TMTPro reagent was 1:20. After 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, re-suspended in 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA), split into two equal parts, and desalted using home-made STAGE tips (Li, Franz et al. 2021).   Fractionation of TMTPro-labeled peptide mixture One of the two parts was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters cat. no SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 88 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3 min; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passes (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). LC-MS/MS analysis Dried fractions were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Product No. 164942) and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The FAIMS device was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V. Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for the acquisition of the TMTPro reporter ion signals. Peptide separations were performed on an EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Raw files were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (Thermo Fisher Scientific) .

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Proteomics data was analyzed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.10.43, (Cox and Mann 2008). The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma, version 3.34.9, (Ritchie, Phipson et al. 2015) in R, version 3.4.3 (R Core Team 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Rapamycin is a macrolide antibiotic that functions as an immunosuppressive and anti-cancer agent, and displays robust anti-ageing effects in multiple organisms including humans. Importantly, rapamycin analogues (rapalogs) are of clinical importance against certain cancer types and neurodevelopmental diseases. Although rapamycin is widely perceived as an allosteric inhibitor of mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin), the master regulator of cellular and organismal physiology, its specificity has not been thoroughly evaluated so far. In fact, previous studies in cells and in mice hinted that rapamycin may be also acting independently from mTOR to influence various cellular processes. Here, we generated a gene-edited cell line that expresses a rapamycin-resistant mTOR mutant (mTOR<sup>RR</sup> ) and assessed the effects of rapamycin treatment on the transcriptome and proteome of control or mTOR<sup>RR</sup> -expressing cells. Our data reveal a striking specificity of rapamycin towards mTOR, demonstrated by virtually no changes in mRNA or protein levels in rapamycin-treated mTOR<sup>RR</sup> cells, even following prolonged drug treatment. Overall, this study provides the first unbiased and conclusive assessment of rapamycin's specificity, with potential implications for ageing research and human therapeutics.

### Keywords
Rapamycin / sirolimus / mtorc1 / ageing / proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing (MPI-AGE) Joseph-Stelzmann Str. 9B 50931 Cologne Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Constantinos Demetriades
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing (MPI-AGE) Joseph-Stelzmann Str. 9B 50931 Cologne Germany


