### Accession
PXD017079

### Title
Integrated multi-omic analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates identifies ethionamide resistance-associated gene pair Rv3094c-Rv3095

### Description
Global control of the tuberculosis (TB) epidemic is seriously threatened by increasing prevalence of drug resistant (DR) M. tuberculosis (MTB) isolates. Many genome-wide studies have identified DR-associated SNPs and investigated their role in DR mechanisms. However, DR in ~30% of isolates has no clear genetic basis. DR mechanisms related to variation in gene/protein expression are known, but not well-studied.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Protocol1: Seven isolates’ samples were washed with with chilled phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and lysis buffer (9 M Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 30 mM NaCl, 50 mM IAA, 5 mM Na4P2O7, 100 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0), 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM sodium glycerophophate, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma, St. Louis, USA), 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (Sigma, St. Louis, USA), 1 tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) ) for every 10 mL of lysis buffer). Then the total lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4℃ to remove debris. the same amount of proteins (100 μg) from each total sample was reduced with 5 mM of DTT, alkylated with 20 mM of iodoacetamide, precleaned with 10% SDS-PAGE (0.7 cm), and digested in-gel with final concentration of 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Meizhiyuan, Beijing, China) at 37 ℃ for 12 h. The tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT reagents (S01-1, S01-2, BCG, H37Ra, R06/R27, R29, R33, and S04/S25 samples were labeled with 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C , 129N, 129C , and 130N label reagent, respectively.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The TMT-labeled and combined samples were injected into a Durashell C18 column (150 Å, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm2) and eluted with a linear gradient in 60 min. the TMT labeled peptides from each fraction were analyzed with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) after Easy-Nano LC 1200 separation (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Sample Processing Protocol2 Night isolates’ samples ()were washed with with chilled phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and lysis buffer (9 M Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 30 mM NaCl, 50 mM IAA, 5 mM Na4P2O7, 100 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0), 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM sodium glycerophophate, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma, St. Louis, USA), 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3 (Sigma, St. Louis, USA), 1 tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) ) for every 10 mL of lysis buffer). Then the total lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4℃ to remove debris. the same amount of proteins (100 μg) from each total sample was reduced with 5 mM of DTT, alkylated with 20 mM of iodoacetamide, precleaned with 10% SDS-PAGE (0.7 cm), and digested in-gel with final concentration of 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Meizhiyuan, Beijing, China) at 37 ℃ for 12 h. The tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT reagents (R07/R30, R04/R08, S01, R01-1,R03/ R06,R05/R21, R01-2, R02/R03, S03/S21 and S02/S08 were labeled with 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131, respectively.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The TMT-labeled and combined samples were injected into a Durashell C18 column (150 Å, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm2) and eluted with a linear gradient in 60 min. the TMT labeled peptides from each fraction were analyzed with a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) after Easy-Nano LC 1200 separation (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol1 The raw files were searched with PD (v2.1.1.21) against the uniprot reference proteome from M. tuberculosis H37Rv database. Fully tryptic peptides with as many as 2 missed were allowed. TMT 10 plex (N-Term / K) and cysteine carbamidomethyl were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm. Data Processing Protocol2 The raw files were searched with MaxQuant (v1.5.6.0) against the TubercuList reference proteome from M. tuberculosis H37Rv database. Fully tryptic peptides with as many as 2 missed were allowed. TMT 10 plex (N-Term / K) and cysteine carbamidomethyl were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Global control of the tuberculosis epidemic is threatened by increasing prevalence of drug resistant M. tuberculosis isolates. Many genome-wide studies focus on SNP-associated drug resistance mechanisms, but drug resistance in 5-30% of M. tuberculosis isolates (varying with antibiotic) appears unrelated to reported SNPs, and alternative drug resistance mechanisms involving variation in gene/protein expression are not well-studied. Here, using an omics approach, we identify 388 genes with lineage-related differential expression and 68 candidate drug resistance-associated gene pairs/clusters in 11 M. tuberculosis isolates (variable lineage/drug resistance profiles). Structural, mutagenesis, biochemical and bioinformatic studies on Rv3094c from the Rv3093c-Rv3095 gene cluster, a gene cluster selected for further investigation as it contains a putative monooxygenase/repressor pair and is associated with ethionamide resistance, provide insights on its involvement in ethionamide sulfoxidation, the initial step in its activation. Analysis of the structure of Rv3094c and its complex with ethionamide and flavin mononucleotide, to the best of our knowledge the first structures of an enzyme involved in ethionamide activation, identify key residues in the flavin mononucleotide and ethionamide binding pockets of Rv3094c, and F221, a gate between flavin mononucleotide and ethionamide allowing their interaction to complete the sulfoxidation reaction. Our work broadens understanding of both lineage- and drug resistance-associated gene/protein expression perturbations and identifies another player in mycobacterial ethionamide metabolism.

### Keywords
Baeyer-villiger monooxygenase, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Lineage, Phylogenetics, Proteome, Ethionamide, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
Student

### Submitter
Sun jinshuai

### Lab Head
Dr Kanglin Wan
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention


