### Accession
PXD045715

### Title
Chemoproteomics-guided development of SLC15A4 inhibitors with anti-inflammatory activity

### Description
SLC15A4 is an endolysosome-resident transporter intimately linked with autoinflammation and autoimmunity. Specifically, SLC15A4 is critical for Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7-9 as well as the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein (NOD) signaling in several immune cell subsets. Notably, SLC15A4 is essential for the development of systemic lupus erythematosus in murine models and is associated with autoimmune conditions in humans. Despite its therapeutic potential, to our knowledge no chemical probes have been developed that target SLC15A4. Here, we use an integrated chemical proteomics approach to develop a suite of chemical tools, including first-in-class functional inhibitors, for SLC15A4. We demonstrate SLC15A4 inhibitors described herein suppress endolysosomal TLR and NOD functions in a variety of human and mouse immune cells, furnish evidence of their ability to suppress inflammation in vivo and in clinical settings, and provide insights into their mechanism of action. Our findings establish SLC15A4 as a druggable target for the treatment of autoimmune/autoinflammatory conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µL ice-cold DPBS and lysed by sonicating three times using a Branson Sonifier probe (15 milliseconds (msec) on, 40 msec off, 15% amplitude, 1 second (sec) total on). Protein concentrations were normalized (2 mg/mL in 500 µL with ice-cold DPBS) using a DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) with absorbance measured using ClarioStar plate reader (BMG Labtech) following manufacturer’s instructions. For click reaction, a mix of the following solutions was added to each 500 μL sample, tris((1-benzyl-4-triazolyl)methyl)amine (TBTA, 30 μL, 1.7 mM in DMSO/t-BuOH 1:4 v/v), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 10 µL, 50 mM), biotin-PEG3-azide (5 µL, 100 µM), and CuSO4 (10 µL, 50 mM) and samples were shaken at room temperature (RT) for 1 hr. After click reaction, 2.5 mL of ice-cold 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3 solution and 1 mL ice-cold DPBS was added to each sample to precipitate proteins. The samples were then vortexed and centrifuged (3,200 x g, 4 °C, 10 min), forming a protein disc. The supernatant was removed, and the samples were washed with 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3, resuspended by sonication and centrifuged as above. Pellets were resuspended in freshly prepared urea solution (500 µL DPBS, 6 M) with SDS (10 µL of 10% w/v), Protein reduction was carried out by the addition of a freshly prepared 1:1 solution (50 µL total, 25 µL each solution) of TCEP (200 mM in DPBS) and K2CO3 (600 mM in DPBS) and incubating the samples for 30 min at 37 °C. Followed reduction, proteins were alkylated by the addition of freshly prepared iodoacetamide (70 µL, 400 mM in DPBS) and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. A solution of SDS (130 µL, 10% in DPBS w/v) was added, and samples were diluted with DPBS (5.5 mL) for streptavidin enrichment. A streptavidin-agarose slurry (100 µL, 50%) was added to each tube and rotated for 1.5 hr at RT. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (750 x g, 2 min, 4 °C) and washed four times (1 x 5 mL 0.2% w/v SDS in DPBS, 1 x 5 mL DPBS, 1 x 5 mL of H2O, 1 x 5 mL 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) before being transferred to 1.5 mL LoBind microcentrifuge tubes with TEAB (1 mL, 100 mM). Beads were resuspended in sequencing-grade modified trypsin (100 µL, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 100 µM CaCl2) and incubated at 37 °C overnight with shaking for on-bead digestion. The digest was separated by centrifugation (300 x g, 5 min, 4 °C) and transferred to new LoBind centrifuge tubes. The beads were washed with TEAB (50 µL, 100 mM, pH 8.5), and the washing was combined with the previous supernatant. MS-grade acetonitrile (60 µL) was added to each sample before labeling with respective tandem-mass-tags (TMT – Thermo Fisher Scientific) 10plex or 16plex reagents (8 µL, 20 µg/µL) for 1 hr with occasional vortexing at RT. To quench the labeling reaction, hydroxylamine (6 µL, 5% v/v) was added to each sample and incubated for 15 min at RT. Formic acid (4 µL) was added to each tube to acidify the samples before drying under vacuum centrifugation. The samples were combined by redissolving the contents of one tube in a solution of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 200 µL, 0.1% in water) and transferred into each sample of a respective multiplexed experiment until all samples were redissolved. This stepwise process was repeated with a second volume of TFA solution (100 µL in water) for a final volume of 300 µL. The samples were fractionated using the Pierce high pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific 84868) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide fractions were eluted from the spin column with solutions of 0.1% triethylamine containing an increasing concentration of MeCN (5 - 95% MeCN; 12 fractions). The fractions were combined into 6 final fractions in a pairwise fashion (fraction 1 and fraction 7, fraction 2 and fraction 8, etc.), dried via vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80 °C until ready for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
TMT labeled peptides were resuspended in MS buffer A (20 µL, 0.1% formic acid in water) prior to LC-MS analysis. 3 µL of each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 µm x 2 mm) and eluted on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 15 cm) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was prepared as described above and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in MeCN) were used in a 220 min gradient (flow rate 0.3 mL/min, 35 °C) of 2% buffer B for 10 min, followed by an incremental increase to 30% buffer B over 192 min, 60% buffer B for 5 min, 60-95% buffer B for 1 min, hold at 95% buffer B for 5 min, followed by descent to 2% buffer B for 1 min followed by re-equilibration at 2% buffer B for 6 min. The eluents were analyzed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with a cycle time of 3 sec and nano-LC electrospray ionization source applied voltage of 2.0 kV. MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1x106 ions, maximum injection time of 50 msec (dynamic exclusion enabled, repeat count 1, duration 20 sec). The scan range was specified from 375 to 1,500 m/z. Peptides selected for MS2 analysis were isolated with the quadrupole (isolation window 1.6 m/z) and fragmented using collision-induced dissociation (CID 30%) with resultant fragments recorded in the ion trap (AGC 1.8x104, maximum inject time 120 msec). A list of TMT 10plex-labeled SLC15A4 peptide molecular weights (573.6666, 872.9958, 463.8029, 688,3862, 1239.1694, 1012.5444, 705.4477, 459.2593, 582.3318, 859.9966, 517.7844, 721.8893, 470.6345, 675.3653) were employed for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). MS3 spectra were generated by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with collision energy of 65%. Synchronous precursor selection43 (SPS) was employed to isolate up to 10 MS2 ions for MS3 analysis to improve sensitivity of MS3-based quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemoproteomic, Slc15a4, Anti-inflammatory

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
The Scripps Research Institute 

### Submitter
Weichao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Parker
Scripps Research


