### Accession
PXD025929

### Title
A regulatory network comprising let-7 miRNA and SMUG1 is associated with good prognosis in breast cancer survival

### Description
Cytosine deamination to uracil in DNA leads to mutations if the DNA lesion is not corrected. Base excision repair (BER) initiated by single-strand selective uracil-DNA glycosylase 1 (SMUG1) primarily recognizes uracil and oxidized pyrimidines, and processes them to restore the correct bases. SMUG1 status has been associated with cancer risk and therapeutic response as high levels of SMUG1 were observed in breast carcinomas and other cancer types. The role of SMUG1 in breast cancer is not completely understood. Here, we define a bad prognosis signature for SMUG1 interactors in different cancers by mapping out a SMUG1 interaction network. Survival analyses of patient outcomes show that high expression of genes in the bad prognosis network correlates with lower survival probability in breast cancer. Interestingly, bioinformatics analyses suggested let-7b-5p microRNA as one of the upstream regulators of SMUG1 interactors. Expression of SMUG1 and let-7b-5p are negatively correlated in breast cancer and we observed an inhibitory auto-regulatory loop between SMUG1 and let-7b-5p in MCF-7 cells. Hence, SMUG1 is a key player connecting RNA and DNA metabolism with regulation of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Immunopurified protein from total cell extracts from HeLa cell clones expressing ectopic SMUG1-eGFP-tagged protein or transfected with the empty vector were processed in parallel. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, Coomassie G-250 stained gel pieces were in-gel digested with 0.2 µg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding 5 µl 50 % formic acid and the generated peptides were purified using a ZipTip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and dried using a Speed Vac concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile and 5 µl analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length) (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) was used. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with a solvent gradient of 4-35% B in 47 min, to 50% B in 20 min and then to 80% B in 2 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometers were operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS1 and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired with the resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (LTQ-Orbitrap XL), after accumulation to a target of 1e6. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 60 msec. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to six most intense ions, depending on signal intensity (intensity threshold: 1.7e4), for fragmentation using collision induced dissociation (CID) at a target value of 10,000 charges in the linear ion trap  of the LTQ-Orbitrap XL. Target ions already selected for MS2 were dynamically excluded for 60 sec. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode.

### Data Protocol
ata were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed to generate peak list in Mascot generic format (*.mgf) using ProteoWizard. Database searches were performed using Mascot in-house version 2.2.0 to search the SwissProt database (Human, 20,411 proteins) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, at maximum one missed cleavage site, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, oxidation of methionines, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal peptides with glutamine, and propionamide formation of cysteines as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Single-strand selective uracil-DNA glycosylase 1 (SMUG1) initiates base excision repair (BER) of uracil and oxidized pyrimidines. SMUG1 status has been associated with cancer risk and therapeutic response in breast carcinomas and other cancer types. However, SMUG1 is a multifunctional protein involved, not only, in BER but also in RNA quality control, and its function in cancer cells is unclear. Here we identify several novel SMUG1 interaction partners that functions in many biological processes relevant for cancer development and treatment response. Based on this, we hypothesized that the dominating function of SMUG1 in cancer might be ascribed to functions other than BER. We define a bad prognosis signature for SMUG1 by mapping out the SMUG1 interaction network and found that high expression of genes in the bad prognosis network correlated with lower survival probability in ER+ breast cancer. Interestingly, we identified hsa-let-7b-5p microRNA as an upstream regulator of the SMUG1 interactome. Expression of SMUG1 and hsa-let-7b-5p were negatively correlated in breast cancer and we found an inhibitory auto-regulatory loop between SMUG1 and hsa-let-7b-5p in the MCF7 breast cancer cells. We conclude that SMUG1 functions in a gene regulatory network that influence the survival and treatment response in several cancers.

### Keywords
Rna and ribonucleoprotein biogenesis, Smug1, Modified bases, Dna repair, Breast cancer, Hsa-let-7b-5p

### Affiliations
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
University of Oslo


