### Accession
PXD005597

### Title
FliP subcomplex analysis -  A flagellum-specific chaperone facilitates assembly of the core type III export apparatus of the bacterial flagellum

### Description
Biosynthesis of the bacterial flagellum depends on a flagellar-specific type III secretion system (T3SS), a protein export machine homologous to the export machinery of the virulence-associated injectisome. Six cytoplasmic (FliH/I/J/G/M/N) and seven integral membrane proteins (FlhA/B FliF/O/P/Q/R) form the flagellar basal body and are involved in transport of flagellar building blocks across the inner membrane in a protein motive force-dependent manner. FlhA/B and FliP/Q/R are conserved in all T3SS and form the export gate complex. FliO is absent in some T3SS and was presumed to regulate FliP during flagellum assembly. However, the molecular function of FliO and how the large, multi-component transmembrane export gate complex assembles in a coordinated manner remained enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that FliO protects FliP from proteolytic degradation and promotes formation of FliP-containing subcomplexes during the first step of core export apparatus assembly. We further reveal the sub-cellular localization of FliO by dSTORM superresolution microscopy and show that FliO is not part of the assembled flagellar basal body. In summary, our results suggest that FliO functions as a novel, flagellar T3SS-specific chaperone, which facilitates quality control and productive assembly of the core T3SS export machinery.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl min-1 and subsequently eluted with a 57 min gradient of 5–33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). During peptide elution the flow rate was kept constant at 200 nl min-1. The 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 5000 charges and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8. Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, which is a module of the MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a database consisting of 10,152 protein entries from S. Typhimurium and 285 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Cleavage specificity C-terminal of phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, leucine and methionine was set for chymotrypsin and up to five missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) and at the fragment ion level 0.5 dalton (Da) was set for CID fragmentation. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Many bacteria move using a complex, self-assembling nanomachine, the bacterial flagellum. Biosynthesis of the flagellum depends on a flagellar-specific type III secretion system (T3SS), a protein export machine homologous to the export machinery of the virulence-associated injectisome. Six cytoplasmic (FliH/I/J/G/M/N) and seven integral-membrane proteins (FlhA/B FliF/O/P/Q/R) form the flagellar basal body and are involved in the transport of flagellar building blocks across the inner membrane in a proton motive force-dependent manner. However, how the large, multi-component transmembrane export gate complex assembles in a coordinated manner remains enigmatic. Specific for most flagellar T3SSs is the presence of FliO, a small bitopic membrane protein with a large cytoplasmic domain. The function of FliO is unknown, but homologs of FliO are found in &gt;80% of all flagellated bacteria. Here, we demonstrate that FliO protects FliP from proteolytic degradation and promotes the formation of a stable FliP-FliR complex required for the assembly of a functional core export apparatus. We further reveal the subcellular localization of FliO by super-resolution microscopy and show that FliO is not part of the assembled flagellar basal body. In summary, our results suggest that FliO functions as a novel, flagellar T3SS-specific chaperone, which facilitates quality control and productive assembly of the core T3SS export machinery.

### Keywords
T3ss, Flip, Flio, Export gate complex, Assembly

### Affiliations
Junior Research Group Infection Biology of Salmonella Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research Inhoffenstraße 7 38124 Braunschweig Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Erhardt
Junior Research Group Infection Biology of Salmonella Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research Inhoffenstraße 7 38124 Braunschweig Germany


