### Accession
PXD024461

### Title
Proteomics on pancreas-on-chip model

### Description
In this study, we engineered a micro-well duct-on-chip platform to generate defined 3D aggregates from hiPSC-derived PPs and subsequently induce differentiation toward PDLOs. Time-resolved scRNA-seq combined with cleared immunofluorescence imaging provided a deep understanding of in vitro ductal cell type differentiation. By defining the emergent cell types at each stage of differentiation based on their gene expression profiles and organoid structures, we provide a precise cell-by-cell description of the in vitro differentiation trajectory. Transcriptional data of PDLOs were complemented by their proteome and secretome data, allowing the identification and validation of prognostic cancer marker. Thus, we show the applicability of hiPSC-derived PDLOs-on-chip for future ductal disease modeling.

### Sample Protocol
PDLO/Stellate co-culture PDLOs and HPaSteCs were seeded on a fluidic hexagonal micro-well duct-on-chip platform facilitating paracrine signalling between PDLOs and HPaSteCs in the same chip without direct cellular contact. For this 150 cells were seeded per well following the proeceedure describe above (schematic see Supplementary Fig. 10a). The PDLOs were derived on the upscaled micro-well duct-on-chip platform (Fig. 8a), harvested at day 31, and transferred onto two arrays of the the micro-well chip (Fig. 1). The chip was filled with phase II ductal media and co-cultured for 3 days without media change. The 3D HPaSteC aggregates and PDLOs were harvested at day 34. Therefore, the media was removed, and PBS drops of 40 µL were put on top of each arrays. Utilizing surface tension, the HPaSteC aggregates and PDLOs were harvested without cross-contamination. They were washed three times with PBS with an incubation time of 10 min in between. The 3D HPaSteCs aggregates and PDLOs were centrifuged with 200 g for 5 min within the washing steps. The dry pellet was frozen and kept at -80 °C upon sample preparation for proteomic measurements. PDLO Secretome – Sample preparation for mass spectrometry For determining the secretome of PDLOs, an upscaled chip was manufactured. The chip contained 1196 micro-wells with a well diameter of 400 µm, a well depth of 600 µm, and 600 cells were seeded per well (Fig. 8a). At day 28 of differentiation, PDLOs were washed three times with blank DMEM:F12 medium. 10 min incubation time between the washing steps ensured settling of eventually washed out PDLOs. Then, 700 µL blank DMEM:F12 was added and the supernatant was taken after 8 h for subsequent analysis by mass spectrometry. For the parallel PDLO proteome determination , PDLOs were harvested at the end of the experiment from the chips and washed twice with ice-cold PBS and then lysed for 15 min on ice in 200 µL RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For disruption of the DNA, the samples were additionally sonicated and then incubated for another 15 min on ice. Protein lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 5 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected.Each 10 µg lysate and 20 µg supernatant were subjected to tryptic digest applying a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure as described79. Peptides were collected by centrifugation (10 min at 14,000 g) and acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric measurements LC-MSMS analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) each online coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex). Tryptic peptides were automatically loaded on a C18 trap column (300 µm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, LC Packings) at 30 µL/min flow rate. For chromatography, a C18 reversed phase analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250 nL/min flow rate in a 95 minutes non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid was used. The high-resolution (60,000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z with automatic gain control target set to 3x 106 and a maximum of 30 ms injection time. From the MS pre-scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15,000 resolution with automatic gain control target set to 5x 102 and a maximum of 50 ms injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28, and the spectra were recorded in profile mode. Data Processing – Protein Identification Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against Swissprot human data base (Release 2020_02, 20349 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for one missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn, Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle.  Data processing – Label-free quantification Proteins were quantified based on abundance values for unique peptides. For this, abundance values were first normalized to the total amount of peptides in each sample to account for sample loading errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing up the abundance values for admissible peptides. In the following only proteins with more than 1 unique peptide hit were used for downstream analysis. The secretome data was filtered as follows: First proteins were filtered, which were not detected in the parallel recorded proteome or scRNA transcriptome datasets of the duct-like clusters. Secondly, proteins which were never detected before in the pancreas were filtered out. Therefore, we used the protein list “not detected proteins in the pancreas” of the Human Protein Atlas project46. To determine the fraction of proteins which were actively secreted we matched the PDLO secretome against the refined human secretome47. Here, only proteins with the label blood secretion and extracellular space were used.  Protein abundance changes within the co-culture experiment were calculated by normalizing the proteomes to the mean abundance levels. The PC were calculated on the normalized abundances. In the following the log2 fold changes of the proteins were calculated between individual and co-culture. Proteins, which were upregulated in co-culture experiments compared to the respective separately cultured PDLOs or HPaSteCs were further subjected to overrepresentation analyses. Enrichment of upregulated proteins against gene sets in common databases (Gene Ontology, KEGG, Reactome) was tested using g:Profiler [version: e100_eg47_p14_7733820]80 browser tool, and EnrichR81,82 allowed expansion to an EnrichR collective database comprising transcription factor protein-protein interaction networks. The co-culture signaling networks were generated by the X2Kweb83.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Secretome, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Pioneer Campus, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany and Medical Faculty, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Meier
Helmholtz Pioneer Campus, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany and Medical Faculty, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany


