### Accession
PXD001808

### Title
BALF exosomes -  Pulmonary Sarcoidosis is Associated With Exosomal Vitamin D-Binding Protein and Inflammatory Molecules

### Description
Using  8-plex iTRAQ labelling exosmes isolated from bronchial lavage (BALF) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The measurements compared control subjects with sarcoidosis patients (15 in all) ; five with löfgrens syndrome and 10 with regular sacroidosis

### Sample Protocol
The isolated exosomes were prepared for proteomic analysis as previously described (1), with modifications to accommodate for labeling with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (ABSciex). The exosomes (~50 µg per subject) were precipitated using acetone (6:1), dissolved in a denaturing buffer (6 M urea, 0.05% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, and 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)), and reduced with 1 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride for 60 minutes at 60°C, followed by alkylation with the addition of 1 µl of 200 mM MMTS and incubation for 10 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested overnight (16-h) with trypsin (20:1, sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) at 37°C. The digests were purified using Sep-Pak® Vac C18 cartridges (1cc/50mg, Waters, USA), dried and re-dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB (30 µl). The purified digests were assayed at 280 nm with a Nanodrop detector (Thermo Scientific) and the concentrations adjusted such that equal (estimated) amounts of the peptides would be labelled (40 µg). A sub-aliquot of each unlabelled digest was taken to create a reference pool that could be used to cross compare samples. The labelling was performed and mixtures composed such that the 15 cases and 5 controls were be divided between three 8-plex experiments, each with one reference pool (113 reporter), two controls (or one control and one control pool) and five cases. Small aliquots of the labelled samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS to confirm efficacy of the labelling experiments before proceeding. The labelled samples were mixed (as indicated in supplement 1), dried and acidified. These mixtures were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography using a 200 mm x 4.6 mm i.d. PolySULFOETHYL-A column with a BioCAD HPLC system, as previously described (2). Forty SCX fractions were collected, dried and desalted using OMIX C18 100-µl tips and pooled on the basis of UV absorption at 280 nm, determined with a Nanodrop detector (Thermo Scientific).   )An Orbitrap-Velos coupled with an EasyNano-LC was also used for LC-MS/MS. The MS/MS data were acquired in positive ion mode with a data dependent acquisition setting for HCD of the 10 most intense ions (m/z 300-2000) with charge states of 2+ or higher. MS1 spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap set to a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 400), with a target value of 1,000,000 ions and a maximal injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 7,500 (at m/z 400), a target value of 50,000 ions, a maximal injection time of 200 ms, and the lowest mass fixed at m/z 100. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. A 75 µm x 150 mm analytical column packed with 5 µm Magic C18 (Michrom), coupled together with a 20 x 0.1 mm i.d.  pre-column packed with 5 µm Magic C18 (Michrom) silica,  was used with a gradient from 5 to 40% B in 100 min, at a flow rate of 300 µl/min (the buffer composition was as described above for the QSTAR, further details are indicated in the supplementary information). The Orbitrap was used for analysis of the SCX fractions.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed using ProteinPilot™ software and the Paragon™ identification algorithm (3) with a human Swiss-Prot database (Release August 18th 2011, 20245 entries including 162 common non-human contaminants). To accommodate analysis of the Orbitrap data with ProteinPilot, the files were converted to MGF format using Proteome Discover version 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and filtered using the script PeakConvert, as described elsewhere (4). The database searches were made in thorough mode specifying 8-plex-iTRAQ quantification, trypsin digestion and MMTS modification of cysteine. False discovery rates for identification were calculated with the ProteinPilot™ PSEP functionality, based on the relative proportion of identification from the forward and reverse sequence searches (5). A confidence threshold of 95% for protein identification was applied.  ITRAQ ratios were calculated relative to the pooled reference using ProteinPilot™. The ProteinPilot™ ratio calculations are based on the weighted average ratio of the contributing peptides, as previously described (2, 6).  The calculations excluded values that were blanks, zeros, greater than 99, or for which the sum of the peak areas is less than 40 counts. Only peptides sequences that were unique were used for protein quantification. Peptides that indicated non-tryptic cleavage, or contained a low probability modification were also removed. A cut off excluding peptides identified with less than 65% confidence from quantification was applied.  Data normalization was made to correct for possible systematic bias.  Bioinformatics The software package R (http://www.r¬project.org/) was used to merge the data. The Protein¬Pilot™ Descriptive Statistics (7) and Protein Alignment Templates were used to asses labelling efficiency and compare iTRAQ experiments, respectively.  Using R, the reproducibility optimized test statistic (ROTS) was used for these analyses. With the ROTS method the test statistic is interpolated from the inherent distribution of the data. The procedure accommodates for high experimental variability, especially in small sample sizes and tolerates a degree of missing quantifications. The following ROTS comparisons were made: i) Löfgrens-Sarcoidosis  exosome samples vs. Healthy exosome samples (reference exosomes) ii) “Regular”-Sarcoidosis  exosome samples vs. Healthy exosome samples iii) Löfgrens-Sarcoidosis  exosome samples vs. Regular sarcoidosis exosome samples GO annotation and Pathway analysis. Ingenuity pathway analysis and DAVID were used to identify common pathways and functional annotation associated with the protein identified as differentially abundant between the Sarcoidosis subjects and controls (based on the ROTS analysis, FDR¬ <0.05).  References  1. Admyre, C., Johansson, S. M., Qazi, K. R., Filen, J. J., Lahesmaa, R., Norman, M., Neve, E. P., Scheynius, A., and Gabrielsson, S. (2007) Exosomes with immune modulatory features are present in human breast milk. J. Immunol. 179, 1969-1978  2. Moulder, R., Lonnberg, T., Elo, L. L., Filen, J. J., Rainio, E., Corthals, G., Oresic, M., Nyman, T. A., Aittokallio, T., and Lahesmaa, R. (2010) Quantitative proteomics analysis of the nuclear fraction of human CD4+ cells in the early phases of IL-4-induced Th2 differentiation. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 9, 1937-1953  3. Shilov, I. V., Seymour, S. L., Patel, A. A., Loboda, A., Tang, W. H., Keating, S. P., Hunter, C. L., Nuwaysir, L. M., and Schaeffer, D. A. (2007) The paragon algorithm, a next generation search engine that uses sequence temperature values and feature probabilities to identify peptides from tandem mass spectra. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 6, 1638-1655  4. Rissanen, J., Moulder, R., Lahesmaa, R., and Nevalainen, O. S. (2012) Pre-processing of orbitrap higher energy collisional dissociation tandem mass spectra to reduce erroneous iTRAQ ratios. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 26, 2099-2104  5. Tang, W. H., Shilov, I. V., and Seymour, S. L. (2008) Nonlinear fitting method for determining local false discovery rates from decoy database searches. J. Proteome Res. 7, 3661-3667  6. Gan, C. S., Chong, P. K., Pham, T. K., and Wright, P. C. (2007) Technical, experimental, and biological variations in isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). J. Proteome Res. 6, 821-827  7. Tambor, V., Hunter, C. L., Seymour, S. L., Kacerovsky, M., Stulik, J., and Lenco, J. (2012) CysTRAQ — A combination of iTRAQ and enrichment of cysteinyl peptides for uncovering and quantifying hidden proteomes. Journal of Proteomics 75, 857-867

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sarcoidosis, Exosome, Balf

### Affiliations
Turku Biosciences
Susanne Gabrielsson Associate Professor Experimental Immunology Karolinska Institutet Dept. of Medicine, Translational Immunology Unit KS L2:04, 17 176 Stockholm Sweden  NOTE : the proteomic data was produced at  Turku University/Åbo Akademi Turku Centre for Biotechnology. Directed by Professor Riitta Lahesmaa  http://www.btk.fi/home/main/ http://www.btk.fi/proteomics/front-page/

### Submitter
Robert Moulder

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Gabrielsson
Susanne Gabrielsson Associate Professor Experimental Immunology Karolinska Institutet Dept. of Medicine, Translational Immunology Unit KS L2:04, 17 176 Stockholm Sweden  NOTE : the proteomic data was produced at  Turku University/Åbo Akademi Turku Centre for Biotechnology. Directed by Professor Riitta Lahesmaa  http://www.btk.fi/home/main/ http://www.btk.fi/proteomics/front-page/


