### Accession
PXD013552

### Title
Glucocorticoid treatment leads to aberrant ion and macromolecular transport mechanisms in regenerating zebrafish fins.

### Description
Bone is a highly regenerative tissue but it can be permanently lost due to severe trauma and as a result of disease. In zebrafish, which are capable of complex organ regeneration, intramembranous bones of the fins and skull regenerate rapidly even after profound loss. The fin regenerate, albeit being composed of different tissues is a structure of modest complexity which, together with the fact that it is easy to access and monitor, makes it a useful system to study bone formation, wound healing and metabolic disease. Glucocorticoids are powerful drugs used in anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive therapy. Despite their unmistakable advantages and usefulness, long term treatment with glucocorticoids can cause a variety of adverse effects such as insulin resistance, high blood pressure and bone fragility.  Here we made use of proteomics to study the fin regeneration by sampling zebrafish caudal fins without prior injury and regenerated tissue 4 days post amputation at normal and perturbed conditions (prednisolone-treatment).

### Sample Protocol
Four treatment groups were submitted to analysis each including 22 individuals of zebrafish: untreated uninjured fin tissue (uninjured/untreated), untreated regenerating fin tisse at 4 dpa (4 dpa/untreated), vehicle (DMSO) treated regenerating fin tissue at 4 dpa (4 dpa/DMSO) and prednisolone (50 µM) treated regenerating fin tissue at 4 dpa (4 dpa/prednisolone). The collected tissue was pooled for each treatment group and the proteins were extracted in urea containing buffer. For each sample pool 4 technical replicates were prepared, each of which was fractionated by 1D-SDS-polyacrylamide electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and sliced into 10 fractions. Proteins were proteolytically cleaved in-gel by trypsin and peptides were extracted. The peptide solutions were evaporated and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid. Each sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltimMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 60 min gradient in reversed-phase chromatographie. Peptides were electrosprayed at 1.7 kV. The peptide ions were acquired in MS1 scans at a resolution (R) of 60,000, in m/z-range 350-1550 in positive ion mode using an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3 x 10E6 and a max. injection time of 100 ms. The top 15 most abundant ions were selected (isolation window: 1.4 m/z) for fragmentation with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. The fragment ions were acquired in MS2 scans at R=15,000 using an AGC target of 2 x 10E5 and a max. injection time of 50 ms. Peptides were listed for dynamic exclusion for 30 sec. All mass spectra were generated using Xcalibur (version 3.0).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6). The spectra were matched to a zebrafish reference protein database. The mass error was limited to 10 ppm in first search and 4.5 ppm in main search (precursor ions) as well as 20 ppm (fragment ions), respectively. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for peptide identifications. Carbaminomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two inferred peptides including at least one unique peptide were required for protein inferences. Peptide spectrum matches and proteins were validated in a target-decoy approach setting the false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05. Lable-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were automatically extracted from precursor ions and used for protein abundances. Preset parameters were used if not stated otherwise.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term glucocorticoid administration in patients undergoing immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory treatment is accompanied by impaired bone formation and increased fracture risk. Furthermore, glucocorticoid treatment can lead to impaired wound healing and altered cell metabolism. Recently, we showed that exposure of zebrafish to the glucocorticoid prednisolone during fin regeneration impacts negatively on the length, bone formation, and osteoblast function of the regenerate. The underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of impairment, however, remain incompletely understood. In order to further elucidate the anti-regenerative effects of continued glucocorticoid exposure on fin tissues, we performed proteome profiling of fin regenerates undergoing prednisolone treatment, in addition to profiling of homeostatic fin tissue and fins undergoing undisturbed regeneration. By using LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) we identified more than 6,000 proteins across all tissue samples. In agreement with previous reports, fin amputation induces changes in chromatin structure and extracellular matrix (ECM) composition within the tissue. Notably, prednisolone treatment leads to impaired expression of selected ECM components in the fin regenerate. Moreover, the function of ion transporting ATPases and other proteins involved in macromolecule and vesicular transport mechanisms of the cell appears to be altered by prednisolone treatment. In particular, acidification of membrane-enclosed organelles such as lysosomes is inhibited. Taken together, our data indicate that continued synthetic glucocorticoid exposure in zebrafish deteriorates cellular trafficking processes in the regenerating fin, which interferes with appropriate tissue restoration upon injury.

### Keywords
Q exactive hf, Lfq, Zebrafish, Lable free quantification, Glucocorticoid, Fin regeneration, Prednisolone

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes R. Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


