### Accession
PXD007934

### Title
Hyper-specialized Bacteroidetes selfishly compete for laminarin in microalgal blooms

### Description
Laminarin is a major storage polysaccharide in phytoplankton and an important carbon and energy source for marine microbes. How microbes compete for this labile polysaccharide in nature remains unclear. Here we investigated metaproteomes and metagenomes of bacterioplankton during four consecutive algal blooms in the North Sea to determine key laminarin consumers. We identified two specialized laminarin degraders of the Bacteroidetes group, which reached high abundances year after year. We found that these genomically streamlined bacteria of the genus Formosa have an expanded set of laminarin hydrolases, sensors and transporters that belonged to the most abundant proteins in the blooms. The respective genes are organized in three polysaccharide utilization loci. Proteomic and biochemical analyses revealed surface tethered enzymes and a laminarinase recombined with a membrane-spanning transporter, which act as a disassembly line and efficiently integrate substrate degradation and uptake in the highly diffusive, aquatic environment. We also show that the bloom bacteria couple laminarin utilization with uptake of cellular building blocks such as amino acids. This study suggests that in addition to genome reduction, enzyme fusions, transporter and enzyme expansion also the tight coupling of the carbon and nitrogen uptake make Formosa spp. efficient laminarin utilizers.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were cultivated with different carbon sources (control, glucose, laminarin). The cell pellets were lysed and separated into intracellular soluble proteome and membrane-associated proteome by ultracentrifugation and the supernatant after centrifugation was precipitated with TCA to get the extracellular proteome. The protein extracts were loaded on a 1D-SDS gel and after gel run, the gels were fixed with ethylacetate and stained with Coomassie. After destaining overnight, the gel lanes were cutted into 10 equal pieces and tryptic digested for 16h. After elution the samples were desalted and cleaned by Ziptipping procedure after the manufacters guidelines. Finally the samples were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The data processing was done with MaxQuant and the Andromeda search engine. The FDR (false positive rate) on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01 (1%). The calculated iBAQs were manually calculated to riBAQs to compare the samples semiquantitative.

### Publication Abstract
Polysaccharide degradation by heterotrophic microbes is a key process within Earth's carbon cycle. Here, we use environmental proteomics and metagenomics in combination with cultivation experiments and biochemical characterizations to investigate the molecular details of in situ polysaccharide degradation mechanisms during microalgal blooms. For this, we use laminarin as a model polysaccharide. Laminarin is a ubiquitous marine storage polymer of marine microalgae and is particularly abundant during phytoplankton blooms. In this study, we show that highly specialized bacterial strains of the Bacteroidetes phylum repeatedly reached high abundances during North Sea algal blooms and dominated laminarin turnover. These genomically streamlined bacteria of the genus Formosa have an expanded set of laminarin hydrolases and transporters that belonged to the most abundant proteins in the environmental samples. In vitro experiments with cultured isolates allowed us to determine the functions of in situ expressed key enzymes and to confirm their role in laminarin utilization. It is shown that laminarin consumption of Formosa spp. is paralleled by enhanced uptake of diatom-derived peptides. This study reveals that genome reduction, enzyme fusions, transporters, and enzyme expansion as well as a tight coupling of carbon and nitrogen metabolism provide the tools, which make Formosa spp. so competitive during microalgal blooms.

### Keywords
Laminarin degradation, Marine, Bacteroidetes, Formosa

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Frank Unfried

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany


