### Accession
PXD022831

### Title
Improving spectral validation rates in hydrogen-deuterium exchange data analysis.

### Description
HX-MS data generated to support the testing and development of the HX data analysis applications in Mass Spec Studio.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labelling of Eg5 was initiated by adding labelling buffer (10 mM PIPES, 1 mM MgCl2, 95% D2O, pD 7.4) at final D2O concentrations of 20, 40, 60 and 80% for labeling times ranging from 1 to 1440 min, at 25°C. The labelled Eg5 (10 pmol) was quenched and digested in solution with rNepII (5pmol, 100mM GlyHCl, pH 2.5) for 2 min at 10°C. To generate simulations of EX1 (i.e. bimodal) exchange conditions, simultaneous labelling of two Eg5 fractions (10 pmol each) were initiated at different %D2O for labeling times ranging from 1 to 1440 min, at 25 °C. Samples were then quenched with cold acidic solution (100 mM GlyHCl, pH 2.5) and quickly combined to create equimolar blend of differentially labelled Eg5 (Fig. 1). The following blends were prepared: 20-40%, 20-60% and 20-80%. The blends were digested with rNepII as above. All resulting samples (10 pmol each) were loaded on a self-packed preconcentration cartridge (200 µm × 25 mm capillary, 200 Å, 5 µm Magic C18 beads, Michrom Bio-Resources) using an Eksigent nanoLC-ultra-2D pump, and desalted with loading solution (0.23% FA, 3% ACN) for 1.5 min at 20 µL/min. The peptides were eluted over 10 min at 8 µL/min using a 10-30% gradient of acetonitrile (0.23% FA, 97% ACN). Data were collected on a SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 equipped with Turbo V ion source. Mass spectra were acquired over a range of m/z 350 to 1250 (IonSpray voltage at 5000V, curtain gas at 15, source gas at 25, and declustering potential at 80V). For peptide identification, data were obtained from three recursive data-dependent acquisition runs (top 20), using the same digestion workflow and chromatographic gradient as the HX-MS runs.  Rabbit 20S proteasome complex was obtained from Boston Biochem Inc, at 1 mg/mL in sample buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4).  The protein complex was diluted 8-fold with deuterated sample buffer (88% D2O) and incubated at 3°C for labelling times ranging from 30 to 20000 seconds. The deuterated samples were then quenched as above and digested online at using a pepsin column (at 8°C) using a fully automated LEAP robot (Trajan Scientific and Medical). Flow-through digest was concentrated and washed for 3 min at 150 l/min on an Acclaim PepMapTM C18 reverse phase trap column (1.0mm x 50 mm, 3 m, 100Å) at 1°C. Peptide separation was achieved with a 15 min gradient (10%B – 35%B) at 45l/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptide separation was performed using a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 system and mass analysis via a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1300 (sheath gas at 20, ion transfer tube set to 220°C, resolution 60K, max. injection 200 ms).  For peptide identification, data were obtained from a single data-dependent analysis in OT/OT mode (top 10, HCD 28%, ion selection 2+ to 8+, dynamic exclusion 10 s, resolution 60K for MS and MS/MS). The parameters for database searching in HXpipe are provided in the supplementary material, as well as the processing parameters for HXdeal.

### Data Protocol
DDA runs were searched in HX-PIPE (Mass Spec Studio v2.0) application using MSGF+ search engine.

### Publication Abstract
The data analysis practices associated with hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HX-MS) lag far behind that of most other MS-based protein analysis tools. A reliance on external tools from other fields and a persistent need for manual data validation restrict this powerful technology to the expert user. Here, we provide an extensive upgrade to the HX data analysis suite available in the Mass Spec Studio in the form of two new apps (HX-PIPE and HX-DEAL), completing a workflow that provides an HX-tailored peptide identification capability, accelerated validation routines, automated spectral deconvolution strategies, and a rich set of exportable graphics and statistical reports. With these new tools, we demonstrate that the peptide identifications obtained from undeuterated samples generated at the start of a project contain information that helps predict and control the extent of manual validation required. We also uncover a large fraction of HX-usable peptides that remains unidentified in most experiments. We show that automated spectral deconvolution routines can identify exchange regimes in a project-wide manner, although they remain difficult to accurately assign in all scenarios. Taken together, these new tools provide a robust and complete solution suitable for the analysis of high-complexity HX-MS data.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Eg5, Hx-deal, Mass-spec studio, Proteasome, Hx-pipe

### Affiliations
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Shaunak Raval

### Lab Head
Dr David Schriemer
University of Calgary


