### Accession
PXD013269

### Title
Screening of serum biomarkers of preeclampsia by proteomics combination with bioinformatics

### Description
Objective: To screen for novel predictive serum markers of preeclampsia (PE). Method: Blood samples were collected from 7 women with PE and 5 with healthy pregnancies. Serum proteins were identified using ITRAQ technology combined with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis. The differential expressed proteins in the PE samples were identified using the SwissProt database, and functionally annotated by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses Results: We identified 121 differential expressed proteins, of which 76 were up-regulated and 45 were down-regulated, and 14 were differential expressed by more than 2-folds. The top GO terms for Cellular Components (CC) were high-density lipoprotein particles and plasma lipoprotein particles, defense response for Biological Processes (BP), and glycosaminoglycan binding, heparin binding and sulfur compound for Molecular functions (MF). The pathway hsa04979 for Cholesterol metabolism was significantly enriched among the upregulated proteins, while structural domain was enriched in immunoglobulin subtype 2. Conclusion: PE pathogenesis is related to lipid metabolism and inflammation, and proteins related to these pathways are potential early diagnostic markers for PE.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 High-Abundance Protein Depletion  To increase the accuracy of mass spectrometry results, the top 12 abundant proteins were depleted using Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions[7]. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA test, and SDS PAGE was performed to evaluate sample quality.  2.3 Trypsin digestion and peptide iTRAQ isobaric labeling The protein samples were first reduced by heating with 5mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 11mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 15 min. After diluting with 100mM TEAB to reduce urea concentration to < 2M, the samples were digested overnight with trypsin at the trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50, followed by a 4h digestion at the ratio of 1:100 at 37°C.  Equal amounts of proteins from the PE (designated ED) and control (designated CK) groups were divided into two aliquots each to serve as technical replicates for the iTRAQ labeling. After digestion, the ensuing peptides mixtures were labeled with the iTRAQ reagent according to the kit instructions and the tags were as follows: iTRAQ114 and iTRAQ115 (replicate) for the control group, and iTRAQ116 and iTRAQ117 (replicate) for the PE group. A total of 1897 N-terminal peptides and 1862 total peptides were labeled at the efficiency of 98.15%.  2.4 HPLC fractionation  The samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first segregated over 60 min into 60 fractions using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile, and then pooled into 18 fractions. The eluents were vacuum freeze-dried by Thermo centrifugal enrichment system SPD111VP1 (Thermo Scientific™ Savant™ SPD111V) for subsequent analyses. 2.5 Mass Spectrometry  The freeze-dried samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase A), and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75μm i.d.). The samples were run with the following gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile): 9-23% for 0~20 min, 23-35% for ~33 min, 23%-35% for 33-37 min, 35%-80% for 37~40 min, and 80%. The flow rate was maintained at 700 nL/min. The EASY-nLC 1000 super high performance liquid phase system was used. The peptides were ionized in an NSI ion source and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS) using Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and high resolution Orbitrap was used to detect and analyze peptide precursor ions and secondary fragments. The scanning range of the first-order mass spectrum was set to 350-1800 m/z, and the scanning resolution to 70,000. The fixed starting point of the second-order mass spectrum scanning range was 100 m/z, and the scanning resolution was set to 17,500. The data was acquired using the DDA program, alternating between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4 in order to improve the efficiency of MS.

### Data Protocol
2.6 Data mining and bioinformatics analysis  The secondary MS data was retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8), and the SwissProt Human database linked with a reverse decoy database was used for analysis. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass error tolerance for secondary fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. The data were quantified using itraq-4plex, and the false positive rate (FDR) for protein identification was set at 1% and minimum score for peptides at > 20. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteins was performed in three aspects: biological process (BP), molecular function (MF) and cellular component (CC). The GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/InterPro/) was used to identify the structural domain functions. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html) was used to determine the pathways enriched for the identified proteins. Finally, the Wolfpsort program, an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences[8], was used to predict and annotate the subcellular localization of the proteins. The enrichment of the functional annotations, pathways and structural domains were analyzed by the two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, and p values < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective</b>: To screen for novel predictive serum markers of preeclampsia (PE). <b>Method</b>: Blood samples were collected from seven women with PE and five with healthy pregnancies. Serum proteins were identified using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) technology combined with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis. The differentially expressed proteins in the PE samples were identified using the SwissProt database, and functionally annotated by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses. The upregulated proteins from iTRAQ result were verified by ELISA. <b>Results</b>: We identified 121 differentially expressed proteins, of which 76 were upregulated and 45 were downregulated, and 14 were differentially expressed by more than two-folds. The top GO terms for Cellular Components (CC) were high-density lipoprotein particles and plasma lipoprotein particles, defense response for Biological Processes (BP), and glycosaminoglycan binding, heparin binding and sulfur compound for Molecular functions (MF). The pathway hsa04979 for Cholesterol metabolism was significantly enriched among the upregulated proteins, while the structural domain was enriched in immunoglobulin subtype 2. The dysregulation of pregnancy-specific beta-1-glycoprotein 2 (PSG2) was confirmed by ELISA. <b>Conclusion</b>: PE pathogenesis is related to lipid metabolism and inflammation, and proteins related to these pathways are potential early diagnostic markers for PE.PSG2 may be a marker of PE.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Itraq, Blood

### Affiliations
Department of obstetric, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University.
PTM Biolabs lnc.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Sumei Wang
Department of obstetric, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University.


