### Accession
PXD002062

### Title
Fluctuations in histone H4 isoforms during cellular reprogramming monitored by middle-down proteomics

### Description
Cellular reprogramming remodels the gene expression program by re-setting the epigenome of somatic cells into an embryonic-like state. Post-translational modifications of histones play an important role in this process. We previously used ChIP-seq to profile the distribution of specific histone H3 marks during the entire reprogramming process and found widespread loss of H3K27me3 in the initial stages[1]. Here, using an unbiased middle-down proteomics approach we have identified 74 unique isoforms of histone H4 and quantified them across nine stages of reprogramming. Our data showed substantial differences between the precursor cells and late-phase reprogramming cells. Also, ESCs and iPSCs displayed higher levels of H4 acetylation and tri-methylation concomitantly with lower levels of mono- and di-methylation when compared to cells undergoing reprogramming. These results suggest that during reprogramming, the histone H4 “PTM code” experiences dynamic changes in multiple waves, with a final reset taking place during the transition to an ESC-like state, in perfect agreement with the in-parallel generated multi-omics data[1]. Together, these data represent an invaluable resource to study PTMs of H4 and their potential cross-talk and extend our knowledge on the epigenetic mechanisms involved in acquisition of induced pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 2500 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Cell lysis and extraction of histones was performed as described elsewhere[60]. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in a H2SO4 0.2 M solution and incubating samples overnight at 5° C. After centrifugation for 15 min at 20,000g, the soluble fraction was recovered, concentrated by trichloroacetic acid precipitation and subjected to off-line HPLC fractionation. Histone extracts (~250 µg), were separated on a C8 column (4.6 mm internal diameter and 22 cm length) (Perkin-Elmer Acquapore, RP-300), using a 160 min gradient at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid in 5% ACN, while solvent B was 0.1% trifluoracetic acid, in 90% ACN. The gradient was as follows: 0.0–5.0 min (0% B); 5.0–15 min (0–32.5% B); 15–25 min (32.5–32.5% B); 25–100 min (32.5–52.5% B); 100–118 min (52.5–58% B); 118–135 min (100% B); 135–140 min (100% B); 140–145 min (0% B); 145–160 min (0% B). A total of 40 fractions (1 min each, i.e. 0.8 mL elution volume) were collected and dried in a speedvac. An aliquot of 80 µL for each fraction (i.e. 10% of the total volume) was dried separately and used to visualize the protein content by sodium dodecyl sulfate poly acrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE, 12% polyacrylamide). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue and used to inspect the fractions containing the histone H4. Once selected, the dried fractions containing histone H4 (~10 ug) were resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer 50 mM, 20% ACN and digested for 6 hours with AspN protease (Roche Applied Science) in a substrate/enzyme ratio of 10:1 (w/w). Digestion was quenched by acidification with formic acid (FA) (final concentration 10%). Resulting peptides were subsequently desalted by solid phase extraction (Sep-pack Vac C18 cartridges, Waters), and eluted with 75% ACN, 20 mM propionic acid (Fluka puriss. pro analysis, 99.5% (gas chromatography); Sigma-Aldrich), adjusted to pH 6.0 using ammonium hydroxide (ACS reagent grade, Sigma-Aldrich).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Electron). Basically, peptide identification was performed with Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) against a concatenated forward-decoy database containing all the histones protein variants and supplemented with all the frequently observed protein contaminants in MS (version 5.62). The following parameters were used: 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance; variable modifications used were acetylation, methylation, dimethylation and trimethylation of lysines, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine phosphorylation. MS/MS spectra were first deconvoluted. Finally, results were filtered using the following criteria: (i) mass deviation of ±5 ppm, (ii) Mascot Ion Score of at least 20 and (iii) rank 1 in Mascot. As a result, we obtained peptide FDRs below 1% for all the LC-MS/MS analyses. Label free relative quantification was performed using Progenesis software (Nonlinear Dynamics), by comparing the area of each identified precursor ion in all the different samples analyzed. Peak integration and alignment were manually validated. Finally, peptide ratios were Log2 transformed and normalized based on the two non-modified H4 peptides ratios and median subtraction. Pearson correlation heat-maps and hierarchical clustering were generated using the MeV software

### Publication Abstract
Cellular reprogramming remodels the gene expression program by re-setting the epigenome of somatic cells into an embryonic-like pluripotent state. Post-translational modifications of histones play an important role in this process. Previously, we found by ChIP-seq widespread changes of specific histone H3 marks in two divergent reprogramming routes leading to alternative pluripotent sates . Here, using an unbiased middle-down proteomics approach we have identified 72 unique isoforms of histone H4 and quantified 56 of them in the same set of samples. We found substantial differences between somatic and late-phase reprogramming cells. Also, ESCs and iPSCs displayed higher levels of H4 acetylation and tri-methylation concomitantly with lower levels of mono- and di-methylation when compared to cells undergoing reprogramming. Our data shows that the epigenetic remodeling induced by the reprogramming process goes beyond histone H3 and reveals the importance of H4 modifications as well. The presented data is a valuable resource to study the epigenetic mechanisms involved in the acquisition of induced pluripotency. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002062 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002062).

### Keywords
Cellular reprogramming, Histone h4, Proteomics, Middle-down, Post translational modifications

### Affiliations
Faculty of Sciences
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) ProteoRed-ISCIII Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3 28029 Madrid. SPAIN

### Submitter
Marco Benevento

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) ProteoRed-ISCIII Melchor Férnandez Almagro, 3 28029 Madrid. SPAIN


