### Accession
PXD043514

### Title
Candidate biomarkers for treatment benefit from sunitinib in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma using mass spectrometry-based (phospho)proteomics

### Description
The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib is an effective first-line treatment for patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Hypothesizing that a functional read-out by mass spectrometry-based (phospho, p-)proteomics will identify predictive biomarkers for treatment outcome of sunitinib, tumor tissues of 26 RCC patients were analyzed. Eight patients were primary resistant (RES) and 18 sensitive (SENS).

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tumor resection specimens, acquired through standard care procedures and stored at -80 °C, were collected from the hospital biobank. The tumor samples were cut (Leica CM1850) and processed to tumor lysates for MS-based phosphoproteomics. Reduction, alkylation, tryptic digestion, desalting and lyophilization of peptides was performed.  As quality control samples, the colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 and a reference sample of tissue-mixture (containing pooled lysates of tumor samples of colorectal cancer, melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma) were used. HCT116 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Cells were cultured in DMEM, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml sodium penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and maintained at 37 °C. Plated cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed using 9M urea buffer. Cells were scraped and the lysate was sonicated and centrifuged for 15 minutes at maximum speed. Tumor samples were processed in 3 batches, each containing samples from patients with sensitive and resistant tumors. Immunoprecipitation of tyrosine phospho-peptides was performed using the PTMScan kit (P-Tyr-1000) from Cell Signaling Technology (Leiden, The Netherlands).  The IP samples were then re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent (0.5% TFA, 4% ACN) and transferred to LC autosampler vials and stored at 4 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. Peptides were separated as described elsewhere31,32 on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC- (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands)  connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) using a 2hr gradient (8-32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap analyser using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, MaxIT of 80 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (release August 2015, 62447 entries, no fragments) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.834. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40, with the corresponding minimum delta score set at 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped into protein groups (default MaxQuant settings).  Proteins were digested with trypsin and two missing cleavages were permitted. Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), N terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da) were treated as variable modifications; whereas cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The MS/MS spectra was obtained using MaxQuant (v2.0.3.0) searching the Uniprot human reference proteome. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm, and fragment ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein, peptide and phosphosite identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was set as 40 (delta score 17). The minimum for peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Match‐between‐runs and label‐free quantification options were selected.

### Publication Abstract
The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib is an effective first-line treatment for patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Hypothesizing that a functional read-out by mass spectrometry-based (phospho, p-)proteomics will identify predictive biomarkers for treatment outcome of sunitinib, tumor tissues of 26 RCC patients were analyzed. Eight patients had primary resistant (RES) and 18 sensitive (SENS) RCC. A 78 phosphosite signature (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05, fold-change&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;2) was identified; 22 p-sites were upregulated in RES (unique in RES: BCAR3, NOP58, EIF4A2, GDI1) and 56 in SENS (35 unique). EIF4A1/EIF4A2 were differentially expressed in RES at the (p-)proteome and, in an independent cohort, transcriptome level. Inferred kinase activity of MAPK3 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.026) and EGFR (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.045) as determined by INKA was higher in SENS. Posttranslational modifications signature enrichment analysis showed that different p-site-centric signatures were enriched (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05), of which FGF1 and prolactin pathways in RES and, in SENS, vanadate and thrombin treatment pathways, were most significant. In conclusion, the RCC (phospho)proteome revealed differential p-sites and kinase activities associated with sunitinib resistance and sensitivity. Independent validation is warranted to develop an assay for upfront identification of patients who are intrinsically resistant to sunitinib.

### Keywords
Sunitinib, Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, Renal cell carcinoma, Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, Cancer

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Thang Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


