### Accession
PXD001993

### Title
Male accessory glands of Apis melifera drones

### Description
Protein content of Apis melifera drone male accessory glands (cornua, bulbus and seminal vesicle) investigated by high resolution MS

### Sample Protocol
Predominantly mature drones were collected from a hive of Western honeybees (Apis mellifera carnica) kept at the apiary of the Oberursel Bee Research Institute. From each drone, the reproductive apparatus was dissected and each gland was separated and rinsed three times in phosphate buffered saline. Two glands of each type were carefully mixed with 30 µL 0.1% TFA avoiding the destruction of gland tissue and sonicated for 5 min. The solution was left overnight at 4°C to complete the extraction of gland contents. Later, the samples were purified by ZipTip C18 using standard protocol, completely dried in SpeedVac and reconstituted in 1% formic acid (FA) before HPLC-MS analysis. No enzymatic digestion was performed before LC-MS analysis. All experiments were done on a 7-Tesla Finnigan LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) consisting of a linear quadrupole ion trap and a Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FTICR) mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano electrospray ionization source run in positive ion mode. The HPLC system - Ultimate (Dionex/LCPackings, Idstein, Germany). Chromatographic separation of the peptides took place in a 15-cm analytical column with an internal diameter of 75 µm filled with C18, 3 µm, 100 Å stationary phase. Samples were pre-focused on the trap column (Dionex, C18 PepMap, i.d. 300 µm, length 5 mm). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, fragmenting three most intense ions by CID (isolation width 2 u, normalized collision energy 30). Survey MS spectra (from m/z 200–2000) were acquired in the FTICR cell with a mass resolution of 100,000 (@m/z 400), while MS2 spectra were recorded with a mass resolution of 50,000 (@m/z 400).

### Data Protocol
First, LC-MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) using the SEQUEST search engine embedded in this software. The reference database included proteins of the genus Apis obtained from Uniprot as well as frequently observed contaminations (cRAP set: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html dated 29.02.2012). Unspecific cleavages were used to form theoretical peptides; oxidation of methionine was specified as variable modification. Fragmentation spectra were grouped with 4 ppm tolerance for parent ion and 1 min RT window prior to search. The same mass tolerance was used for parent ion in SEQUEST, while for the fragments the tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. Database search results were filtered to FDR < 0.05 (estimated by target-decoy approach) and further validated by manual de novo sequencing. In the second step, manual de novo interpretation of all spectra was performed to find peptides undiscovered by SEQUEST. Two home-built programs, written in Python 2.7.5, were used to assist de novo sequencing.

### Publication Abstract
In honeybees, reproductive females usually mate early in their life with more than 10 males in free flight, often within 10 minutes, and then store male gametes for up to five years. Because of the extreme polyandry and mating in free flight special adaptations in males are most likely. We present here the results of an investigation of the protein content of four types of male reproductive glands from the Western honeybee (Apis mellifera) drone, namely seminal vesicles (secretion in ejaculate), as well as bulbus, cornua and mucus glands (secretions for the mating plug). Using high resolution and accuracy mass spectrometry and a combination of database searching and de novo sequencing techniques it was possible to identify 50 different proteins in total, inside all mentioned glands, except in the mucus gland. Most of the proteins are unique for a specific gland type, only one of them (H9KEY1/ATP synthase subunit O) was found in three glands, and 7 proteins were found in two types of glands. The identified proteins represent a wide variety of biological functions and can be assigned to several physiological classes, such as protection, energy generation, maintaining optimal conditions, associated mainly with vesicula seminalis; signaling, cuticle proteins, icarpin and apolipoproteins located mainly in the bulbus and cornua glands; and some other classes. Most of the discovered proteins were not found earlier during investigation of semen, seminal fluid and tissue of reproductive glands of the bee drone. Moreover, we provide here the origin of each protein. Thus, the presented data might shed light on the role of each reproductive gland.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cornua, Bulbus, Apis melifera, Seminal vesicle, Common bee, Drone, Reproductive system, De novo

### Affiliations
Justus-Liebig University Giessen
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry Justus-Liebig University Giessen Germany

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Bernhard Spengler
Institute of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry Justus-Liebig University Giessen Germany


