### Accession
PXD011784

### Title
Identification of 4-Hydroxyproline at the Xaa Position in Collagen by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Collagen has a triple helix form, structured by a [-Gly-Xaa-Yaa-] repetition, where Xaa and Yaa are amino acids. This repeating unit can be post-translationally modified by enzymes, where proline is often hydroxylated into hydroxyproline (Hyp). Two Hyp isomers occur in collagen: 4-hydroxyproline (4Hyp, Gly-Xaa-Pro, substrate for 4-prolyl hydroxylase) and 3-hydroxyproline (3Hyp, Gly-Pro-4Hyp, substrate for 3-prolyl hydroxylase). If 4Hyp is lacking at the Yaa position, then Pro at the Xaa position should remain unmodified. Nevertheless, in literature 16 positions have been described where Hyp occurs at the Xaa position (?xHyp) lacking an adjacent 4Hyp. We report four additional positions in liver and colorectal liver metastasis tissue (CRLM). We studied the sequence commonalities between the 20 known positions of ?xHyp. Alanine and glutamine were frequently present adjacent to ?xHyp.  We showed that proline, position 584 in COL1A2, had a lower rate of modification in CRLM than in healthy liver. The isomeric identity of ?xHyp, i.e. 3- and/or 4Hyp, remains unknown. We present a proof of principle identification of ?xHyp. This identification is based on liquid chromatography retention time differences and mass spectrometry using ETD-HCD fragmentation, complemented by ab initio calculations. Both techniques identify ?xHyp at position 584 in COL1A2 as 4-hydroxyproline (4xHyp).

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic peptides were diluted to a concentration of 2 nM and mixed in a 1:1 ratio with the liver tissue digest. The following mixtures were analyzed: the digest with 0.1% TFA, with GLH-Pro, with GLH-Pro + GLH-3Hyp, and with GLH-Pro + GLH-4Hyp. This was performed for control-6, control-18, CRLM-6, and CRLM-18 (11). The same nanoLC method was used as described by van Huizen et al. (11), the only difference being that a 30 min gradient instead of a 90 min gradient was used. The nanoLC was coupled to a nanospray source of an Orbitrap Fusion. The above mentioned ETD-HCD mass spectrometry method was used for detection. To increase the number of MS3 scans on a LC time scale, ions were analyzed in the ion trap of the Orbitrap Fusion. LC-MS/MS/MS runs are included in the supplementary data.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed MS/MS/MS spectra directly to identify ?xHyp.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen has a triple helix form, structured by a [-Gly-Xaa-Yaa-] repetition, where Xaa and Yaa are amino acids. This repeating unit can be post-translationally modified by enzymes, where proline is often hydroxylated into hydroxyproline (Hyp). Two Hyp isomers occur in collagen: 4-hydroxyproline (4Hyp, Gly-Xaa-Pro, substrate for 4-prolyl hydroxylase) and 3-hydroxyproline (3Hyp, Gly-Pro-4Hyp, substrate for 3-prolyl hydroxylase). If 4Hyp is lacking at the Yaa position, then Pro at the Xaa position should remain unmodified. Nevertheless, in literature 41 positions have been described where Hyp occurs at the Xaa position (?xHyp) lacking an adjacent 4Hyp. We report four additional positions in liver and colorectal liver metastasis tissue (CRLM). We studied the sequence commonalities between the 45 known positions of ?xHyp. Alanine and glutamine were frequently present adjacent to ?xHyp. We showed that proline, position 584 in COL1A2, had a lower rate of modification in CRLM than in healthy liver. The isomeric identity of ?xHyp, that is, 3- and/or 4Hyp, remains unknown. We present a proof of principle identification of ?xHyp. This identification is based on liquid chromatography retention time differences and mass spectrometry using ETD-HCD fragmentation, complemented by ab initio calculations. Both techniques identify ?xHyp at position 584 in COL1A2 as 4-hydroxyproline (4xHyp).

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Ab initio, Etd, Collagen, Liver, Hydroxyproline, Colorectal liver metastasis, Ptm, Mass spectrometry, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands ( lab head )
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Nick van Huizen

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands ( lab head )


