### Accession
PXD041844

### Title
Longitudinal Effects of Elexacaftor/Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor on Sputum Viscoelastic Properties, Airway Infection and Inflammation in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis

### Description
Rationale: We recently demonstrated that the triple combination CFTR modulator therapy elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor (ELX/TEZ/IVA) improves lung ventilation and airway mucus plugging determined by multiple-breath washout and magnetic resonance imaging in CF patients with at least one F508del allele. However, effects of ELX/TEZ/IVA on viscoelastic properties of airway mucus, chronic airway infection and inflammation have not been studied. Objectives: To examine the effects of ELX/TEZ/IVA on airway mucus rheology, microbiome and inflammation in CF patients with one or two F508del alleles aged 12 years and older. Methods: In this prospective observational study, we determined sputum rheology, microbiome, inflammation markers and proteome before and 1, 3 and 12 months after initiation of ELX/TEZ/IVA. Measurements and Main Results: CF patients with at least one F508del allele and healthy controls were enrolled in this study. ELX/TEZ/IVA improved the elastic and viscous modulus of CF sputum. Further, ELX/TEZ/IVA improved the microbiome α-diversity and decreased the relative abundance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P<0.05) in CF sputum. ELX/TEZ/IVA also reduced IL-8 and free NE activity, and shifted the CF sputum proteome towards healthy. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that ELX/TEZ/IVA improves sputum viscoelastic properties, chronic airway infection and inflammation in CF patients with at least one F508del allele, however, without reaching levels close to healthy.

### Sample Protocol
Sputum samples were prepared and measured in two batches. First, the samples were inactivated and proteins solubilized by adding sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl) in a 1:1 volume to volume ratio, followed by an incubation at 95°C for 10 min. After measuring the protein concentration using a BCA assay, 100 µg protein were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 40 mM chloroacetamide at 95°C for 10 min. Subsequently, samples were treated with benzonase (25U, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for 15 min and protein clean-up was performed using the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. Protein containing beads were resuspended in 50 mM ABC buffer, treated with 2 µg peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA) for 1 hour at 37°C and subsequently digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA, USA) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C. The peptide containing supernatant was collected and desalted using C18 stage tips. 2 µg of the peptides samples were using a 200 min gradient on an EASY-nLC 1200 System coupled to an Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer running on data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package (Ver. 2.0.3.1; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) and a decoy human UniProt database (2023-03). Variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine were selected. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. “Match between runs” and label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm were applied. MaxQuant protein groups data were filtered by removing reverse hits, proteins only identified by site and potential contaminants. Data were further filtered for proteins identified by at least two peptides or at least 5 MS/MS counts with an Andromeda score above 20. Outlier patient samples, defined by number of proteins identified (< than 1200) and principal component analysis, were excluded. Proteins identified in at least 50% of one of the patient groups were considered for further analysis. Missing values were replaced by random values from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a down shift of 1.8. For statistical analysis two-sample or paired moderated t-testing and moderated F testing (limma package) were applied. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg method and cutoffs of either 0.05 or 0.01 were chosen. For gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) the clusterProfiler package was used. Only gene ontology (GO) terms of biological processes with a minimum size of 50 and a maximum size of 500 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Disease, Sputum, Cystic fibrosis, Proteome, Label free, Elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany. Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany. Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.


