### Accession
PXD016568

### Title
The Histone Demethylase KDM5C Functions as a Tumor Suppressor in AML by Repression of B ivalently M arked Immature Genes

### Description
To uncover novel epigenetic regulators in AML, we performed an in vivo short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screen in the context of Cebpa mutant AML. This led to the identification of the Histone 3 Lysine 4 (H3K4) demethylase, KDM5C, as a novel tumor suppressor in AML. KDM5C potentially functions as a transcriptional repressor via its demethylase activity at promoters, and dysregulation could therefore have widespread consequences. Here, we found that reduced Kdm5c/KDM5C expression is associated with accelerated growth in both human and murine AML cell lines. In vivo, Kdm5c knockdown in a Cebpa mutant AML mouse model resulted in a more aggressive, immature and short-latency phenotype. Mechanistically, we show that knockdown of Kdm5c increased H3K4me3 globally. This translated into the up-regulation of a group of bivalently marked immature genes, resulting in a de-differentiation phenotype which could be reversed by modulating levels of pro-differentiation factors. Finally, we demonstrated that low levels of KDM5C were associated with a decrease in long-term disease-free survival, specifically in female patients. This emphasizes the clinical relevance of our findings and identifies KDM5C as a novel female-biased tumor suppressor in AML.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted from 4 mln cells essentially as described by Sidoli et al [PMID: 27286567] However, nuclei sedimentation step was performed at 2000g, since 1000g did not result in good nuclei recovery. TCA precipitation was substituted with desalting using disposable SEC PD-10 columns from GE healthcare (17085101) and the samples were subsequently concentrated by speed vac to 100ul. Histones were quantified by BCA assay (each sample produced 20-30ug) and 10ugs were digested and derivatised in 30uls of buffer, as described in [PMID: 25680960]. Histones were desalted using 3mg of HLB material (waters), as recommended by the manufacturer. The samples were analysed using DIA strategy with high resolution orbitrap MS1 and low resolution ion trap MS2 scans[ PMID: 26505526] on Orbitrap Velos coupled to nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptides (600ng per injection) were directly loaded on 30 cm long with 150 uM inner diameter packed with intertsil 2um sorbent using flashPack method [PMID: 30373789]. The flow rate was kept at 1 ul/min and column temperature was 30 C during analysis. The aqueous mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid. The organic mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was 4-25% B in 49 min, 25-40% in 13 minutes, 40-80% in 4 minutes. Peptides were electrosprayed through etched emitters [PMCID: PMC1769309]. MS1 scans were performed at 15K resolution in Orbitrap analyser. For MS2 peptides were isolated in ten 80Da windows and fragmented using CID with 35NCE. To improve data quality all scans were performed as 2 microscans which were averaged on the flight.

### Data Protocol
The results were analysed by epiProfile [PMID: 25805797], the code was modified to specify phenyl isocyanate (119.037114) as N-terminal modification

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic regulators are frequently mutated in hematological malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Thus, the identification and characterization of novel epigenetic drivers affecting AML biology holds potential to improve our basic understanding of AML and to uncover novel options for therapeutic intervention. To identify novel tumor suppressive epigenetic regulators in AML, we performed an in vivo short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screen in the context of CEBPA mutant AML. This identified the Histone 3 Lysine 4 (H3K4) demethylase KDM5C as a tumor suppressor, and we show that reduced Kdm5c/KDM5C expression results in accelerated growth both in human and murine AML cell lines, as well as in vivo in Cebpa mutant and inv(16) AML mouse models. Mechanistically, we show that KDM5C act as a transcriptional repressor through its demethylase activity at promoters. Specifically, KDM5C knockdown results in globally increased H3K4me3 levels associated with up-regulation of bivalently marked immature genes. This is accompanied by a de-differentiation phenotype that could be reversed by modulating levels of several direct and indirect downstream mediators. Finally, the association of KDM5C levels with long-term disease-free survival of female AML patients emphasizes the clinical relevance of our findings and identifies KDM5C as a novel female-biased tumor suppressor in AML.

### Keywords
Human, Leukemia, Kdm5c

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group
Syddansk University

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N Jensen
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group


