### Accession
PXD029239

### Title
Acacia Catechu Willd extract protects neuronal cells from oxidative stress-induced damage

### Description
Oxidative stress (OS) resulting in reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and inflammation, play a pivotal role in the neuronal loss occurring in neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, promising future drugs that would prevent or slow down the progression of neurodegeneration should possess potent radical-scavenging activity. Acacia catechu Willd heartwood extract (AC) contains high amount of catechins endowed of antioxidant properties. The aim of the present study was to assess AC neuroprotection in rat brain slices treated with hydrogen peroxide. AC reverted the decrease in viability as well as the increase in sub-diploid-, DAPI positive cells, reduced ROS formation, recovered the mitochondrial potential and caspase-3 activation. Neuroprotective effects occurred in rat brain slices as a reversal in the expression of the main proteins involved in apoptosis and signalling pathways related to calcium homeostasis following OS-mediated injury was demonstrated. Additionally, unbiased quantitative mass spectrometry allowed us to assess that AC partially reverted the hydrogen peroxide-induced altered proteome, including proteins belonging to the synaptic vesicle fusion apparatus. In conclusion, the present results suggest the possibility of AC as a nutraceutical useful in preventing neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Acacia Catechu willd extract (AC) treatment was performed in rat brain slices as follows: after an equilibration phase, slices were incubated with artificial cerebro-spinal fluid (ACSF) containing (or not, in case of controls) AC (1-200 µg/ml in ACSF) for 1h. After this period, the medium with AC was maintained and hydrogen peroxide (5 mM for 1h) were added to the medium. At the end of treatments, the slices were lysed to extract proteins. Brain slices were lysed in ice-cold buffer containing 8 M urea, 2% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, and protease inhibitors cocktail. To ensure a complete lysis, samples were passed through an insulin syringe, incubated for 5 minutes in an ultrasound bath, and finally centrifuged (10 min, 14,000× g, 4 °C) to remove tissue debris. The homogenates were subjected to Micro-Lowry assay to determine total protein concentration. Samples were then stored at -80°C until use. Protein extracts from four independent rat brains undergoing the treatments described above (Control, C; H2O2, H; and H2O2+AC, A) were processed according to the filter‐aided sample preparation protocol. Additionally, three independent quality control (QC) samples prepared by mixing equal amount of each protein extract were prepared. Equal amount of each protein extracts (200 μg in 50 μL) were mixed with 150 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Samples were loaded in filters with a molecular weight cut‐off of 10 kDa and centrifuged (15 min, 14,000× g, 25 °C). Then, three washing steps were performed by adding with 200 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 and by centrifuging samples (15 min, 14,000× g, 25 °C). Afterwards, disulphide bonds were first reduced using 200 μL of 25 mM DTT (1h, 55 °C) and, after centrifugation, cysteine residues were alkylated using 200 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (45 min in the dark, RT) (both diluted in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8). After centrifugation, five additional washing steps were performed by adding 100 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 to each filter. Finally protein digestion was carried out by incubating filters (18 h, 37 °C) in presence of 100 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 and 1 mM CaCl2, containing 8 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio of 1:25 (w/w)). After digestion, released peptides were collected by centrifugation (15 min, 14,000× g). To each filter, an additional amount of 100 μL of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 was added to improve recovery of peptides, by a second centrifugation (15 min, 14,000× g). Protein digests were acidified by adding of formic acid until pH ≤ 3 was reached, and then desalted by using C18 BioPure spin columns. Briefly, columns were activated with 400 μL of methanol, and then with 400 μL of acetonitrile. Then columns were equilibrated twice with 400 μL of water containing formic acid (0.1%, v/v). Then peptides were loaded onto C18 spin columns and washed twice with 200 μL of water containing formic acid (0.1%, v/v). The elution was achieved by adding 200 μL of 80% acetonitrile in water (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Peptide extracts were finally dried at room temperature under a stream of nitrogen and dissolved in 200 μL of 5% acetonitrile in water (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v), immediately before LC-HRMS/MS analyses (protein digest concentration of 1 μg/μL). Label free quantification of proteins was performed by analyzing digested peptides with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, coupled with a UHPLC system Ultimate 3000. Peptides were separated on a reversed phase analytical column (C18, 150 × 2.1 mm, 2.6 μm). Mobile phases were water (A) and acetonitrile (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). The gradient applied was: 0–1 min 2.5% B, then B was increased linearly to reach 30% at 20 min and increased again to reach 50% at 24 min. Afterwards, solvent B was increased to 95% at 26 min and kept until and 30 min to wash the column. Finally, the concentration of B was decreased to 2.5% at 30.5 min, to equilibrate the column to initial conditions until 35 min. The column oven was set to 30 °C, the injection volume was 5 µL and the flow rate was 200 μL/min. Full HRMS scans were acquired at 70000 resolution full width at half maximum (FWHM) followed by the MS/MS scan of the four most intense precursor ions acquired at 17500 resolution FWHM. Full scan spectra were acquired in a scan range from 300 to 2000 Th. Higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Each protein digest was analyzed twice by LC-HRMS/MS analysis. In the second run, an exclusion list containing the m/z values deriving from peptides identified in the first run was applied to increase the number of identified peptides and increase the overlap among different samples.

### Data Protocol
LC-HRMS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, version 2.1) and analyzed with SEQUEST HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three QC sample were used to ensure repeatability of protein quantification and to check for instrumental performance along the analytical session. Protein identification was done using the following parameters: enzyme specificity set to trypsin with up to 1 allowed miss cleavage, peptide tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.2 Da. Searches were done against the Rattus Norvegicus reference proteome of UniProtKB (version UP000002494). Carbamidomethyl-Cys was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu and acetylation of N-terminus were set as variable modification. Proteins were considered as positively identified if at least two independent peptides were identified with a false discovery rate below 5%. Proteins were grouped into protein families according to the principle of maximum parsimony. Label free quantification was achieved by using the precursor ion abundance of unique peptides that are not shared between different proteins or protein groups and normalizing relative quantification values to the total peptide amount. Normalized intensity values of proteins derived from Proteome Discoverer software were finally exported in a spreadsheet, for multivariate analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress (OS) and the resulting reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and inflammation play a pivotal role in the neuronal loss occurring during the onset of neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, promising future drugs that would prevent or slow down the progression of neurodegeneration should possess potent radical-scavenging activity. <i>Acacia catechu</i> Willd. heartwood extract (AC), already characterized for its high catechin content, is endowed with antioxidant properties. The aim of the present study was to assess AC neuroprotection in both human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and rat brain slices treated with hydrogen peroxide. In SH-SY5Y cells, AC prevented a decrease in viability, as well as an increase in sub-diploid-, DAPI positive cells, reduced ROS formation, and recovered the mitochondrial potential and caspase-3 activation. AC related neuroprotective effects also occurred in rat brain slices as a reversal prevention in the expression of the main proteins involved in apoptosis and signalling pathways related to calcium homeostasis following OS-mediated injury. Additionally, unbiased quantitative mass spectrometry allowed for assessing that AC partially prevented the hydrogen peroxide-induced altered proteome, including proteins belonging to the synaptic vesicle fusion apparatus. In conclusion, the present results suggest the possibility of AC as a nutraceutical useful in preventing neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-hrms/ms, Rat, Acacia catechu

### Affiliations
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie
Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Roberto Stella

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Frosini
Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Italy


