### Accession
PXD035268

### Title
Phosphorylation of TRF2 promotes its interaction with TIN2 and regulates DNA repair at damaged telomeres

### Description
Protein phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1 delta (PPM1D) is involved in termination of the cell cycle checkpoint by counteracting activity of the tumour suppressor protein p53. By dephosphorylating various proteins at chromatin, PPM1D contributes to the control of DNA damage response and DNA repair. Using proximity biotinylation followed by proteomic analysis, we identified interaction between PPM1D and the components of the shelterin complex that protects telomeric DNA. Interaction between PPM1D and TRF2 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation and proximity ligation assay. Confocal microscopy revealed colocalisation of the endogenous PPM1D with TRF2 at telomeres. Further, we found that TRF2 was phosphorylated by ATR at S410 after induction of DNA damage at telomeres and this modification was increased in cells lacking PPM1D or after PPM1D inhibition. Phosphorylation of TRF2 stimulated its interaction with TIN2 at telomeres and in vitro. Conversely, overexpression of PPM1D impaired localisation of TIN2 at telomeres. Finally, inhibition of PPM1D impaired recruitment of 53BP1 and RAD51 to DNA double strand breaks at telomeres. Expression of TRF2-S410A mutant fully rescued the recruitment of 53BP1 to telomeric breaks. These results suggest that TRF2 phosphorylation promotes association of TIN2 with the shelterin complex and regulates DNA repair at telomeres.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 stably transfected with empty pBIOID2 or pBIOID2-PPM1D-D314A were grown in media supplemented with 50 μM biotin for 5 h, then cells were collected, washed in cold PBS and lysed under denaturating conditions in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1.0 % SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor). Protein lysates were diluted with four volumes of PBS and sonicated 3x for 30 sec. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15 000 g for 10 min and biotinylated proteins were pulled down by incubation with Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin for 90 min. After washing twice in lysis buffer and twice with PBS, on-bead trypsin digestion was performed and peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry using Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.1) and Perseus softwares. Three biological replicates were analyzed and median peptide intensities were compared. Statistical significance was calculated using Student's T-test.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1 delta (PPM1D) terminates the cell cycle checkpoint by dephosphorylating the tumour suppressor protein p53. By targeting additional substrates at chromatin, PPM1D contributes to the control of DNA damage response and DNA repair. Using proximity biotinylation followed by proteomic analysis, we identified a novel interaction between PPM1D and the shelterin complex that protects telomeric DNA. In addition, confocal microscopy revealed that endogenous PPM1D localises at telomeres. Further, we found that ATR phosphorylated TRF2 at S410 after induction of DNA double strand breaks at telomeres and this modification increased after inhibition or loss of PPM1D. TRF2 phosphorylation stimulated its interaction with TIN2 both in vitro and at telomeres. Conversely, induced expression of PPM1D impaired localisation of TIN2 and TPP1 at telomeres. Finally, recruitment of the DNA repair factor 53BP1 to the telomeric breaks was strongly reduced after inhibition of PPM1D and was rescued by the expression of TRF2-S410A mutant. Our results suggest that TRF2 phosphorylation promotes the association of TIN2 within the shelterin complex and regulates DNA repair at telomeres.

### Keywords
Dna repair, Ppm1d, Trf2, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic
BIOCEV, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague

### Submitter
Pavel Talacko

### Lab Head
Dr Libor Macurek
Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences Vídeňská 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic


