### Accession
PXD030733

### Title
the expression of BDNF and the levels of this neurotrophin influence the behavioural response in Zebrafish

### Description
Experimental evidence suggests that environmental stress conditions can alter the expression of BDNF and the levels of this neurotrophin influence the behavioural response in mammalian models. Recently it has been demonstrated that the exposure to 34° C for 21 days alters the brain proteome and behaviour in zebrafish. The aim of this work was to investigate the role of BDNF in the nervous system of adult zebrafish under control and heat treatment conditions. For this purpose, wild type (WT), heterozygous BDNF+/- (HT) and knock out BDNF-/- (KO) zebrafish were kept for 21 days at 26° C or 34° C and then euthanized for brain analysis or subjected to behavioural tests (Y-maze test, novel tank test, light and dark test, social preference test, mirror biting test) used for assessing behavioural aspects such as boldness, anxiety, social preference, aggressivity, interest for the novel environment and exploration. RTqPCR analysis showed the reduction of gene expression of BDNF and its receptors after heat treatment. Moreover, proteomic analysis and behavioural tests showed genotype- and temperature-dependent effects on brain proteome and behaviour of zebrafish.

### Sample Protocol
A shotgun label free proteomic approach for the identification and quantification of the expressed proteins was used. The brains were homogenized in 100 μL of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors cocktail). Prior to proteolysis, proteins were reduced with 13 mM dithioerythriol (30 min at 55° C) and alkylated with 26 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature). Protein digestion was performed using sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37° C using a protein: enzyme ratio of 20:1.  The collected peptides were desalted using Zip-Tip C18 before Mass Spectrometric (MS) analysis

### Data Protocol
A database search was conducted against the Danio rerio Uniprot sequence database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes, release 11/12/18) with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) software. The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, defined as C-terminal to Arg and Lys excluding Pro, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in labelfree quantification algorithms (LFQ) based on extracted ion intensity of precursor ions. False protein identifications (1%) were estimated by searching MS/MS spectra against the corresponding reversed-sequence (decoy) database. Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Only proteins present and quantified in at least 75% of the repeats were positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analysis. PCA was carried out by grouping quantitative data related to proteins in the sample groups: WT26, WT34, KO26, KO34, HT26, HT34. Focusing on specific comparisons, proteins were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one condition or showed significant t-test difference (Welch's test P ≤0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Experimental evidence suggests that environmental stress conditions can alter the expression of BDNF and that the expression of this neurotrophin influences behavioural responses in mammalian models. It has been recently demonstrated that exposure to 34 &#xb0;C for 21 days alters the brain proteome and behaviour in zebrafish. The aim of this work was to investigate the role of BDNF in the nervous system of adult zebrafish under control and heat treatment conditions. For this purpose, zebrafish from three different genotypes (wild type, heterozygous BDNF<sup>+/-</sup> and knock out BDNF<sup>-/-</sup>) were kept for 21 days at 26 &#xb0;C or 34 &#xb0;C and then euthanized for brain molecular analyses or subjected to behavioural tests (Y-maze test, novel tank test, light and dark test, social preference test, mirror biting test) for assessing behavioural aspects such as boldness, anxiety, social preference, aggressive behaviour, interest for the novel environment and exploration. qRT-PCR analysis showed the reduction of gene expression of BDNF and its receptors after heat treatment in wild type zebrafish. Moreover, proteomic analysis and behavioural tests showed genotype- and temperature-dependent effects on brain proteome and behavioural responding. Overall, the absent expression of BDNF in KO alters (1) the brain proteome by reducing the expression of proteins involved in synapse functioning and neurotransmitter-mediated transduction; (2) the behaviour, which can be interpreted as bolder and less anxious and (3) the cellular and behavioural response to thermal treatment.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Nano lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Università degli studi di Milano 
Dipartimento di medicina veterinaria

### Submitter
Francesca  Grassi Scalvini

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Grassi Scalvini
Dipartimento di medicina veterinaria


