### Accession
PXD038001

### Title
An integrated multi-omics analysis of identiﬁes distinct molecular characteristics in pulmonary infections of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) can cause severe acute infections, including pneumonia and sepsis, and also cause chronic infections commonly in patients with structural respiratory diseases. However, the molecular and pathophysiological mechanisms of P. aeruginosa respiratory infection are largely unknown. Here, we profiled performed to assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq), transcriptomics, and quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues for multi-omics analysis, while ATAC-seq and transcriptomics were also examined in P. aeruginosa-infected mouse macrophages. To find the pivotal transcription factors that are likely involved in host immune defense, we integrally investigated systematic changes in chromatin accessibility and gene expression in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues combined with proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics studies. We discovered that Stat1 and Stat3 were altered in various omics and found similar results in mouse alveolar macrophages. Taken together, these findings indicate that these crucial transcription factors and their downstream signaling molecules play a critical role in the mobilization of host immune response against P. aeruginosa infection and may serve as potential targets for bacterial infections and inflammatory diseases, as well as provide clear insights and resources for using integrative histological analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and tryptic digestion Samples were removed from -80°C, weighed into a pre-cooled mortar with liquid nitrogen, and ground to powder with liquid nitrogen. Each group of samples were lysed by adding 4 times the volume of powder lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, and 2 mM EDTA) and sonicated. 4°C, 12,000 g was centrifuged for 10 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube for protein concentration determination using the BCA kit. Dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced for 30 min at 56 °C. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at room temperature and protected from light for 15 min. Finally, the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) and digested overnight at 37 °C. The trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) and the digestion was continued for 4 h. Trypsinized peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and then vacuum freeze-dried. Peptides were solubilized with 0.5 M TEAB Peptides were solubilized and labeled according to the TMT kit operating instructions. Tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm i.d., 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated into 60 fractions using a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. The peptides were then combined into 18 fractions, and the combined fractions were vacuum freeze-dried for subsequent operation.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics LC-MS/MS data acquisition The peptides were separated by an ultra-performance liquid chromatography system and then injected into an NSI ion source for ionization and analysis by Orbitrap FusionTM mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using a high-resolution Orbitrap. The primary mass spectrometry scan range was set to 350-1,550 m/z and the scan resolution was set to 60, 000, while the secondary mass spectrometry scan range was fixed at 100 m/z and the secondary scan resolution was set to 15,000. the dynamic exclusion time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 200 ms. The dynamic exclusion time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 30 s to avoid duplicate scans of the parent ion. M2 spectrometry data were searched with Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Search parameter settings: the database is SwissProt Mouse, a reverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the effect of contaminated proteins in the identification results; the digestion method was set to trypsin/P. The number of missed cut sites was set to 2; the minimum peptide length was set to 7; the mass error tolerance of the primary parent ion was the mass error tolerance for primary search and primary search was set to 20 ppm, and the mass error tolerance for primary search and primary search was set to 5 ppm, and the mass error tolerance for secondary fragment ion was set to 0.02 Da. The quantification method was set to TMT-6plex and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Transcription factors, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Atac-seq, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Sichuan University;  610041;  P. R. China;  State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy;  West China Hospital;  Sichuan University.  ;
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy

### Submitter
Yang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Yang
Sichuan University;  610041;  P. R. China;  State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy;  West China Hospital;  Sichuan University.  ;


