### Accession
PXD036435

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of Virulence Factors and Related Proteins in Enterococcus strains from Dairy and Fermented Food Products

### Description
Shotgun proteomics analysis of 14 different Enterococcus strains from dairy and fermented products.

### Sample Protocol
- Bacterial Strains Fourteen Enterococcus strains isolated from dairy products were used in this study (Table 1). Strains were previously characterized by MALDI-TOF-MS and 16S rRNA se-quencing [129]. The Enterococcus strains were grown in brain heart infusion (BHI, Oxoid Ltd., Hampshire, UK) at 31 °C for 24 h. Bacterial cultures were then transferred to plate count agar (PCA, Oxoid Ltd., Hampshire, UK) and subjected to further incubation at 31 °C for 24 h. - Protein Extraction Protein extraction was performed as indicated previously (Carrera et al., 2017; Böhme et al., 2010). In short, a fresh inoculation loop of bacterial culture was resuspended in 100 μL of a solution with 50% acetonitrile (ACN; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and 1% aque-ous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Acros Organics, Bridgewater, NJ, USA). After vortexing and centrifuging, the supernatant was further treated with lysis buffer consisting of 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% lauryl maltoside, 5 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 1% dithiothreitol (DTT). The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and the amount of protein was determined by the bicinchoninic acid method (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). All experiments were performed in triplicate. - Peptide Sample Preparation Protein extracts were solubilized and further digested with trypsin, as reported pre-viously [133]. To do so, 100 μg of protein was dried in a SpeedVac (CentriVap, Labconco Co., Kansas City, MO, USA), resuspended in 25 μL of denaturation buffer (8 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0), and sonicated for 5 min. Then, the addition of DTT followed, at a final concentration of 10 mM, and incubation at 37 °C for 1 h. Alkylation was easily achieved by addition of the appropriate amount of iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 50 mM; the solution was dark-incubated for 1 additional hour at room temperature. The sample was diluted with 4 volumes of 25 mM ammonium bicar-bonate (pH 8.0) to reduce the urea concentration. The final step included trypsin digestion (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a protease:protein ratio of 1:100. The incubation was performed overnight at 37 °C. - Shotgun LC–ESI–MS/MS Analysis The peptide digests prepared as shown before were acidified with formic acid (FA) (~pH 2), desalted in a C18 MicroSpin™ column (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA) and finally analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLC II Nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) [19,134]). Peptide separation (2 μg) was performed in a reverse-phase (RP) column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 10 mm precol-umn (Accucore XL C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution from the column was per-formed by means of a linear gradient from 5 to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 98% water, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 98% ACN, 2% water, 0.1% fatty acid (FA)) for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Electrospray ionization was carried out with a spray voltage of 1.95 kV at a capillary temperature of 230 °C. Peptides were analyzed in positive mode (1 μscan; 400 to 1600 amu), followed by 10 data-dependent collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans (1 μscan), using an isolation width of 3 amu and a normalized collision en-ergy of 35%. After the second fragmentation event, dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s, and ions with an unassigned charge state were excluded from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
- LC-ESI-MS/MS Data Processing The MS/MS spectra obtained by LC-ESI-MS/MS were analyzed using the program SEQUEST-HT (Proteome Discoverer 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and compared to the Listeriaceae UniProt/TrEMBL protein database (containing 431,881 protein sequence entries, September 2020). MS/MS spectra were searched using fully tryptic cleavage con-straints, and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Tolerance windows were set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.06 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. The variable modifica-tions allowed were (M*) methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and protein N-terminal acety-lation (+42.0106 Da). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (Cys) (+57.02 Da) (C*) was con-sidered a fixed modification. The percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007) was used to vali-date the results as well as for statistical analysis. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was always kept at less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Enterococcus species are Gram-positive bacteria that are normal gastrointestinal tract inhabitants that play a beneficial role in the dairy and meat industry. However, Enterococcus species are also the causative agents of health care-associated infections that can be found in dairy and fermented food products. Enterococcal infections are led by strains of Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium, which are often resistant to antibiotics and biofilm formation. Enterococci virulence factors attach to host cells and are also involved in immune evasion. LC-MS/MS-based methods offer several advantages compared with other approaches because one can directly identify microbial peptides without the necessity of inferring conclusions based on other approaches such as genomics tools. The present study describes the use of liquid chromatography&#x2212;electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC&#x2212;ESI&#x2212;MS/MS) to perform a global shotgun proteomics characterization for opportunistic pathogenic Enterococcus from different dairy and fermented food products. This method allowed the identification of a total of 1403 nonredundant peptides, representing 1327 proteins. Furthermore, 310 of those peptides corresponded to proteins playing a direct role as virulence factors for Enterococcus pathogenicity. Virulence factors, antibiotic sensitivity, and proper identification of the enterococcal strain are required to propose an effective therapy. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036435. Label-free quantification (LFQ) demonstrated that the majority of the high-abundance proteins corresponded to E. faecalis species. Therefore, the global proteomic repository obtained here can be the basis for further research into pathogenic Enterococcus species, thus facilitating the development of novel therapeutics.

### Keywords
Lc–esi–ms/ms; proteomics; mass spectrometry; antibiotic resistance peptides; antibiotic pro-duction; virulence factors; enterococcus spp.; dairy; fermented food products

### Affiliations
CSIC
Marine Research Institute (IIM-CSIC)

### Submitter
Mónica Carrera

### Lab Head
Dr Monica Carrera
Marine Research Institute (IIM-CSIC)


