### Accession
PXD019157

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 induced glycolysis is essential for monocytes inflammatory response

### Description
We have analyzed through shotgun proteomics approach Macrophages and Monocytes infected by the virus Sars-Cov 2, performing a qualitative and quantitative analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages and Monocytes isolated from 5 healthy controls and 5 sarscov2 patients were chemically (Lysis Buffer: 100mM TrisHCL, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCL, 1% triton-x, protease and phosphatase inhibitors), and mechanically lysed (Utrasonication probe) then the total protein extract was quantified by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Then aliquotes of 60 μg protein amount of total extract protein were transferred on Microcon-10 Centrifugal Filter , with 10kDa cut off, for FASP protein digestion (Distler, U., et al 2016). Proteins were reduced by 10mM DTT and alchilated by 50mM IAA. Each protein aliquote was digested over-night by Trypsin. In detail, Trypsin digestions were carried out at 37°C, 16-18 hours in 50mM AMBIC pH=8.0.  The day after, all digestions were blocked by adding FA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) and the peptides were recovered from the filter in 50mM AMBIC, concentrated in a speedvac and stored at -80°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptides from each sample were resuspended in 0.1% FA. The separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corporation). 0.50 μg of each digested samples has been loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm precolumn (Waters Corp.) used as trapping column and subsequently separated by a 120 min reversed phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 3–55% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale and LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C. For the gradient eluition water-Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) has been used as eluent A and Acetonitrile Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) as eluent B. The Separated peptides have been analysed by High Definition Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Differential protein expression has been evaluated with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) of shotgun proteomics analysis by Expression configuration mode (MSe). The mass spectrometer operated in “Expression Mode” switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies on the gas cell, using a scan time of 1.0s per function over 50–2000 m/z. All spectra have been acquired in Ion Mobility Mode by applying a wave velocity for the ion separation of 1.000m/s and a transfer wave velocity of 175m/s. The processing of low and elevated energy, added to the data of the reference lock mass ([Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard, Waters Corp.) provides a time-aligned inventory of accurate mass retention time components for both the low and elevated-energy (EMRT, exact mass retention time) Each sample was run in three technical replicates. Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate experiments for each sample have been processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software Progenesis (Waters Corp.). The qualitative identification of proteins has been obtained by searching in Homo Sapiens database (UNIPROT Protein reviewed release 2020-04). Search parameters were set as: automatic tolerance for precursor ions and for product ions, minimum 2 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum 3 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum 1 peptide matched per protein, 2 missed cleavage, carbamydomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications, false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification algorithm < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 can result in severe lung injury. It remained to be determined why diabetic individuals with uncontrolled glucose levels are more prone to develop the severe form of COVID-19. The molecular mechanism underlying SARS-CoV-2 infection and what determines the onset of the cytokine storm found in severe COVID-19 patients are unknown. Monocytes and macrophages are the most enriched immune cell types in the lungs of COVID-19 patients and appear to have a central role in the pathogenicity of the disease. These cells adapt their metabolism upon infection and become highly glycolytic, which facilitates SARS-CoV-2 replication. The infection triggers mitochondrial ROS production, which induces stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1&#x3b1; (HIF-1&#x3b1;) and consequently promotes glycolysis. HIF-1&#x3b1;-induced changes in monocyte metabolism by SARS-CoV-2 infection directly inhibit T&#xa0;cell response and reduce epithelial cell survival. Targeting HIF-1&#x251; may have great therapeutic potential for the development of novel drugs to treat COVID-19.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Proteomics, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
Post doctor
Professor at UINCAMP-BR Campinas State University - São Paulo - Brazil

### Submitter
Victor Corasolla Carregari

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Professor at UINCAMP-BR Campinas State University - São Paulo - Brazil


