### Accession
PXD013781

### Title
Succinylation dimethyl-labeling quantitative proteomic in liver cancer HepG2 cells

### Description
Lysine succinylation (Ksucc) as an evolutionarily conserved and widespread post-translational modification has been identified. However, the mechanism of succinylation modulation remains unclear. Here, we report a histone acetyltransferase is a succinyltransferase, essentially enhancing the tumor growth and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor  in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The trypsin-digested peptide was desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was solubilized with 0.5 M TEAB, the peptides were labeled according to the dimethyl labeling kit instructions. CH2O was labeled for control group and treatment group was labeled with CD2O. The simple operation is showed as follows: the labeling reagent was mixed with the peptide and incubated for 2 h at room temperature, and the labeled peptides were mixed, desalted, and vacuum-dried. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The peptide was dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and the supernatant was transferred to the pre-washed succinylated resin (Resin antibody product number PTM402, Jingjie PTM BioLab Co. Ltd., China), was placed on a rotary shaker at 4 °C, gently shaken and incubated overnight. After the incubation, the resin was washed 4 times with IP buffer solution and twice with deionized water. Finally, the resin-bound peptide was eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid eluate and eluted three times in total. The eluate was collected and vacuum-dried and drained. After draining, the salt was removed according to the C18 ZipTips (Millipore, USA) instructions, vacuum-dried and drained for liquid-mass analysis. The protocol of HPLC/MS/MS analysis was conducted as previously described (Huang et al., 2018; Rardin et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017). The enriched peptides obtained above were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water and loaded onto a reversed-phase microcapillary column (10 cm length with 75 mm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil 100 C18 resin (3 mm particle size, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Beim Bruckle, Germany). The loaded samples were separated using a gradient of 5% to 80% HPLC buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile, v/v) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water, v/v) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min over 60 min by an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The samples were analyzed by a Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one full mass scan followed by the top 15 most intense precursor ions was applied with a 25 s dynamic exclusion. Intact peptides were detected with a resolution of 70,000, and the tandem mass spectra were acquired with a mass resolution of 17,500 at 27% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data was searched by MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009). All the data were searched against UniProt Human protein database (88,277 entries, http://www.uniprot.org). Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification. The lysine succinylation was specified as variable modifications. FDR thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. The following peptides were considered as false positives and removed from our list: peptides identified from reverse or contaminant protein sequences, peptides with score below 40, site localization probability below 0.75, Ksucc sites on peptide C terminus unless the peptide C-terminal was also the corresponding protein C-terminal. To ensure that the Ksucc level change in the cells is not caused by the protein level change, we quantified the protein expression levels. Briefly, the proteolytic peptides obtained in previous step were separated on preparative HPLC into 20 fractions, or separated into 12 fractions with SDS-PAGE. These samples were analyzed using the same procedures for the Ksucc peptides quantification. Then all the ratios of quantified Ksucc peptides were normalized by the ratios of their corresponding protein expression levels. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/).Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway.There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used.Soft motif-x was used to analysis the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site，but phosphorylation with modify-13-mers that 6 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic, Lc-ms/ms, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Research, Institute of Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P.R. China.
Nankai University

### Submitter
Xiaodong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaodong Zhang
Department of Cancer Research, Institute of Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, P.R. China.


