### Accession
PXD016038

### Title
Multi-condition affinity capture/MS analysis of LAP-tagged human NCBP1, NCBP2, and NCBP3

### Description
A 5′, 7-methylguanosine cap is a quintessential feature of RNA polymerase II-transcribed RNAs, and thus a textbook aspect of co-transcriptional pre-mRNA processing. The cap is bound by the cap-binding complex (CBC), canonically consisting of nuclear cap-binding proteins 1 and 2 (NCBP1/2). Recently, NCBP3 has been proposed to form an alternative, non-canonical CBC, together with NCBP1. NCBP3 has also been shown to interact with the canonical CBC along with the protein SRRT (aka ARS2), in a manner that is mutually exclusive with the RNA export factor, PHAX. Taken together, ambiguities and missing information in the bona fide physiological protein-protein associations of NCBP3 persist. In an effort to clarify the compositions of NCBP1-, 2-, and 3-related macromolecular assemblies, including their intersections and differences, we have applied our recently developed interactome screening platform (PMID: 25938370). Here the experimental design and data processing have been modified and updated to identify interactome differences between targets of affinity capture under a wide range of experimental conditions, followed by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa Kyoto cell lines stably expressing LAP tagged NCBP proteins and “tag-only” (LAP-control), respectively, were provided as stably transfected cell pools by Ina Poser and Anthony Hyman; these were engineered as previously described (PMIDs: 18391959; 15644491). All cell pools provided were FACS sorted for EGFP-positive cells (forward scatter threshold = 5000). Cell harvesting and cryomilling was carried out as previously described (PMID: 28060343). 50 mg of cell powder was used per well (NCBP1, 2 and cognate controls) at 1:9 (w:v) in 24-wells of a 96-well plate; 300 mg of cell powder was used per affinity capture replicate of NCBP3 and cognate controls at 1:4 (w:v) when conducted individually in microfuge tubes. Screens were conducted as in (PMID: 25938370) with modifications. Sonication was achieved using a QSonica Q700 equipped with an 8-tip microprobe (#4602), applied until material in multi-well plates was homogeneously resuspended as judged by visual inspection (4°C, 1 Amp, ~30-40 sec [continuous]: ~140J per row on average); or using a QSonica S4000 equipped with a low-energy microprobe (#4717), applied individually in microfuge tubes (4°C, 2 Amp, 15 x 2 sec pulses [1 sec interval]: ~50 J per sample). After centrifugal clarification of the extracts (10 min, 4°C, 20,000 RCF), affinity capture was achieved using 5 µl of affinity medium slurry, conjugated with Llama α-GFP polyclonal antibody (PMIDs: 21536766; 22668517), in multi-well screens, or 10 µl of slurry in microfuge tubes. Affinity capture was allow to proceed for 30 min at 4°C with gentle mixing. Elution from the affinity medium was achieved using 1.1x LDS (ThermoFisher Scientific #NP0008).  Samples were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide), and subjected to standard SDS-PAGE, staining with Sypro Ruby, or run as a gel plug, Coomassie Blue stained, excised, subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion, and the peptides desalted and concentrated upon C18 resin (OMIX C18 pipette tips; Agilent #A57003100) essentially as previously described (PMID: 31106238). Standard SDS-PAGE was used for excision of select bands (based on imaging) for protein identification by tandem MS; gel plugs were used to prepare whole IP fractions for LFQ MS. Summarized as follows: Samples produced by multi-well screening were run on either an Orbitrap Fusion or a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 10 µL of 5% (v/v) methanol, 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water; half was loaded on the LC column (Thermo Easy-Spray ES800). Peptides were ionized by electrospray at 1.8 – 2.1 kV following elution across a linear gradient (7 minutes for individual gel bands; 35-40 minutes for whole gel plugs) rising to 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water; Solvent B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prepared by combination with either 95% (v/v) or neat acetonitrile. Full MS scans were performed in profile mode, while fragmentation spectra were acquired in centroid mode with priority given to the most intense precursors. Dynamic exclusion was enabled to limit repeated sequencing of the same peptides. For NCBP3-LAP and control samples obtained by microfuge tube affinity capture: the dried peptide mix was reconstituted in a solution of 20ul of 2% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for MS analysis. 5 µl of this solution was loaded with the autosampler directly onto a self-packed column, which was made from a 75 µm ID PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) filled with 25 cm of 2.4 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ. Peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min from the column using an Eksigent NanoLC 415 with a 52 min gradient from 2% to 25% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile); at which point the gradient was switched from 25% to 85% buffer B over 5 min and held constant for 3 min; finally, the gradient was changed from 85% buffer B to 98% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) over 1 min, and then held constant at 98% buffer A for 15 more minutes. The application of a 3.5 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometer-scanning functions and HPLC gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was set to scan MS1 at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target set at 3x10^6. The scan range was m/z 375-2000. For MS2, resolution was set at 15,000 and AGC target at 2x10^5 with a maximum IT at 50 ms. The top 15 peaks were analyzed by MS2. Peptides were isolated with an isolation window of m/z 1.6 and fragmented at 27 CE. Minimum AGC target was at 8x10^3. Only ions with a charge state of 2 through 6 were considered for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 15 sec.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant processing of RAW files and initial QC: Peptide identification and quantitation was achieved using the MaxQuant v.1.6.5.0 software and a proteomic database comprised of a Uniprot human proteome (proteome:up000005640; reviewed:yes) with GFP added (97% identical to the EGFP sequence in the LAP-tag). The following abridged software settings were used: Include contaminants - True; PSM & Protein FDR - 0.01; quantify unmodified peptides and Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C); Phospho (STY) was searched but not quantified, nor were unmodified counterpart peptides; iBAQ - True; iBAQ log fit - False; Match between runs - True; Decoy mode - revert; Include contaminants - True; Advanced ratios - False; Second peptides - True; Stabilize large LFQ ratios - True; Separate LFQ in parameter groups - True; Require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons - True; Razor protein FDR - True.

### Publication Abstract
A 5',7-methylguanosine cap is a quintessential feature of RNA polymerase II-transcribed RNAs, and a textbook aspect of co-transcriptional RNA processing. The cap is bound by the cap-binding complex (CBC), canonically consisting of nuclear cap-binding proteins 1 and 2 (NCBP1/2). Interest in the CBC has recently renewed due to its participation in RNA-fate decisions via interactions with RNA productive factors as well as with adapters of the degradative RNA exosome. A novel cap-binding protein, NCBP3, was recently proposed to form an alternative CBC together with NCBP1, and to interact with the canonical CBC along with the protein SRRT. The theme of post-transcriptional RNA fate, and how it relates to co-transcriptional ribonucleoprotein assembly, is abundant with complicated, ambiguous, and likely incomplete models. In an effort to clarify the compositions of NCBP1-, 2-&#xa0;and 3-related macromolecular assemblies, we have applied an affinity capture-based interactome screen where the experimental design and data processing have been modified to quantitatively identify interactome differences between targets under a range of experimental conditions. This study generated a comprehensive view of NCBP-protein interactions in the ribonucleoprotein context and demonstrates the potential of our approach to benefit the interpretation of complex biological pathways.

### Keywords
Mrnp, Cap binding complex, Cbc, Interactome screen

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
John LaCava

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
The Rockefeller University


