### Accession
PXD001944

### Title
Proteomic interrogation of the cell envelope of Neisseria gonorrhoeae exposed to physiologically relevant environmental cues.

### Description
Gonorrhea occurs at high incidence worldwide and has a major impact on reproductive and neonatal health worldwide. Alarmingly, with each new antibiotic introduced for gonorrhea, resistance has emerged, including resistance to penicillin, tetracycline, fluoroquinolones, and recently the third-generation cephalosporins. Treatment options are currently seriously limited and the development of a gonorrhea vaccine is a critical, longterm solution to this problem. Progress on gonorrhea vaccines has been slow, however, in part due to the high number of surface molecules in Neisseria gonorrhoeae (GC) that undergo phase or antigenic variation and a lack of understanding of protective responses. Gonorrhea vaccine development can therefore benefit from a comprehensive, unbiased approach for antigen discovery. Here we identified cell envelop proteins from Neisseria gonorrhoeae exposed to physiology relevant conditions: presence of human serum, iron limitation and anaerobic growth.

### Sample Protocol
GC FA1090 grown under aerobic (GCB media, iron limited, and in the presence of human serum) and anaerobic were harvested from plates after 18 hours of incubation and suspended in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing Pierce Protease Inhibitors Mini Tablets, EDTA-Free (Thermo) and lysed by passing four times through French Press (1200 psi). To remove cell debris, the obtained whole cell lysates were spun down at 6,000 × g for 20 min and additionally filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filters (VWR). The clarified cell lysate (8 mL) was mixed with 42 mL of ice cold 0.1 M sodium carbonate and incubated with rotation for 1 h at 4 °C. Solutions were subjected to sonication for 30 s at 5 W (Qsonica) at 0, 30 and 60 min. The cell envelope fractions were obtained by ultracentrifugation at 150,000 x g for 1 h. Membrane protein pellets were washed with PBS and spin at 150,000 x g for 30 min and finally reconstituted in PBS with 0.2% SDS. Protein concentrations were measured using 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Proteins were digested with trypsin and labeled with iTRAQ following manufacturer recomendations. Samples isolated from GCB were labeled with 114 tag, incubated with human serum with 115 tag, after iron limitation with 116 tag and incubated under anaerobic conditions with 117 tag. Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was used to separate iTRAQ-labeled peptides. Desalted SCX fractions were analyzed by LC/ESI MS/MS with a ThermoScientific Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) nano HPLC coupled to a hybrid Orbitrap Elite ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. In-line de-salting was accomplished using a reversed-phase trap column (100 µm × 20 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-µm 200 Å resin; Michrom Bioresources) followed by peptide separations on a reversed-phase column (75 µm × 250 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-µm 100 Å resin; Michrom Bioresources) directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. A 90-minute gradient from 7% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/minute was used for chromatographic separations. The heated capillary temperature was set to 300 C and a spray voltage of 2250 V was applied to the electrospray tip.  The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode, switching automatically between MS survey scans in the Orbitrap (AGC target value 1,000,000, resolution 60,000, and injection time 250 milliseconds) and MS/MS scans in the OrbiTrap (AGC target value of 50,000, 15,000 resolution and injection time 250 milliseconds). The 15 most intense ions from the survey scan were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 40%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds with a list size of 500 and exclusion mass by mass width +/- 0.5.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The data were searched against a SwissProt Neisseria gonorrheae FA1090 database  (downloaded on January, 17 2012) that included common contaminants. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance and the fragment ion tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Variable modifications included iTRAQ4Plex (+144.102 Da) on any N-Terminus, oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da), methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) on cysteine (+46.988 Da), and iTRAQ4Plex on lysine (+144.102 Da). Data were searched using Sequest HT. All search results were run through Percolator for scoring. Quantification was performed using the canned iTRAQ 4plex method through Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Expanding efforts to develop preventive gonorrhea vaccines is critical because of the dire possibility of untreatable gonococcal infections. Reverse vaccinology, which includes genome and proteome mining, has proven very successful in the discovery of vaccine candidates against many pathogenic bacteria. However, progress with this approach for a gonorrhea vaccine remains in its infancy. Accordingly, we applied a comprehensive proteomic platform-isobaric tagging for absolute quantification coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry-to identify potential gonococcal vaccine antigens. Our previous analyses focused on cell envelopes and naturally released membrane vesicles derived from four different Neisseria gonorrhoeae strains. Here, we extended these studies to identify cell envelope proteins of N. gonorrhoeae that are ubiquitously expressed and specifically induced by physiologically relevant environmental stimuli: oxygen availability, iron deprivation, and the presence of human serum. Together, these studies enabled the identification of numerous potential gonorrhea vaccine targets. Initial characterization of five novel vaccine candidate antigens that were ubiquitously expressed under these different growth conditions demonstrated that homologs of BamA (NGO1801), LptD (NGO1715), and TamA (NGO1956), and two uncharacterized proteins, NGO2054 and NGO2139, were surface exposed, secreted via naturally released membrane vesicles, and elicited bactericidal antibodies that cross-reacted with a panel of temporally and geographically diverse isolates. In addition, analysis of polymorphisms at the nucleotide and amino acid levels showed that these vaccine candidates are highly conserved among N. gonorrhoeae strains. Finally, depletion of BamA caused a loss of N. gonorrhoeae viability, suggesting it may be an essential target. Together, our data strongly support the use of proteomics-driven discovery of potential vaccine targets as a sound approach for identifying promising gonococcal antigens.

### Keywords
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Quantitative proteomics, Cell envelope, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA

### Submitter
Aleksandra Sikora

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Sikora
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA


