### Accession
PXD018098

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis reveals the attenuated replication mechanism of Newcastle disease virus caused by nuclear localization signal mutation in viral matrix protein

### Description
Nuclear localization of cytoplasmic RNA virus proteins mediated by intrinsic nuclear localization signal (NLS) plays essential roles in successful virus replication. We previously reported that NLS mutation in the matrix (M) protein obviously attenuates the replication and pathogenicity of Newcastle disease virus (NDV), but the attenuated replication mechanism of NDV remains unclear. In this study, we showed that M/NLS mutation not only disrupted M’s nucleocytoplasmic trafficking characteristic but also impaired viral RNA synthesis and transcription. Using TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis of BSR-T7/5 cells infected with the parental NDV rSS1GFP and the mutant NDV rSS1GFP-M/NLSm harboring M/NLS mutation, we found that rSS1GFP infection stimulated much greater quantities and more expression level changes of differentially expressed proteins involved in host cell transcription, ribosomal structure, posttranslational modification, and intracellular trafficking than rSS1GFP-M/NLSm infection. Further in-depth analysis revealed that early nuclear localization of M protein inhibited cell transcription and participated in reducing cellular protein synthesis, posttranscriptional modification and transport; whereas later cytoplasmic localization of M protein promoted viral protein synthesis and benefited for virus assembly and budding. Importantly, we first demonstrated that later cytoplasmic localization of M protein effected the inhibition of TIFA expression in a dose-dependent manner, and inhibiting TIFA expression was beneficial to NDV replication by down-regulating TIFA/TRAF6/NF-κB-mediated production of cytokines. Our findings suggest that precocious cytoplasmic localization of M protein caused by M/NLS mutation disrupts these important biological processes, and thereby causes the attenuated replication of NDV, demonstrating that NDV replication is closely related to the nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of M protein.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation and trypsin digestion Three biological replicates of rSS1GFO- or rSS1GDP-M/NLSm-infected group and one mock group were prepared for TMT-based quantitative proteomics experiments. Briefly, BSR-T7/5 cells grown in 25-cm2 flasks were infected with rSS1GFP or rSS1GFP-M/NLSm at an MOI of 1. Cell samples were collected at 12 and 24 hpi, respectively, and then sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g at 4℃ for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT labeling, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis After trypsin digestion of protein samples, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed for 6-plex TMT kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). LC-MS/MS analysis of the tryptic peptides was performed as described previously. The HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis in this study is supported by Jingjie PTM BioLabs (Hangzhou, China).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. For protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot, and only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to <1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set >40. For data analysis, protein quantification data with a fold change of >1.2 and <0.83 and p-value <0.05 was selected as the significantly DEPs. Gene ontology (GO) annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The DEPs were classified by GO annotation based on the three categories including biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. The COG of protein database was carried out for functional classification of DEPs. The protein-protein interaction networks were annotated by STRING software version 11.0 (http://string.embl.de/) and KEGG database (http://www.kegg.jp/), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear localization of cytoplasmic RNA virus proteins mediated by intrinsic nuclear localization signal (NLS) plays essential roles in successful virus replication. We previously reported that NLS mutation in the matrix (M) protein obviously attenuates the replication and pathogenicity of Newcastle disease virus (NDV), but the attenuated replication mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we showed that M/NLS mutation not only disrupted M's nucleocytoplasmic trafficking characteristic but also impaired viral RNA synthesis and transcription. Using TMT-based quantitative proteomics analysis of BSR-T7/5 cells infected with the parental NDV rSS1GFP and the mutant NDV rSS1GFP-M/NLSm harboring M/NLS mutation, we found that rSS1GFP infection stimulated much greater quantities and more expression changes of differentially expressed proteins involved in host cell transcription, ribosomal structure, posttranslational modification, and intracellular trafficking than rSS1GFP-M/NLSm infection. Further in-depth analysis revealed that the dominant nuclear accumulation of M protein inhibited host cell transcription, RNA processing and modification, protein synthesis, posttranscriptional modification and transport; and this kind of inhibition could be weakened when most of M protein was confined outside the nucleus. More importantly, we found that the function of M protein in the cytoplasm effected the inhibition of TIFA expression in a dose-dependent manner, and promoted NDV replication by down-regulating TIFA/TRAF6/NF-&#x3ba;B-mediated production of cytokines. It was the first report about the involvement of M protein in NDV immune evasion. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that NDV replication is closely related to the nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of M protein, which accelerates our understanding of the molecular functions of NDV M protein.

### Keywords
Newcastle disease virus; matrix protein; nuclear localization signal; nucleocytoplasmic trafficking; tmt; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Guizhou University
Guizhou university

### Submitter
zhiqiang duan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiqiang Duan
Guizhou University


