### Accession
PXD030947

### Title
SWATH-MS identification of CXCL7, LBP, TGFβ1 and PDGFRβ as novel biomarkers in human systemic mastocytosis.

### Description
We carried out a novel clinical biomarker investigation of the blood of systemic mastocytosis patients versus healthy controls; utilizing a new and emerging technology platform Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical fragment-ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS).  This is the first use of this novel proteomic technique in the study of mastocytosis.   A Swath-MS based biomarkers dsicovery study for systemic mastocytosis with orthogonal validation of biomarkers via ELISA.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve patients with Sytemic Mastocytosis and eight healthy, controls were recruited to the study.  Peripheral blood samples, from the antecubital vein, were collected and processed within 24hrs. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 minutes at room temperature. Plasma aliquots (15 l) were thawed on ice and 10 µl added to Pierce top 12 abundant protein depletion spin columns (Pierce, Thermos Scientific, Rockford, USA) and treated following manufactures instructions. The immuno-depleted plasma samples (50 µg) were reduced with 5mM Dithiothreitol; 1% Sodium Deoxycholate was added, incubated for 30 mins at 60C; 50mM Iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. Enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin (1:50) and incubated at 37C overnight. Samples cleaned using in house stage tips. Samples were reconstituted in buffer A and 1µg of protein containing 0.1% final concentration of Indexed Retention Time peptides ( Biognosys, Switzerland) was loaded onto a 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Warrington, UK), with an Eksigent 1D+ Nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) for SWATH-MS analysis, samples were run in triplicate. The run time was 135 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3µl min-1.  Mobile phase A consisted 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 97% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were separated with a of 0.3µl min-1linear gradient of 3–30% B for 90 min, 30–40% B for 10 min, 80% B for 5 min and equilibration at 3% B for the remainder of the run. The mass spectrometer was operated and data collected in SWATH acquisition mode using 100 variable windows (1 Da overlap) of variable width ranging between 6 and 50 Da, which covered a mass range of 400–1250 DaSWATH-MS accumulation time was set to 25 ms for each fragment ion scan and 250 ms for the survey scan with a total cycle time of 2.75 s.

### Data Protocol
PeakView v 2.2.0.11391 (SCIEX, USA) with the SWATH-MS acquisition MicroApp v 2.0.1.2133 was used for spectral aliment and targeted extraction of DIA samples to extract SWATH-MS peak areas. Retention times realignment for all SWATH-MS experiments were auto-recalibrated in PeakView, based on iRT peptide retention times.  Ion library parameters were set with 6 transitions per peptide, peptide confidence threshold of 99% and FDR threshold of 1%. The time window and width were set to 5 minute and 75 ppm, respectively in XIC manager. The data was searched against the Pan-human spectral library ,Rosenberger et al. in 2014. Quantitation tables for fragment ions, peptides and proteins were generated using PeakView. These files were analysed using MarkerView v1.31 (SCIEX, USA) for sample normalization and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mastocytosis is a rare myeloproliferative disease, characterised by accumulation of neoplastic mast cells in one or several organs. It presents as cutaneous or systemic. Patients with advanced systemic mastocytosis have a median survival of 3.5&#xa0;years. The aetiology of mastocytosis is poorly understood, patients present with a broad spectrum of varying clinical symptoms that lack specificity to point clearly to a definitive diagnosis. Discovery of novel blood borne biomarkers would provide a tractable method for rapid identification of mastocytosis and its sub-types. Moving towards this goal, we carried out a clinical biomarker study on blood from twenty individuals (systemic mastocytosis: n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12, controls: n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), which were subjected to global proteome investigation using the novel technology SWATH-MS. This identified several putative biomarkers for systemic mastocytosis. Orthogonal validation of these putative biomarkers was achieved using ELISAs. Utilising this workflow, we identified and validated CXCL7, LBP, TGF&#x3b2;1 and PDGF receptor-&#x3b2; as novel biomarkers for systemic mastocytosis. We demonstrate that CXCL7 correlates with neutrophil count offering a new insight into the increased prevalence of anaphylaxis in mastocytosis patients. Additionally, demonstrating the utility of SWATH-MS for the discovery of novel biomarkers in the systemic mastocytosis diagnostic sphere.

### Keywords
Mastocytosis, Biomarkers, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Deputy Head of School,  School of Biological Sciences | 19 Chlorine Gardens| Belfast, BT9 5DJ  Queen’s University Belfast  | +44 28 9097 2383 |  https://www.qub.ac.uk/schools/SchoolofBiologicalSciences/
Queens University Belfast

### Submitter
bobby graham

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ciaren Graham
Deputy Head of School,  School of Biological Sciences | 19 Chlorine Gardens| Belfast, BT9 5DJ  Queen’s University Belfast  | +44 28 9097 2383 |  https://www.qub.ac.uk/schools/SchoolofBiologicalSciences/


