### Accession
PXD008974

### Title
Complexome Profiling of the mitochondrial proteome from Viscum album

### Description
Recent genomic studies revealed that mitochondria from mistletoe species appear to lack a major amount of genes, indicating a possible loss of the NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) which forms an essential part of the mitochondrial Oxidative Phosphorylation System (OXPHOS). This dataset is used for profiling of the mitochondrial complexome from European mistletoe, Viscum album and gives biochemical evidence for a lack of complex I as well as a unique composition of OXPHOS in Viscum album.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes of Viscum album leaf mitochondria were separated by 1D Blue native (BN) polyacrylamide gelelectrophoresis (PAGE) as described in [1].  A 1D BN gel lane was cut horizontally into 54 slices of about 10 mm in widths and 3 mm height. Gel slices were then further processed for MS analysis by tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide extraction as described before [2]. Peptide extracts were taken up in 20 µl sample buffer (5% [v/v] acetonitrile 0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid) and transferred to liquid-chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis. For LC, an Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) was used. 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase trapping column, length 2 cm, ID 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm, pore size 100 Å (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Subsequently, peptides were separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column, length 50 cm, ID 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm, pore size 100 Å (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) applying a non-linear 5% [v/v] to 30% [v/v] acetonitrile (ACN) gradient in 0.1% [v/v] formic acid at a column oven temperature of 33°C over a period of 70 min and a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. Finally, the ACN concentration was increased up to 95% [v/v] within 10 min and kept for another 10 min to clean the column. Column equilibration was performed at 5% [v/v] ACN for 10 min.  Eluting peptides were directly transferred to a Nano-Spray-Ionization (NSI) source using stainless steel nano-pore emitters of an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C and S-lens RF level to 50%. MS/MS spectra (top 10) were recorded from 20 to 80 min with the MS running in positive mode. For full MS scans, the number of microscans was set to 1, resolution to 70000, AGC target to 1e6, maximum injection time to 400 msec, number of scan ranges to 1, scan range to 400 to 1600 m/z and the spectrum data type to “Profile”. For dd-MS2, the number of microscans was set to 1, resolution to 17500, AGC target to 1e5, maximum injection time to 250 msec, loop count to 10, MSX count to 1, isolation window to 3.0 m/z, fixed first mass to 100.0 m/z, NCE to 27 (stepped NCE deactivated) and the spectrum data type to “Profile”. The data dependent (dd) settings were set to: Intensity threshold, 4.2e3; apex trigger, 10 to 60 sec; charge exclusion, unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8; peptide match, preferred; exclude isotypes, on; dynamic exclusion 45.0 sec.   [1] Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue-Native PAGE. NATURE Protocols 1, 418-428. [2] Klodmann J, Sunderhaus S, Nimtz M, Jänsch L, Braun HP. (2010) Internal architecture of mitochondrial complex I from Arabidopsis thaliana. The Plant Cell 22, 797–810.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files generated by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) were evaluated via MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1. [3]. Peptide spectra were queried against the TAIR10 Arabidopsis protein database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/) and a set of Viscaceae protein sequences taken from NCBI. Group-specific parameters were set to: Digestions mode, Specific; Enzyme, Trypsin/P; Maximum missed cleavage sides, 2; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); Maximum number of modifications per peptide, 5. For global parameters, Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, minimal peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum peptide mass [Da] to 4600. For protein identification, PSM and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 5% for queries against the Arabidopsis database, and to 1% for queries against the Viscaceae sequences. Minimum number of peptides, razor peptides and unique peptides for protein group identification were left at the default value of 1. To accurately quantify proteins within fractions for complexome profiling, calculation of intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was activated [4]. The remaining settings were left at the default values.  Complexome profiling was performed using the NOVA software (Version 0.5.7) [5] using the iBAQ values from the “proteinGroups” output file generated by MaxQuant. Values were normalized via “maximum normalization” for hierarchical clustering which was performed via the Pearson Correlation distance function and UPGMA (Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetical Mean) average linkage. The Viscum album ComplexomeMap was created at https://complexomemap.de/ [6]. [3] Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. (2016) The MaxQuant Computational Platform for Mass Spectrometry – Based Shotgun Proteomics. Nature Protocols 11, 2301–2319. [4] Schwanhäusser B, Busse D, Li N, Dittmar G, Schuchhardt J, Wolf J, Chen W, Selbach M. (2011) Global Quantification of Mammalian Gene Expression Control. Nature 473, 337–342. [5] Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31, 440-441. [6] Senkler J, Senkler M, Eubel H, Hildebrandt T, Lengwenus C, Schertl P, Schwarzländer M, Wagner S, Wittig I, Braun, HP. (2017) The mitochondrial complexome of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 89, 1079-1092.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Mistletoe, Blue native, Proteome, Viscum album

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Genetics, Leibniz Universitaet Hannover, Germany
Institute fuer Pflanzengenetik, Leibniz Universitaet Hannover

### Submitter
Jennifer Senkler

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Braun
Institute of Plant Genetics, Leibniz Universitaet Hannover, Germany


