### Accession
PXD029586

### Title
Analysis of protein secretome of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) Cancer Associated Fibroblasts (CAFs) after long term (14 days) treatment with Transforming Growth Factor beta 1 (TGF beta 1)

### Description
Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (CAFs) were isolated from specimens taken from primary human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) nodules (4 patients in total), characterized for expression of typical stromal markers (including vimentin and alpha smooth muscle actin), and then incubated in complete medium (Iscove's Modified Dulbecco Medium, IMDM + 20% fetal bovine serum + antibiotic/antimycotic) without any treatment, or in the presence of Transforming Growth Factor Beta 1 (TGF beta 1) at a concentration of 5 ng/ml. The medium and the treatment were renewed every 2 days until the 14th day. At that time point, cells were washed 4 times with serum-free IMDM medium and then incubated with serum free IMDM medium for 48 hours to allow for enrichment with secreted CAFs proteins. The CAFs conditioned medium was then collected, concentrated using a centricon device (10 kDa cutoff), assayed for protein concentration, and finally subjected to Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation  20µg of each sample was processed by SDS-PAGE using 10% Bis-Tris NuPage Mini-gel (Invitrogen) with the MES buffer system. The gel was run 5cm. The gel lane was excised into 20 equally sized bands. Each band was processed by in-gel digestion with trypsin using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol:  - Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. - Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. - Digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. - Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing.   Mass Spectrometry  Project MSB-7943: Half of each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. 10hrs of instrument time was used for the analysis of each sample.  Project MSB-8870: Half of each digested sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters M-Class HPLC system interfaced to a Thermo Fisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The instrument was run with a 3s cycle for MS and MS/MS. 5hrs of instrument time was used for the analysis of each sample.  Reference: https://www.msbioworks.com/service/protein-profiling/

### Data Protocol
Data Processing  Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P Database: SwissProt Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N/Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering and to create a nonredundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.  Reference: https://www.msbioworks.com/service/protein-profiling/  Samples are identified as follows: CAFs from HCC patient #1 - MSB42116: Control (untreated) CAFs from HCC patient #1 - MSB42117: TGF beta 1-treated CAFs from HCC patient #2 - MSB42118: Control (untreated) CAFs from HCC patient #2 - MSB42119: TGF beta 1-treated CAFs from HCC patient #3 - MSB49456: Control (untreated) CAFs from HCC patient #3 - MSB49457: TGF beta 1-treated CAFs from HCC patient #4 - MSB49458: Control (untreated) CAFs from HCC patient #4 - MSB49459: TGF beta 1-treated

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein secretome, Lc-ms/ms, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Cancer associated fibroblasts, Tgf beta

### Affiliations
National Institute of Gastroenterology, IRCCS "S. De Bellis" Research Hospital, Castellana Grotte, 70013 Bari, Italy
National Institute for Gastroenterology, IRCCS 'S. De Bellis' Research Hospital, 70013, Castellana Grotte (Ba)

### Submitter
Francesco Dituri

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Dituri
National Institute of Gastroenterology, IRCCS "S. De Bellis" Research Hospital, Castellana Grotte, 70013 Bari, Italy


