### Accession
PXD038410

### Title
Dehalobacterium formicoaceticum proteomics data from dichloromethane (DCM)-only medium

### Description
Dehalobacterium formicoaceticum is recognised for its unusual ability to anaerobically ferment dichloromethane (DCM), and a catabolic model has recently been proposed. D. formicoaceticum is currently the only axenic culture representative of its class, the Dehalobacteriia, however much diversity has been revealed in this lineage through recent culture-independent exploration of anoxic habitats. Here we performed a comparative analysis of 10 members of the Dehalobacteriia, representing three orders, and infer that anaerobic DCM degradation is a recently acquired trait only present in some members of the order Dehalobacteriales. Inferred traits common to the class include the use of amino acids as sole carbon sources for growth, energy generation via a remarkable range of putative electron-bifurcating protein complexes, and S-layers. The ability of D. formicoaceticum to grow on serine alone was subsequently confirmed experimentally and a high abundance of the electron-bifurcating protein complexes and S-layer proteins was noted when this organism was grown on DCM. We conclude that members of the Dehalobacteriia are low abundance fermentative scavengers in anoxic habitats.

### Sample Protocol
D. formicoaceticum was grown in medium containing DCM for 31 days. Peptide samples were collected from the sample using filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol.   Peptides were separated by nanoLC using an UltiMate nanoRSLC UPLC and   autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Samples (2.5 μl) were concentrated and desalted on a micro C18 precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid) at 15 μl/min. After a 4-minute wash, the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco, Houston, TX) into line with a fritless nano column (75μ x ~15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9μ, 120 Å Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany). Peptides were eluded using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid), to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid)   at 200 nl/min over 30 min. High voltage (2000V) was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) and the tip positioned ~0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=275°C) of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Electron Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Fusion Lumos operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA).  A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired (resolution = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 400,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Data-dependent tandem MS analysis was performed using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 2s). MS2 spectra were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD; NCE=30) activation mode and the ion-trap was selected as the mass analyzer. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 25,000 unit . A dynamic exclusion of 20 s was applied with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The peptide sequence data  obtained from the three replicates of the D. formicoaceticum sample grown in DCM-only condition were mapped against the ORFs of the D. formicoaceticum genome available in the GTDB release R06-202, using ProteinPilot software    (version 5.0.2, AB Sciex Pte. Ltd., 2018). The ProteinPilot results were filtered using a custom R script (R version 3.4.3; 29) to generate a list of proteins which were identified in at least two replicates of each test set and had an average ‘unused’ peptide score ≥ 2 (i.e., 99% confidence of identification).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiology, Dichloromethane, Dehalobacterium

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Young Song

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Hugenholtz
Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, The University of Queensland


