### Accession
PXD033585

### Title
Functional characterization of SH3P2 from Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Associated proteins with SH3P2 (from Arabidopsis thaliana) in the presence or absence of proteasome inhibitor bortezomib were analyzed. Furthermore, the project aimed to identify possible posttranslational modifications of SH3P2 (e.g.ubiquitination and phosphorylation)

### Sample Protocol
: Proteins were purified by SDS-PAGE (short run) and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin. Chloroacetamide was used instead of iodoacetamide for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using an 87min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. In each scan cycle, the 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105charges, and for the MS scan 3x106 charges.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Nicotiana benthamiana database obtained from Uniprot, and the sequences of GFP, GFP-XopL and GFP-XopL dE3 from Xanthomonas campestris pv. Vesicatoria, and SH3P2-GFP from Arabidopsis thaliana. Full trypsin digestion specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and GlyGly dipetide on lysine residues were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein level. The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Plants

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Suayb Üstün
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum


