### Accession
PXD010560

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling of brain in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of dementia and the number of AD patients is expected to increase as human life expectancy improves.  The deposition of β-amyloid protein (Aβ) in the extracellular matrix and neurofibrillary tangles intracellularly are pathologic hallmarks. Since the precise pathophysiology of AD has not been clearly elucidated yet, effective treatment is not available. Thus the development of valid AD biomarkers is imperative for early diagnosis and for monitoring disease progression and therapeutic responses.

### Sample Protocol
The 100 μg of protein from each brain samples were reduced at cysteine residues and alkylated with 5 mM DTT for 20 min at 60 °C and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature respectively. Protein digestion was carried out using lys-C (1:100) for 4 h. followed by trypsin (1:20) at 37°C for 12-16 h. Resulted peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 material. Peptides from the respective brain samples were labeled using TMT as per the manufacturer’s instruction (Catalog # 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides derived from control brain samples were labeled with TMT tags as 126, 127N, 128N and 128C and patient samples with TMT tag as 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131. After labeling reaction were quenched using with 5% hydroxylamine followed by sample were pooled together. The labeled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation generating 96 fractions. Briefly, TMT labeled peptides mixture was resuspended in 1 ml of bRPLC solvent A (7mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (7mM TEABC, pH 8.5, 90% acetonitrile) on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system. A total of 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated into 24 fractions and vacuum dried. 100 μg of each brain sample from each individual were used for the targeted analysis. Protein were reduced using 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 20 mM IAA. Protein was double digested using LysC (1:00) for 4 h. followed by trypsin (1:20) for 12-14h. Resulting peptides were purified using sep-pak column C18 material and sample swere dried in a speed vac.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 73, containing protein entries with common contaminants) using SEQUEST search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). The algorithms search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level as well as at 1% at protein level. Acquired PRM data was processed in the Skyline software package (23) . Peak integrations were calculated within the platform and reviewed manually; results were exported for additional data and statistical analysis. PRM data was assessed for (i) peak symmetry and baseline; (ii) consistency of retention times (iii) retention time consistency across transitions of the same analyte; and (iv) signal: noise ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease characterized by intracellular formation of neurofibrillary tangles and extracellular deposition of &#x3b2;-amyloid protein (A&#x3b2;) in the extracellular matrix. The pathogenesis of AD has not yet been fully elucidated and little is known about global alterations in the brain proteome that are related to AD. To identify and quantify such AD-related changes in the brain, we employed a tandem mass tags approach coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry. We compared the proteomes of frontal cortex from AD patients with corresponding age-matched brain samples. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/MS analysis carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer led to identification of 8,066 proteins. Of these, 432 proteins were observed to be significantly altered (&gt;1.5 fold) in their expression in AD brains. Proteins whose abundance was previously known to be altered in AD were identified including secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1), somatostatin (SST), SPARC-related modular calcium binding 1 (SMOC1), dual specificity phosphatase 26 (DUSP26), and neuronal pentraxin 2 (NPTX2). In addition, we identified several novel candidates whose association with AD has not been previously described. Of the novel molecules, we validated chromogranin A (CHGA), inner membrane mitochondrial protein (IMMT) and RAS like proto-oncogene A (RALA) in an additional set of 20 independent brain samples using targeted parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry assays. The differentially expressed proteins discovered in our study, once validated in larger cohorts, should help discern the pathogenesis of AD.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biomarkers, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
527 Miller Research Building 733 N. Broadway Baltimore, MD 21205
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey, M.D, Ph.D.
527 Miller Research Building 733 N. Broadway Baltimore, MD 21205


