### Accession
PXD042234

### Title
Mesothelin secretion by pancreatic cancer cells co-opts macrophages and promotes metastasis

### Description
SILAC-based proteomic analysis was performed on the secretome of the low metastatic FC1199 and high metastatic FC1245 KPC derived pancreatic cancer cell lines in order to identify secreted proteins that correlate with increased metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
The FC1199 and FC1245 cells were cultured with R6K6 and R0K0 non-phenol red serum free SILAC media respectively for 24hrs. The supernatant was then harvested, centrifuged and passed through a 0.22μM filter. This procedure was performed in quadruplet to produce 4 replicates. The SILAC TCM from each replicate was concentrated onto 10μl of strataclean beads (Agilent Technologies Inc.) and washed 479 twice with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The resin beads were resuspended in 80μl of 25mM amminoium bicarbonate and 5μl 1% (w/v) Rapigest™ (Waters). The samples were denatured at 80°C for 10 minutes, reduced with 5μl of 60mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 10 minutes, cooled and alkylated with 5μl of 180mM iodoacetamide. The samples were incubated with 1μg of trypsin (porcupine sequencing grade, Promega) overnight on a rotary mixer at 37°C. Afterwards, the digests were acidified with Trifluoroacetic acid for 45 minutes at 37°C to remove Rapigest™ surfactant. Samples were centrifuged at 17000g for 30 minutes and 10μl of each supernatant was taken for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using a QExactive HF quadruple-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher). Separation was performed using a 120minute gradient, with the eluent being introduced to the integrated nano-electron spray ionisation source operating in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were searched against the Mus Musculus UniprotKb FASTA protein sequences (accessed July 2020) using MaxQuant (v1.6.8) with the Andromeda peptide search engine with the false discovery rate set to 0.01. MaxQuant output ratios were filtered to remove contaminants, peptides not present in every replicate and proteins identified by only 1 peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Pancreatic cancer, Vegfa, Mesothelin, Metastasis, Macrophages, S100a9

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Dr Ainhoa Mielgo, Tumour Microenvironment Lab, Department of Molecular and Clincial Cancer Medicine, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Teifion Luckett

### Lab Head
Dr Ainhoa Mielgo
Dr Ainhoa Mielgo, Tumour Microenvironment Lab, Department of Molecular and Clincial Cancer Medicine, University of Liverpool


