### Accession
PXD037528

### Title
SND1 binds SARS-CoV-2 negative-sense RNA and promotes viral RNA synthesis through NSP9

### Description
Regulation of viral RNA biogenesis is fundamental to productive SARS-CoV-2 infection. To characterize host RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) involved in this process, we biochemically identified proteins bound to genomic and subgenomic SARS-CoV-2 RNAs. We find that the host protein SND1 binds the 5ʹ end of negative-sense viral RNA and is required for SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis. SND1-depleted cells form smaller replication organelles and display diminished virus growth kinetics. We discover that NSP9, a viral RBP and direct SND1 interaction partner, is covalently linked to the 5ʹ ends of positive and negative-sense RNAs produced during infection. These linkages occur at replication-transcription initiation sites, consistent with NSP9 priming viral RNA synthesis. Mechanistically, SND1 remodels NSP9 occupancy and alters the covalent linkage of NSP9 to initiating nucleotides in viral RNA. Our findings implicate NSP9 in the initiation of SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis and unravel an unsuspected role of a cellular protein in orchestrating viral RNA production.

### Sample Protocol
Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56C for 20 min in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and alkylated with 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide at 24C for 20 min in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Samples were cleaned up according to the SP3 protocol (1, 2). Sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and incubated overnight at 37C. Peptides were labelled with TMT10-plex (3) (Co-IP samples) or TMT6-plex (4) (input lysates) Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short, 0.8 mg reagent was dissolved in 42 μl 100% acetonitrile and 8 μl of stock was added and incubated for 1 h room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Samples were combined and desalted on an OASIS HLB μElution Plate (Waters). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 A, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex) (5). Thirty-two fractions were collected and pooled into 6 fractions (Co-IP samples) or 12 fractions (input lysates), dried under vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in 10 μl 1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile for LC-MS analysis. An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) equipped with a trapping cartridge (C18 PepMap 100, 5μm, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 A) and an analytical column (nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 column 75 μm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 μm, 100 A, Waters) was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) using the Nanospray Flex ion source in positive ion mode. The peptides are concentrated on the pre-column with a constant flow of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water at 30 μl/min for 6 minutes. The analytical column is operated with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min and  a binary solvent system (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, 3% DMSO; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, 3% DMSO)  is used for elution of the peptides over a gradient from 2% to 8% in 6 min, from 8% to 26% in 42 min (lysates, for Co-IP in 72 min), from 26% to 38% in 4 min, followed by an increase of B from 38 to 80% in 4min and a re-equilibration back to 2% B for 4 min. The peptides were introduced into the Fusion Lumos via a fused silica emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (CoAnn Technologies) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275C. Full mass scan (MS1) was acquired with mass range 375-1500 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with resolution of 60000 (lysates, for Co-IP 120,000). The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 15000 (lysates, for Co-IP 30000), with a fill time of 54 ms (lysates, for Co-IP 94 ms) and a limitation of 1x105 ions. A normalized collision energy of 36 was applied. Fixed first mass m/z 110. MS2 data were acquired in profile mode.

### REFERENCES ###
1. Hughes,C.S., Moggridge,S., Müller,T., Sorensen,P.H., Morin,G.B. and Krijgsveld,J. (2019) Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments. Nat Protoc, 14, 68–85.
2. Hughes,C.S., Foehr,S., Garfield,D.A., Furlong,E.E., Steinmetz,L.M. and Krijgsveld,J. (2014) Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol Syst Biol, 10, 1–10.
3. Werner,T., Sweetman,G., Savitski,M.F., Mathieson,T., Bantscheff,M. and Savitski,M.M. (2014) Ion Coalescence of Neutron Encoded TMT 10-Plex Reporter Ions. Anal Chem, 86, 3594–3601.
4. Dayon,L., Hainard,A., Licker,V., Turck,N., Kuhn,K., Hochstrasser,D.F., Burkhard,P.R. and Sanchez,J.-C. (2008) Relative Quantification of Proteins in Human Cerebrospinal Fluids by MS/MS Using 6-Plex Isobaric Tags. Anal Chem, 80, 2921–2931.
5. Reichel,M., Liao,Y., Rettel,M., Ragan,C., Evers,M., Alleaume,A.-M., Horos,R., Hentze,M.W., Preiss,T. and Millar,A.A. (2016) In Planta Determination of the mRNA-Binding Proteome of Arabidopsis Etiolated Seedlings. Plant Cell, 28, 2435–2452.


### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant(1) and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against a combined Uniprot proteome database of Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640) and SARS-CoV-2 (UP000464024) containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. Carbamidomethyl on cystein and TMT6 on lysine (lysates, for Co-IP: TMT 10) were set as fixed modifications. Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT6 on N-termini (lysates, for Co-IP TMT10) were set as variable modifications. For the full scan (MS1) a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS (MS2) spectra of 0.02 Da was allowed. As protease Trypsin was chosen with maximum of two missed cleavages. Further parameters were: a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids: false discovery rate on peptide and protein level: 0.01.

### REFERENCES ###
1. Franken,H., Mathieson,T., Childs,D., Sweetman,G.M.A., Werner,T., Tögel,I., Doce,C., Gade,S., Bantscheff,M., Drewes,G., et al. (2015) Thermal proteome profiling for unbiased identification of direct and indirect drug targets using multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry. Nat Protoc, 10, 1567–1593.


### Publication Abstract
Regulation of viral RNA biogenesis is fundamental to productive SARS-CoV-2 infection. To characterize host RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) involved in this process, we biochemically identified proteins bound to genomic and subgenomic SARS-CoV-2 RNAs. We find that the host protein SND1 binds the 5' end of negative-sense viral RNA and is required for SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis. SND1-depleted cells form smaller replication organelles and display diminished virus growth kinetics. We discover that NSP9, a viral RBP and direct SND1 interaction partner, is covalently linked to the 5' ends of positive- and negative-sense RNAs produced during infection. These linkages occur at replication-transcription initiation sites, consistent with NSP9 priming viral RNA synthesis. Mechanistically, SND1 remodels NSP9 occupancy and alters the covalent linkage of NSP9 to initiating nucleotides in viral RNA. Our findings implicate NSP9 in the initiation of SARS-CoV-2 RNA synthesis and unravel an unsuspected role of a cellular protein in orchestrating viral RNA production.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Rna-binding proteins, Rna interactome

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research, Helmholtz-Center for Infection Research, Würzburg, Germany  Faculty of Medicine, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research

### Submitter
Mathias Munschauer

### Lab Head
Professor Mathias Munschauer
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research, Helmholtz-Center for Infection Research, Würzburg, Germany  Faculty of Medicine, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany


