### Accession
PXD020370

### Title
SLC15A4 functions as a metabolic guardian of immune cells by controlling mTORC1 and AMPK

### Description
Solute carrier family 15 member A4 (SLC15A4) is a lysosome-resident amino acid/oligopeptide transporter preferentially expressed in immune cells, and plays critical roles in the pathogenesis of lupus and colitis in murine model. SLC15A4 is required for TLR7/9- or NOD1-mediated inflammatory responses through mTORC1 regulation or transporting NOD1 ligand, TriDAP, respectively. To further understand the mechanisms of SLC15A4’s action in inflammatory responses, we applied proximity-dependent biotin identification experiment (BioID) to SLC15A4, and identified a panel of proteins including mTORC1 and its regulator that associate with and/or are proximate to SLC15A4 in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Myc-tagged BirA*-SLC15A4-expressing or control MGC motif-cMyc-BirA*-expressing 293T cells were established and BioID pull-down was performed to identify candidate proteins, as previously described (Roux et al., 2013). Samples eluted from Streptavidin beads with 100 L of sample buffer for 5 min at 98 oC were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Electrophoresis was stopped when the protein migrated from the stacking gel to the separation gel and the gel was stained with Coomassie blue. The protein bands on the top of the separating gel were excised and destained. The digestion of proein was performed in gel with a trypsin (TPCK treated, Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Lakewood, NJ) and the digestion mixtures were separated with nanospray-column (NTCC-360/75-3-105, Nikkyo Technos, Co., Ltd., Tokyo Japan) using EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Sicentific, Waltham, MA) in the gradient of 0-64% B buffer per 50min (0.1% Formic acid / 80% AcCN) at a flow rate in 300nl/min and performed on-line mass spectrometry using Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Sicentific) equipped with nano-spray ion source. The MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired with data- dependent TOP10 method. Three analyses were performed for a sample.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were further analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Sicentific) using MASCOT program (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.6). The MSMS data were used to search the NCBI-nr protein database (20160711, Taxonomy: H. sapiens 326,427 sequences), using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; Fixed modifications = Propionamide (C); variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M); product mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Slc15a4 bioid

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


