### Accession
PXD016007

### Title
Alternative Reading Frame expression in POLG gene

### Description
POLGARF is an upstream Alternative Reading Frame in POLG gene partially overlapping POLG sequence. To obtain POLGARF peptide reference spectra POLGARF was overexpressed in HEK293T and HEK293F cells .

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were transfected in 12 well plates with 1 ug of pcDNA3.4 POLGARF or pcDNA3.4 Timer (as a negative control) with Fugene transfection reagent (Promega) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After 48hr the cells were washed with PBS and lysed in a sonication bath  in 150 ul of 1x Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Expi293F cells were transfected with pcDNA3.4 POLGARF or pcDNA3.4 (40 ug of DNA per 108 of cells) with Expifectamine 293 (Thermo Fisher). After 48hr cells were washed with PBS and lysed in a sonication bath in 1x Passive Lysis Buffer (Promega) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The lysates were heated for 10 min at 90oC. Protein material was purified by MeOH-chloroform precipitation [Wessel D, Flügge UI. A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Anal Biochem. 1984 Apr;138(1):141-3] and resuspended in 1% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 buffer. Protein concentration was measured by microBCA assay and 50 g of protein was readjusted to the concentration 1 mg/ml with the 1% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 buffer, cysteine disulphide bonds were reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP and CAA to 10 and 20 mM correspondingly and heating at 85oC for 10 min. For protein digestion, trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at 1/100 w/w ratio twice with the first digestion for 2 h and the second digestion overnight at 37oC. Digestion was stopped by adding TFA to 1%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. The samples were directly analysed by LC-MS without SPE. To compare BioPlex MS data with the spectra of overexpressed POLGARF, we transfected Expi293 cells with pcDNA 3.4 POLGARF-HiBiT and isolated POLGARF-HiBiT using SNAP-LgBiT protein immobilised on SNAP magnetic beads; note that LgBit and HiBiT tags specifically interact with high affinity. SNAP magnetic beads were first incubated with the lysate of cells transfected with pcDNA3.4-SNAP-LgBiT. Next, after intensive washes of the beads with PBS, POLGARF-HiBiT was purified. After 3 washes with PBS, the magnetic beads were incubated with 1% SDC, 100 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.5 followed by ultrasonication. S-S bonds were reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP/CAA to the final concentrations 5/20 mM and heating the sample for 10 min at 85oC. Trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega, USA) was added in the ratio 1/100 to protein concentration and incubated overnight at 37oC. Proteolysis was stopped by adding TFA to 1%. SDC was removed by centrifugation and the samples were loaded to LC-MS directly without SPE.  LC-MS analysis was done on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were loaded on home-packed 2 cm x 100 m precolumns packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GLSciences, Japan) PepMap 100 C18 5 µm 2 cm x 100 m pre-column (Thermo Fisher) in loading solvent buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow rate and separated with a 2 h gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer A) on a 50 cm x 100 m analytical column at RT home-packed (24) with Reprosil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 m sorbent (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany) in 360 m OD 100 m ID polyimide coated fused-silica capillary with a laser-pulled emitter prepared on Sutter P2000 laser puller (Thermo FisherSutter, USA).   MS data were collected in DDA mode with the following parameters: MS1 resolution 70K, 3e6 AGC target with 30 msec IT, 350-2000 m/z scan range; MS2 resolution 17.5K, 1e5 AGC target with 50 msec IT, 10 dependent MS2 scans, 1.4 m/z isolation window with 0.2 m/z offset, NCE 27; min AGC 8e3, charge exclusion unassigned, 1 and >7, preferred peptide match with isotope exclusion and 40 sec dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from BioPlex, from published datasets downloaded from ProteomeExchangeBioPlex data   and the along with in-house generated LC-MS data were subjected to protein identification with the same parameters. Protein LC-MS were analysed in Peaks Studio X (Bioinformatic Solution Inc., Waterloo, CA)MaxQuant v1.6.3.4 [Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates,individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Dec;26(12):1367-72] against the UniProt SwissProt Homo Sapiens canonical plus isoform database containing both canonical and isoform proteoforms (version from 2019 08 26) with a manually attached POLGARF sequence. Search parameters included trypsin D|P digestion with max 3 miscleavages, precursor mass correction, 10 ppm and 0.05 Da error tolerance for precursor and fragment ions respectively, oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ) and acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications (max numbed of variable modification per peptide = 5) and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, Decoy-Fusion FDR estimation. Identification results were filtered by 1to 1%% PSM protein FDR with the protein FDR<1%.

### Publication Abstract
While near-cognate codons are frequently used for translation initiation in eukaryotes, their efficiencies are usually low (&lt;10% compared to an AUG in optimal context). Here, we describe a rare case of highly efficient near-cognate initiation. A CUG triplet located in the 5' leader of <i>POLG</i> messenger RNA (mRNA) initiates almost as efficiently (&#x223c;60 to 70%) as an AUG in optimal context. This CUG directs translation of a conserved 260-triplet-long overlapping open reading frame (ORF), which we call <i>POLGARF</i> (<i>POLG</i> Alternative Reading Frame). Translation of a short upstream ORF 5' of this CUG governs the ratio between POLG (the catalytic subunit of mitochondrial DNA polymerase) and POLGARF synthesized from a single <i>POLG</i> mRNA. Functional investigation of POLGARF suggests a role in extracellular signaling. While unprocessed POLGARF localizes to the nucleoli together with its interacting partner C1QBP, serum stimulation results in rapid cleavage and secretion of a POLGARF C-terminal fragment. Phylogenetic analysis shows that <i>POLGARF</i> evolved &#x223c;160 million y ago due to a mammalian-wide interspersed repeat (MIR) transposition into the 5' leader sequence of the mammalian <i>POLG</i> gene, which became fixed in placental mammals. This discovery of <i>POLGARF</i> unveils a previously undescribed mechanism of de novo protein-coding gene evolution.

### Keywords
Leaky scanning, Dual coding, Cug, Uorf, Mir, C1qbp, Polg, 5’utr

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute   of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, RAS
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Sergey Kovalchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Kovalchuk
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, RAS, Moscow, Russia


