### Accession
PXD022662

### Title
Development of a multiplex targeted mass spectrometry assay to quantify levels of LRRK2 phosphorylated Rab substrates and Ser910 and Ser935 biomarker sites

### Description
Mutations that increase the protein kinase activity of LRRK2 are one of the most common causes of familial Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases within their Switch-II motif, impacting interaction with effectors. We describe and validate a new, multiplex targeted mass spectrometry assay to quantify endogenous levels of LRRK2 phosphorylated Rab substrates (Rab1, Rab3, Rab8, Rab10, Rab35 and Rab43) as well as total levels of Rabs, LRRK2 and phosphorylation of the LRRK2 Ser910 and Ser935 biomarker sites. Exploiting this assay, we quantify for the first time the relative levels of each of the pRab proteins in different cells (mouse embryonic fibroblasts & human neutrophils) and mouse tissues (brain, lung, kidney and spleen). We define how each of the different pRab proteins are impacted by Parkinson’s pathogenic LRRK2[R1441C] and VPS35[D620N] mutations as well as LRRK2 inhibitors. We find that the VPS35[D620N], but not LRRK2[R1441C] mutation, enhances Rab1 phosphorylation in a manner blocked by administration of an LRRK2 inhibitor, providing the first evidence that LRRK2 can phosphorylate Rab1 physiologically. We argue that this targeted mass spectrometry assay can replace immunoblotting approaches currently deployed to assess LRRK2 Rab signalling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Cell or tissue lysates (typically 250 g) was reduced by adding 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine(TCEP) and incubated at 60oC for about 30 min on a Thermomixer with a gentle agitation (800rpm). The samples were allowed to cool to room temperature and alkylated by adding 40 mM Iodoacetamide and incubated in dark at room temperature for 30 min on a Thermomixer by gentle agitation (800 rpm). The samples were then supplemented sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to 5% (v/v) from a stock solution of 10% SDS and acidified by adding phosphoric acid to 1.2% (v/v) using 12% phosphoric acid stock. The samples were immediately added to S-Trap wash buffer (90% methanol in 100 mM TEABC pH 7.1) was added (7 times the volume of lysate). An “in-solution on-column” tryptic digestion was performed by applying 160 l of 50 mM TEABC pH 8.0 containing a 1:15 trypsin: protein substrate applied to S-Trap column. The columns incubated on a Thermomixer at 47oC for 80 min followed by 3 h at room temperature without agitation. The columns were transferred to a new 1.5 ml low binding Eppendorf tube for the elution. 80 µl of 50 mM TEABC pH 8.0 was added and spun down at 1000g for 1 min. 100 µl of 0.15% (v/v) Formic acid was added to the columns and the spun down at 1000g 1 min. Another 100 µl of elution buffer 3 [80% (v/v) Acetonitrile and 0.15% (v/v)] was added and spun down at 500g for 3 min to completely elute the tryptic peptides.  Aliquots of vacuum dried peptides (0.5 g for total Rab samples and 150 g for phospho-Rab samples) were dissolved in 1 ml of Immunoaffinity purification buffer (50 mM MOPS, 50 mM Na2HPO4 and 150 mM NaCl). The samples were sonicated for 10 min at room temperature, centrifuged at 20,800g for 10 min and transferred to a 1.5 ml low binding Eppendorf tube. A 10 l mixture containing 100 fmol of each of the pRab1, pRab3, pRab8, pRab10, pRab35, pRab43, tLRRK2(388-399), LRRK2-s910 and LRRK2-s935 heavy isotope synthetic peptide mixture was added. Next an 10 l suspension of Immunoaffinity purification buffer containing 50% Protein A/G resin conjugated to 0.5 µg PAN-pThr-Rab antibody (pRab8), 0.5 µg LRRK2 total antibody (8G10) antibody, 0.5 µg LRRK2-pS910 (UDD1) and 0.5 µg LRRK2-pS935 (UDD2) was added. Samples were incubated on an end-to-end rotator in 4o C for 2h, centrifuged at 2000g for 2 min at 4 oC. The supernatant was collected into new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and subjected to a second round of immunoprecipitation as described above. The immunoprecipitates washed sequentially 1 ml of Immunoaffinity purification buffer, 2 washes with 1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline, and finally with 1 ml of Milli-Q water and the supernatant removed to leave just the immunoprecipitate. 60 µl of 0.2% (v/v) TFA was added to the washed immunoprecipitates and the resulting mixture incubated at room temperature on a Thermomixer at 1200 rpm for 10 min to elute absorbed peptides. The tubes were centrifuged at 2000 g for 2 min and the supernatant containing the eluted peptides collected in a new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. The resin was washed again with 40 µl of 0.2% (v/v) TFA and the supernatants containing the immunoprecipitated peptides were combined.

### Data Protocol
PRM data was acquired with the following settings. EvoTips were loaded on EvoSep LC system autosampler tray and analyzed using 21 min (60 samples per day) script. The EvoSep LC system elutes the peptides from EvoTip using low pressure pump-A and pump-B by directly applying 35% solvent B (Acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) the eluted peptides stored in a long capillary loop where using Pump-C and Pump-D generates a pre-formed gradient that applies the peptides into the analytical column Reprsoil-pur C18 AQ, 1.5um beads, 150um ID, 8cm long for pRab analysis(21 min script) and Reprsoil-pur C18 AQ, 1.9um beads, 150um ID, 15cm long for total Rab analysis (44min script). The eluted peptides are sprayed into the mass spectrometer that was operated in a PRM mode using Xcalibur software interface by including one Full MS scan within 300-800 m/z per duty cycle. The Full MS acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 by accumulating 3E6 ions in the C-trap for a maximum of 20 ms. The targeted MS2 (PRM) scans were performed by importing inclusion list containing pRabs, total and phospho LRRK2 and PRC peptide sequences. The PRM MS2 scans for each targeted ion was isolated using 0.7 Da Quadrupole filter and 1E5 AGC target was set and accumulated in the C-trap for 250 ms by using 27% higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The MS2 scans were acquired at 30,000 resolution at 200 m/z analyzed using Ultra-high field Orbitrap mass analyzer. The loop count was set to 12 scans per duty cycle. Dynamic retention time algorithm was enabled to correct on-the-fly scheduled retention times of the target ions.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations that increase the protein kinase activity of LRRK2 are one of the most common causes of familial Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases within their Switch-II motif, impacting interaction with effectors. We describe and validate a new, multiplexed targeted mass spectrometry assay to quantify endogenous levels of LRRK2-phosphorylated Rab substrates (Rab1, Rab3, Rab8, Rab10, Rab35 and Rab43) as well as total levels of Rabs, LRRK2 and LRRK2-phosphorylated at the Ser910 and Ser935 biomarker sites. Exploiting this assay, we quantify for the first time the relative levels of each of the pRab proteins in different cells (mouse embryonic fibroblasts, human neutrophils) and mouse tissues (brain, kidney, lung and spleen). We define how these components are impacted by Parkinson's pathogenic mutations (LRRK2[R1441C] and VPS35[D620N]) and LRRK2 inhibitors. We find that the VPS35[D620N], but not LRRK2[R1441C] mutation, enhances Rab1 phosphorylation in a manner blocked by administration of an LRRK2 inhibitor, providing the first evidence that endogenous Rab1 is a physiological substrate for LRRK2. We exploit this assay to demonstrate that in Parkinson's patients with VPS35[D620N] mutations, phosphorylation of multiple Rab proteins (Rab1, Rab3, Rab8, Rab10 and Rab43) is elevated. We highlight the benefits of this assay over immunoblotting approaches currently deployed to assess LRRK2 Rab signalling pathway.

### Keywords
Rab-gtpases, Parkinson's disease, Lrrk2, Lc-ms/ms, Prm

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK


