### Accession
PXD035955

### Title
Apocarotenoids are allosteric effectors of a dimeric plant glycosyltransferase involved in plant defense and lignin formation

### Description
Glycosyltransferases are Nature’s versatile tools to tailor the functionalities of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and small molecules by transferring sugars, while C13-apocarotenoids are oxidative degradation products of carotenoids/xanthophylls that fulfil multiple physiological functions. Here, we show that C13-apocarotenoids also interact with the plant glycosyltransferase NbUGT72AY1, ultimately reducing its inherent UDP-α-D-glucose glucohydrolase activity and increasing its catalytic activity for productive substrates such as hydroxycoumarins, which are natural plant protective agents. In contrast, C13-apocarotenoids show no effect on the catalytic activity of the enzyme toward monolignol lignin precursors. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry revealed opposite conformational changes near the catalytic site in the presence of substrates and modulators and studies in tobacco plants confirmed increased glycosylation activity from apocarotenoid supplementation. The interaction of two plant protection mechanisms and the function of apocarotenoids as allosteric enhancers of catalytic proteins has significant implications for potential applications of these multifunctional natural products in agriculture as well as in the pharmaceutical industry.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion of excised protein gel-bands was performed according to standard procedures. Briefly, recombinantly generated NbUGT72AY1-GST as well as NbUGT72AY1-His were run on native and SDS-based protein gels. Subsequently, defined protein bands were excised out of the gel (Fig. S10), reduced (50 mM DTT), alkylated (55 mm CAA, chloroacetamid) and digested overnight with trypsin (trypsin-gold, Promega). The generated peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 25 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA). LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, 3 μL of peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 minutes gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000  using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms. After peptide fragmentation using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD), MS2 spectra of up to 18 precursor peptides were acquired at a resolution of 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 ms. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z and normalized collision energy to 26%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 25 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). MS2 spectra were searched against an Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) protein database plus the protein sequence from the overexpressed target protein NbUGT72AY1 (Fc4), as well as the amino acid sequences of the two fused tags (His-tag and GST-tag). Further, the protein database was supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was not enabled. Estimations of protein mass fractions were carried out using the “intensity-based absolute quantification” (iBAQ) function implemented in MaxQuant. iBAQ values provide an absolute concentration estimate that can be used to compare the abundances of different proteins present in the same sample. By dividing the iBAQ value of a given protein through the summed iBAQ values of all proteins detected in a given sample “protein mass fractions” were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosyltransferases are nature's versatile tools to tailor the functionalities of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and small molecules by transferring sugars. Prominent substrates are hydroxycoumarins such as scopoletin, which serve as natural plant protection agents. Similarly, C13-apocarotenoids, which are oxidative degradation products of carotenoids/xanthophylls, protect plants by repelling pests and attracting pest predators. We show that C13-apocarotenoids interact with the plant glycosyltransferase NbUGT72AY1 and induce conformational changes in the enzyme catalytic center ultimately reducing its inherent UDP-&#x3b1;-d-glucose glucohydrolase activity and increasing its catalytic activity for productive hydroxycoumarin substrates. By contrast, C13-apocarotenoids show no effect on the catalytic activity toward monolignol lignin precursors, which are competitive substrates. In vivo studies in tobacco plants (Nicotiana benthamiana) confirmed increased glycosylation activity upon apocarotenoid supplementation. Thus, hydroxycoumarins and apocarotenoids represent specialized damage-associated molecular patterns, as they each provide precise information about the plant compartments damaged by pathogen attack. The molecular basis for the C13-apocarotenoid-mediated interplay of two plant protective mechanisms and their function as allosteric enhancers opens up potential applications of the natural products in agriculture and pharmaceutical industry.

### Keywords
Lignin, Apocarotenoids, Phytoalexin, Glycosyltransferase, Activation, Ionol

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


