### Accession
PXD045970

### Title
Comprehensive cell-specific protein analysis in early and late pollen development from diploid microsporocytes to pollen tube growth

### Description
Pollen development in angiosperms is one of the most important processes controlling plant reproduction and thus productivity. At the same time, pollen development is highly sensitive to environmental fluctuations, including temperature, drought, and nutrition. Therefore, pollen biology is a major focus in applied studies and breeding approaches for improving plant productivity in a globally changing climate. The most accessible developmental stages of pollen are the mature pollen and the pollen tubes, and these are thus most frequently analyzed. To reveal a complete quantitative proteome map, we additionally addressed the very early stages, analyzing eight stages of tobacco pollen development: diploid microsporocytes, meiosis, tetrads, microspores, polarized microspores, bipolar pollen, desiccated pollen, and pollen tubes. A protocol for the isolation of the early stages was established. Proteins were extracted and analyzed by means of a new gel LC-MS fractionation protocol. In total, 3817 protein groups were identified. Quantitative analysis was performed based on peptide count. Exceedingly stage-specific differential protein regulation was observed during the conversion from the sporophytic to the gametophytic proteome. A map of highly specialized functionality for the different stages could be revealed from the metabolic activity and pronounced differentiation of proteasomal and ribosomal protein complex composition up to protective mechanisms such as high levels of heat shock proteins in the very early stages of development.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Proteome Analysis (GeLC-LTQ-Orbitrap MS)  For each sample, pollen from between 5 and 30 flowers (depending on the stage) was pooled, freeze-dried, cooled in liquid nitrogen, and ground for 3 min in a shaking mill using three 2-mm steel balls per tube. The pollen fragments were resuspended in 200 μl of protein extraction buffer (62.5 mm Tris-HCl pH 6.5, 5% SDS (w/v), 10% glycerol (v/v), 10 mm DTT, 1.2% (v/v) plant protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma P9599)) and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. After this time, the samples were mixed again by pipetting, incubated for 3 min at 90 °C, and then centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 5 min at room temperature. Supernatants were carefully transferred to a new tube. After the addition of an equal volume of 1.4 m sucrose, proteins were extracted twice with Tris-EDTA buffer–equilibrated phenol. The combined phenolic phases were counter-extracted with 0.7 m sucrose and subsequently mixed with five volumes of 0.1 m ammonium-acetate in methanol to precipitate the proteins. After 16 h of incubation at −20 °C, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000 × g at 5 °C. The pellet was washed twice with 0.1 m ammonium-acetate and once with acetone and then air-dried. Pellets were redissolved in 6 m urea, 5% SDS, and protein concentrations were estimated via bicinchoninic acid assay (47).  Proteins were analyzed via a new gel-LC-MS protocol (48). 40 μg of protein were loaded into a mini-protean cell and run for 1.5 cm. Gels were fixed and stained with methanol:acetic acid:water:Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (40:10:50:0.001). Gels were destained in methanol:water (40:60), and then each lane was divided into two fractions. Gel pieces were destained, equilibrated, and digested with trypsin as previously described (49). Peptides were then desalted with the use of Bond-Elute C-18 stage tips (50) and concentrated in a SpeedVac. Prior to mass spectrometric measurement, protein digest pellets were dissolved in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. 10 μg of digested peptides were loaded per injection into a one-dimensional nano-flow LC-MS/MS system equipped with a pre-column (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). Peptides were eluted using a monolithic C18 column Chromolith RP-18r (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) of 15-cm length and 0.1-mm internal diameter during an 80-min gradient from 5% to 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid with a controlled flow rate of 500 nl/min.  MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap LTQ XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Specific tune settings for the MS were as follows: the spray voltage was set to 1.8 kV using a needle with a 30-μm inner diameter (PicoTip Emitter, New Objective, Woburn, MA), and the temperature of the heated transfer capillary was set at 180 °C. Fourier transform MS was operated as follows: full scan mode, centroid, resolution of 30,000, covering the range of 300–1800 m/z, and cyclomethicone used as a lock mass. Each full MS scan was followed by 10 dependent MS/MS scans performed in the ion trap, in which the 10 most abundant peptide molecular ions were dynamically selected with a dynamic exclusion window set to 90 s and an exclusion list set to 500. Dependent fragmentations were performed in collision-induced dissociation mode with a normalized collision energy of 35, an isolation width of 2.0, an activation Q of 0.250, and an activation time of 30 ms. Ions with an unassigned charge or a charge of +1 were excluded for fragmentation. The minimum signal threshold was set at 1000.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic RAW data were processed in MaxQuant 2.0.3.1 software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova, Temu and Cox, 2016) on default settings except enabling ‘Label free quantification - LFQ’, ‘iBAQ’, ‘FTMS recalibration’, ‘Match between runs’, and set ‘Intensity determination’ to ‘Total sum’.

### Publication Abstract
Pollen development in angiosperms is one of the most important processes controlling plant reproduction and thus productivity. At the same time, pollen development is highly sensitive to environmental fluctuations, including temperature, drought, and nutrition. Therefore, pollen biology is a major focus in applied studies and breeding approaches for improving plant productivity in a globally changing climate. The most accessible developmental stages of pollen are the mature pollen and the pollen tubes, and these are thus most frequently analyzed. To reveal a complete quantitative proteome map, we additionally addressed the very early stages, analyzing eight stages of tobacco pollen development: diploid microsporocytes, meiosis, tetrads, microspores, polarized microspores, bipolar pollen, desiccated pollen, and pollen tubes. A protocol for the isolation of the early stages was established. Proteins were extracted and analyzed by means of a new gel LC-MS fractionation protocol. In total, 3817 protein groups were identified. Quantitative analysis was performed based on peptide count. Exceedingly stage-specific differential protein regulation was observed during the conversion from the sporophytic to the gametophytic proteome. A map of highly specialized functionality for the different stages could be revealed from the metabolic activity and pronounced differentiation of proteasomal and ribosomal protein complex composition up to protective mechanisms such as high levels of heat shock proteins in the very early stages of development.

### Keywords
Tobacco, Microspores, Pollen tubes, Development, Pollen

### Affiliations
University of Münster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), Green Biotechnology, 48143 Münster, Germany
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
University of Münster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), Green Biotechnology, 48143 Münster, Germany


