### Accession
PXD016344

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus surface LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus causes treatment-resistant infections, to which biofilm formation and bacterial persistence contribute greatly. This study aims at the large-scale characterization of mechanisms behind its prolonged persistence in hostile environments and capability to evade host defenses. We carried out the analysis of surface-exposed proteins in S. aureus biofilms prepared from two types of inocula; metabolically active, levofloxacin-susceptible culture and stationary phase, levofloxacin-tolerant culture. Age-synchronized planktonic control cultures provided a reference to facilitate the identification of growth mode-specific surface-expression patterns.

### Sample Protocol
Staphylococcus aureus biofilms were seeded onto a 24-well plate from 2- or 72-h-old suspension cultures and incubated aerobically at 37 °C for 6 or 24 hours. Suspension cultures matching the incubation periods were maintained in 50 ml conical tubes. The cells were suspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8); biofilms by scraping and planktonic bacteria after centrifugation. The samples were pelleted and suspended gently in TEAB containing 10% sucrose. Trypsin shaving was carried out at 37 °C for 20 min, after which the mixture of released peptides and trypsin was recovered by filtration through 0.22 µm cellulose acetate membranes and the digestion completed overnight at 37 °C. Digestions were stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.6%. Sample pH was adjusted with TFA to pH < 4 and the peptides were concentrated and purified using the ZipTip C18 system (Millipore). The eluents were dried and equivalent quantities of peptides from each sample were submitted to an Easy-nLC 1000 nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM, ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Easy-SprayTM, Thermo Scientific). The LC separation was performed in an Easy-SprayTM column capillary of 25-cm bed length (C18, 2-μm beads, 100 Å, 75-μm inner diameter, Thermo Scientific), using the flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted with a 2–30% gradient of solvent (composed of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) in 60 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software (MaxQuant v.1.6.1.0) for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) using in-house database composed of S. aureus ATCC 25923 protein sequences in forward and reverse. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error of 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, FDR to 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification, and label-free quantitation with default settings were used. Known contaminants provided by MaxQuant and those identified in the samples were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The present study investigated <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> ATCC25923 surfaceomes (cell surface proteins) during prolonged growth by subjecting planktonic and biofilm cultures (initiated from exponential or stationary cells) to label-free quantitative surfaceomics and phenotypic confirmations. The abundance of adhesion, autolytic, hemolytic, and lipolytic proteins decreased over time in both growth modes, while an opposite trend was detected for many tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging, Fe-S repair, and peptidolytic moonlighters. In planktonic cells, these changes were accompanied by decreasing and increasing adherence to hydrophobic surface and fibronectin, respectively. Specific RNA/DNA binding (cold-shock protein CspD and ribosomal proteins) and the immune evasion (SpA, ClfA, and IsaB) proteins were notably more abundant on fully mature biofilms initiated with stationary-phase cells (SDBF) compared to biofilms derived from exponential cells (EDBF) or equivalent planktonic cells. The fully matured SDBF cells demonstrated higher viability in THP-1 monocyte/macrophage cells compared to the EDBF cells. Peptidoglycan strengthening, specific urea-cycle, and detoxification enzymes were more abundant on planktonic than biofilm cells, indicating the activation of growth-mode specific pathways during prolonged cultivation. Thus, we show that <i>S. aureus</i> shapes its surfaceome in a growth mode-dependent manner to reach high levofloxacin tolerance (&gt;200-times the minimum biofilm inhibitory concentration). This study also demonstrates that the phenotypic state of the cells prior to biofilm formation affects the immune-evasion and persistence-related traits of <i>S. aureus</i>.

### Keywords
Aureus, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Surfaceome, Staphylococcus, Surface

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


