### Accession
PXD032315

### Title
Development of a Method Combining Peptidiscs and Proteomics to Identify, Stabilize and Purify a Detergent-Sensitive Membrane Protein Assembly

### Description
The peptidisc membrane mimetic enables global reconstitution of the bacterial membrane proteome into water-soluble detergent-free particles, termed peptidisc libraries. We present here a method that combines peptidisc libraries and chromosomal-level gene tagging technology with affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP/MS) to stabilize and identify fragile membrane protein complexes that exist at native expression levels. This method circumvents common artifacts caused by bait protein overproduction and protein complex dissociation due to lengthy exposure to detergents during protein isolation. Using the E. coli Sec system as a case study, we identify an expanded version of the translocon, termed the HMD complex, consisting of 9 different integral membrane subunits. This complex is stable in peptidiscs but dissociates in detergent. Guided by this native-level proteomic information, we design and validate a procedure that enables purification of the HMD complex with minimal protein dissociation. These results highlight the utility of peptidiscs and AP/MS to discover and stabilize fragile membrane protein assemblies.

### Sample Protocol
About 1 mg peptidisc libraries containing the SPA-tagged protein of interest were loaded onto 50 μL ANTI-FLAG M2 affinity gel and incubated at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The following day, the flow-through was collected, and the resin was washed with 1 mL TSG buffer. Five additional 1 mL washes were performed to minimize non-specific binding to the resin. Bound proteins were eluted in 100 μL 100 mM Glycine HCl pH 3.5. The sample pH was adjusted by adding 10 μL 1M Tris HCl pH 8.0. Samples were then digested and STAGE tipped before being analyzed by LC-MS/MS exactly as previously described (Babu et. al., Nature Biotechnology, 2018).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (32, 33). The search was performed against a database comprised of the protein sequences from the source organism (E. coli K12) plus common contaminants using the following parameters: peptide mass accuracy <5 ppm; fragment mass accuracy 0.006 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, deamidated N, Q, and N-acetyl peptides. Proteins were quantified from 1 peptide identification. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified.

### Publication Abstract
The peptidisc membrane mimetic enables global reconstitution of the bacterial membrane proteome into water-soluble detergent-free particles, termed peptidisc libraries. We present here a method that combines peptidisc libraries and chromosomal-level gene tagging technology with affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP/MS) to stabilize and identify fragile membrane protein complexes that exist at native expression levels. This method circumvents common artifacts caused by bait protein overproduction and protein complex dissociation due to lengthy exposure to detergents during protein isolation. Using the <i>Escherichia coli</i> Sec system as a case study, we identify an expanded version of the translocon, termed the HMD complex, consisting of nine different integral membrane subunits. This complex is stable in peptidiscs but dissociates in detergents. Guided by this native-level proteomic information, we design and validate a procedure that enables purification of the HMD complex with minimal protein dissociation. These results highlight the utility of peptidiscs and AP/MS to discover and stabilize fragile membrane protein assemblies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032315.

### Keywords
Peptidisc; membrane proteome; sec translocon; membrane protein complexes

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia
University of Oxford

### Submitter
John Young

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Duong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia


