### Accession
PXD026791

### Title
Regulation of CYLD activity and specificity by phosphorylation and ubiquitin-binding CAP-Gly domains

### Description
Non-degradative ubiquitin chains and phosphorylation events govern signaling responses by innate immune receptors. The deubiquitinase CYLD in complex with SPATA2 is recruited to receptor signaling complexes by the ubiquitin ligase LUBAC and regulates Met1- and Lys63-linked polyubiquitin and receptor signaling outcomes. Here, we investigated the molecular determinants of CYLD activity. We reveal that two CAP-Gly domains in CYLD are ubiquitin binding domains and demonstrate a requirement of CAP-Gly3 for CYLD activity and regulation of immune receptor signaling. Moreover, we identify a phosphorylation switch outside of the catalytic USP domain, which activates CYLD selectively towards Lys63-linked polyubiquitin. The phosphorylated residue Ser568 is a novel TNF-regulated phosphorylation site in CYLD and works in concert with Ser418 to enable CYLD-mediated deubiquitination and immune receptor signaling. We propose that phosphorylated CYLD together with SPATA2 and LUBAC functions as a ubiquitin-editing complex that rebalances Lys63- and Met1-linked polyubiquitin at receptor signaling complexes, resulting in escalated LUBAC signaling.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS was used to identify phospho groups on CYLD following TNF stimulation. To achieve this, 2.5x108 CYLD KO (9E-8) U2OS/NOD2 cells reconstituted with FLAG-CYLD were unstimulated or stimulated with TNF at 20ng/ml for 15 mins at 37oC. Cells were then lysed in TBS + 0.5 % NP40 supplemented with 5mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM; Sigma Aldrich), cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail and PhosSTOP and cleared by centrifugation. Inputs were taken and remaining lysate was incubated with FLAG agarose beads for 2 h at 4oC. Samples were washed with TBST before elution with 100 μg/ml FLAG peptide for 15  mins. A fraction was removed for immunoblotting before preparation for MS. Proteins were digested with Elastase. Samples were desalted using SepPak reversed phase columns and peptides were eluted with 1 M Glycolic acid in 80 % Acetonitrile containing 5 % TFA. Eluted peptides were enriched using 10 μM TiO2 spin columns as described in (Montoya et al., 2011). The enriched peptides were dried and injected into an LC-MS/MS platform consisting of Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instruments. Sample separation was achieved with a 60 min gradient of 2-35 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and 5 % DMSO and 250 nl/min flow rate with an EasySpray column (ES803, Thermo Fisher) of 50 cm length and 75 µm inner diameter. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120.000 and an ion target of 400.000, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28 % normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode and an ion target of 4000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analysed using PEAKS Server V.7 (Bioinformatics Solutions) and a Uniprot/Trembl database. Variable modifications were set to Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (N, Q). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment mass. The false discovery rate was set to 1 % at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Non-degradative ubiquitin chains and phosphorylation events govern signaling responses by innate immune receptors. The deubiquitinase CYLD in complex with SPATA2 is recruited to receptor signaling complexes by the ubiquitin ligase LUBAC and regulates Met1- and Lys63-linked polyubiquitin and receptor signaling outcomes. Here, we investigate the molecular determinants of CYLD activity. We reveal that two CAP-Gly domains in CYLD are ubiquitin-binding domains and demonstrate a requirement of CAP-Gly3 for CYLD activity and regulation of immune receptor signaling. Moreover, we identify a phosphorylation switch outside of the catalytic USP domain, which activates CYLD toward Lys63-linked polyubiquitin. The phosphorylated residue Ser568 is a novel tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-regulated phosphorylation site in CYLD and works in concert with Ser418 to enable CYLD-mediated deubiquitination and immune receptor signaling. We propose that phosphorylated CYLD, together with SPATA2 and LUBAC, functions as a ubiquitin-editing complex that balances Lys63- and Met1-linked polyubiquitin at receptor signaling complexes to promote LUBAC signaling.

### Keywords
Cyld phosphorylation and ub-binding

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facitility, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Georgina Berridge

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facitility, Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford


