### Accession
PXD039931

### Title
Solid Phase Synthesis of Fluorosulfate Containing Macrocycles for Chemoproteomic Workflows

### Description
Macrocyclic peptides are attractive for chemoproteomic applications due to their modular synthesis and potential for high target selectivity. We describe a solid phase synthesis method for the efficient generation of libraries of small macrocycles that contain an electrophile and alkyne handle. The modular synthesis produces libraries that can be directly screened using simple SDS-PAGE readouts and then optimal lead molecules applied to proteomic analysis. We generated a library of 480 macrocyclic peptides containing the weakly reactive fluorosulfate (OSF) electrophile. Initial screening of a subset of the library containing each of the various diversity elements identified initial molecules of interest. The corresponding positional and confirmational isomers were then screened to select molecules that showed specific protein labeling patterns that were dependent on the probe structure.  The most promising hits were applied to standard chemoproteomic workflows to identify protein targets. Our results demonstrate the feasibility of rapid, on-resin synthesis of diverse macrocyclic electrophiles to generate new classes of covalent ligands.

### Sample Protocol
OSF-alkyne and SF-alkyne capture-and-release experiment  HEK 293 lysate (5 mg/mL, 2.5 mL) was treated with 100 µM OSF-alkyne or 100 µM SF-alkyne for two hours at 37 °C. Desthiobiotin azide (150 µM, 50x stock in DMSO), TCEP (1 mM, 50x fresh stock in water), TBTA (100 µM, 16x stock in DMSO:tButanol 1:4), and copper(II) sulfate (1 mM, 50x stock in water) were added to the proteome and left to react for one hour at r.t.[4] Protein was precipitated by adding MeOH (4 vol.), CHCl3 (1 vol.) and water (3 vol.) to the reaction mixture and the turbid mixture was centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 x g at 4 °C yielding a protein layer between the aqueous and organic layers. The protein layer was isolated, washed with 3 vol. of MeOH, dried, solubilized in 6 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 via sonication, reduced with 10 mM neutralized TCEP (20x fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t., and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (400 mM fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t. in the dark. Sample was diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 100 μL of 0.5 μg/μL) overnight in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2. Sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 500 µL of streptavidin agarose beads were added and the mixture was rotated for two hours at r.t. Beads were washed with PBS (3x 10 mL) and water (3x 10 mL). Beads-bound peptides were released with 50% acetonitrile 0.1% FA for 3 min (three times). Eluate was lyophilized, desalted over a self-packed C18 spin column and dried. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (see below). The MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (see below). P4:30 proteomics HEK 293 lysate (2 mg/mL, 1 mL) was co-treated with DMSO, 10 µM, 30 µM, or 100 µM of P4:30-c and 10 µM P4:30 for four hours at 37 °C or with DMSO and 10 µM P2:9, for four hours at 37 °C. Biotin azide (Sigma-Aldrich, 20 µM, 50x stock in DMSO), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (1 mM, 50x fresh stock in water), tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA) (100 µM, 16x stock in DMSO:tButanol 1:4), and copper(II) sulfate (1 mM, 50x stock in water) were added and left to incubate for one hour at r.t. Protein was precipitated by adding 4 vol. of MeOH, 1 vol. of CHCl3 and 3 vol. of water to the reaction mixture and the turbid mixture was centrifuged for five min. at 14’000 x g at 4 °C yielding a protein layer between the aqueous and organic layers. The protein layer was isolated, dried and solubilized in 2% SDS in PBS via sonication. Tube was centrifuged at 4’700 x g for five min. and soluble fraction was transferred to a new tube. PBS was added to give a final SDS concentration of 0.2%. 120 µL of streptavidin agarose beads (ProteoChem) were added and the mixture was rotated for overnight at r.t. Beads were washed with 1% SDS in PBS (1x 10 mL), PBS (3x 10 mL), and water (3x 10 mL). Beads were resuspended in 6 M urea in PBS (500 μL), reduced with 10 mM neutralized TCEP (20x fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t., and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (400 mM fresh stock in water) for 30 min. at r.t. in the dark. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1’400 x g, two min.) and resuspended in 150 μL of 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 (100x stock in water) and trypsin (Thermo Scientific, 1 μL of 0.5 μg/μL) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The digestion was performed for 6 hours at 37 °C.  Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 5% acetic acid, desalted over a self-packed C18 spin column and dried. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (see below) and the MS data was processed with MaxQuant (see below). LC-MS/MS analysis  Peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed using Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 nano-UHPLC coupled to QExactive HF-X Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography column consisted of a 50 cm long, 75 μm i.d. microcapillary capped by a 5 μm tip and packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). LC solvents were 0.1% FA in H2O (Buffer A) and 0.1% FA in MeCN (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. over a 90 minutes linear gradient (5-35% Buffer B) at 65 °C. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode (top-20, NCE 28, R = 7,500) after full MS scan (R = 60,000, m/z 400-1,300). Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s, peptide match to prefer and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer analysis The MS data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer using the Sequest HT algorithm and searched against the human proteome (Uniprot).[5] For amino acid selectivity, OSF-desthiobiotin and SF-desthiobiotin were searched as dynamic modification on either Arg, Cys, Asp, Glu, His, Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr together with methionines oxidation and carbamidomethylation of Cys. The minimum peptide length was set to six, maximum precursor mass to 5,000 Da, precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Only peptide with PEP value ≤1% were considered.  MaxQuant analysis  The MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant and searched against the human proteome (Uniprot) and a common list of contaminants (included in MaxQuant).[6] The first peptide search tolerance was set at 20 ppm, 10 ppm was used for the main peptide search and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate for peptides, proteins and sites identification was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and peptide re-quantification was enabled. The minimal number of peptides per protein was set to two. Methionine oxidation was searched as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Macrocycles, Fluorosulfate, Sufex, Electrophile

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Chemistry University of Illinois at Chicago 845 West Taylor Street - Room 1454 SES Chicago, Illinois, 60607, USA

### Submitter
Daniel Abegg

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Alexander Adibekian
Department of Chemistry University of Illinois at Chicago 845 West Taylor Street - Room 1454 SES Chicago, Illinois, 60607, USA


