### Accession
PXD021756

### Title
The Serpin-like Loop-insertion of Ovalbumin Increases Stability and Reduces OVA 323-339 Epitope Immunogenicity

### Description
Chicken ovalbumin (cOVA) has been studied for decades primarily due to the robust genetic and molecular resources that are available for experimental investigations. cOVA is a member of the serpin superfamily of proteins that function as protease inhibitors, although cOVA does not exhibit this activity. As a serpin, cOVA possesses a protease-sensitive reactive-center loop that lies adjacent to the OVA 323-339 CD4+ T-cell epitope. We took advantage of the previously described single-substitution-variant, OVA R339T, which can undergo the dramatic structural transition observed in serpins to study how changes in loop size and protein stability influences CD4+ T-cell priming in vivo. We observed that the OVA R339T loop-insertion increases stability and protease resistance, resulting in reduced CD4+ T-cell priming of the OVA 323-339 epitope in SJL mice. These findings have implications for the design of more effective vaccines for the treatment of infectious diseases and cancer as well as the development of more robust CD4+ T-cell-epitope prediction tools.

### Sample Protocol
The chosen proteolysis fragment was excised from the gel and distained using a 20-volume excess of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% methanol for 20 minutes, twice. Destained gel slices were dehydrated by incubating in a 20- volume excess of 75% acetonitrile for 20 minutes. Dried slices were then incubated in a 5-volume excess of 20 µg/ml mass-spectrometry-grade trypsin dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight. Each sample was subjected to a 60-minute chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2-25% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 30 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 8 minutes and a re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA. Chromatography was carried out in a trap-and-load format using a PicoChip source (New Objective, Woburn, MA); trap column C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, 100 Å and the separation column was PicoChip REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, 120 Å, 105 mm. The entire run was 0.3 µl/min flow rate. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 120,000 between 375-1600 m/z. Data dependent MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap using a collision induced dissociation (CID) of 25%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using SEQUEST specifying non-specific cleavage to identify C-terminal peptides. The Protein FASTA database was M. musculus (TaxID = 10090) version 2017-07-05 with the OVA R339T sequence added. Static modifications included carbamidomethyl on cysteines (= 57.021) and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (= 15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Chicken ovalbumin (cOVA) has been studied for decades primarily due to the robust genetic and molecular resources that are available for experimental investigations. cOVA is a member of the serpin superfamily of proteins that function as protease inhibitors, although cOVA does not exhibit this activity. As a serpin, cOVA possesses a protease-sensitive reactive center loop that lies adjacent to the OVA 323-339 CD4+ T-cell epitope. We took advantage of the previously described single-substitution variant, OVA R339T, which can undergo the dramatic structural transition observed in serpins, to study how changes in loop size and protein stability influence the processing and presentation of the OVA 323-339 epitope. We observed that the OVA R339T loop insertion increases the stability and protease resistance, resulting in the reduced presentation of the OVA 323-339 epitope <i>in vitro</i>. These findings have implications for the design of more effective vaccines for the treatment of infectious diseases and cancer as well as the development of more robust CD4+ T-cell epitope prediction tools.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Antigen processing, Limited proteolysis

### Affiliations
Tulane University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112

### Submitter
Daniel Moss

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel J. Landy
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112


