### Accession
PXD003465

### Title
Changes over lactation in breast milk serum proteins.

### Description
The objective of this study is to investigate the changes of the breast milk proteome from four individual mothers over a six month lactation period by shotgun proteomic techniques, because a comprehensive understanding of the human milk proteome may lead to better understanding of the needs of infants. This may contribute to the improvement of infant formula.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were centrifuged at 1,500×g for 10 min at 10 °C (Beckman coulter Avanti J-26 XP centrifuge, rotor JA-25.15). The milk fat was removed and the obtained supernatant was transferred to the ultracentrifuge tubes followed by ultracentrifugation at 100,000×g for 90 min at 4°C (Beckman L-60, rotor 70 Ti). After ultracentrifugation, samples were separated into three phases. The top layer was remaining milk fat, the middle layer was milk serum (with some free soluble caseins), and the bottom layer (pellet) was casein. Milk serum was used for reduction, carbamidomethylation and trypsin digestion using filter aided sample preparation. Dimethyl labelling of peptides was done on a C18 column. Mixed samples (see labelling strategy) were measured by nLC LTQ-Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification and protein relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Here we provide data from shot-gun proteomics, using filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP), dimethyl labeling and LC-MS/MS, to quantify the changes in the repertoire of human milk proteins over lactation. Milk serum proteins were analyzed at week 1, 2, 3 4, 8, 16, and 24 in milk from four individual mothers. A total of 247 proteins were identified, of which 200 proteins were quantified. The data supplied in this article supports the accompanying publication&#xa0;(Zhang et al., 2006) [1]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Vizca&#xed;no et al., 2016) [2] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD003465.

### Keywords
Human milk nlc-msms proteomics

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


