### Accession
PXD029671

### Title
Proteomic analysis of marine nematode Litoditis marina acclimated to different salinities

### Description
We applied tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis to investigate the basal protein differences among worms growing under different salinity environments.

### Sample Protocol
Newly hatched L1 larvae acclimated to three different salinity conditions: low salinity (normal NGM agar plates containing 0.3% NaCl), seawater salinity (seawater-NGM agar plates prepared with natural seawater), and a higher salinity condition (artificial seawater-NGM agar plates containing 5% sea salt), were collected by filtration using 500 grid nylon filter with 25 μm mesh size. The samples were frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen. Worm sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), with three biological replicates for each group. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight. After being desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried, peptides were labelled with a tandem mass tags (TMT) kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Next, the TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 9 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Further, peptides were identified and quantified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Briefly, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (75 μm ID, 15 cm length). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 9% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 22% to 32% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage was set as 2.2 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1400 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using normalized collisional energy (NCE) setting as 28 and the ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1E5. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the 17661 protein database of L. marina ( bioRxiv 2020.03.06.980219) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 10 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, deamidation on Asn and Gln were specified as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. The quantitative method was set to TMT 10plex, and the false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was adjusted to < 1%. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. A P value < 0.05 from t-tests and a fold change > 1.3 or < 1/1.3 were set as the thresholds for significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Data Protocol
Different databases were selected for protein functional annotation. GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). If the proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro) would be applied to annotate by protein sequence alignment method, which was also used for protein domain functional description. KEGG online service tools KAAS was utilized to predict the pathways in which the identified proteins were involved. Then the annotation results were mapped on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG mapper. Subcellular localizations of the protein were predicted by wolfpsort (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/). COG annotation of the protein was achieved by eggnog-mapper software (v2.0) with the default parameters. Additionally, enrichment analysis of GO and KEGG pathway was conducted for DEPs by Python using an in-house script, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of DEPs against the background of all identified proteins, a corrected P value < 0.05 was considered significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Salinity is a critical abiotic factor for all living organisms. The ability to adapt to different salinity environments determines an organism's survival and ecological niches. <i>Litoditis marina</i> is a euryhaline marine nematode widely distributed in coastal ecosystems all over the world, although numerous genes involved in its salinity response have been reported, the adaptive mechanisms underlying its euryhalinity remain unexplored. Here, we utilized worms which have been acclimated to either low-salinity or high-salinity conditions and evaluated their basal gene expression at both transcriptomic and proteomic levels. We found that several conserved regulators, including osmolytes biosynthesis genes, transthyretin-like family genes, V-type H<sup>+</sup>-transporting ATPase and potassium channel genes, were involved in both short-term salinity stress response and long-term acclimation processes. In addition, we identified genes related to cell volume regulation, such as actin regulatory genes, Rho family small GTPases and diverse ion transporters, which might contribute to hyposaline acclimation, while the glycerol biosynthesis genes <i>gpdh-1</i> and <i>gpdh-2</i> accompanied hypersaline acclimation in <i>L. marina</i>. This study paves the way for further in-depth exploration of the adaptive mechanisms underlying euryhalinity and may also contribute to the study of healthy ecosystems in the context of global climate change.

### Keywords
Marine nematode, Litoditis marina, Acclimation, Salinity

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Liusuo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liusuo Zhang
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China


