### Accession
PXD005415

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis indicates that the B cell cytoskeleton is disrupted after exposure to mercury

### Description
Exposure to environmental mercury (Hg) currently may contribute to immune system dysfunction and autoimmune disease.  In this study phosphoproteomic analysis was used to investigate the impact of Hg2+ on a B cell line.  Treatments were with 0, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 uM Hg2+.   1713 phosphoproteins and 1937 confidently localized phosphorylation sites were identified.  161 phosphoproteins responded to Hg2+ treatment (ANOVA, 10% FDR).  Hg2+ at 50 and 100 uM stimulated Tyr phosphorylation on residues in the B-cell receptor complex as well as other systems.  At 20 uM and below Hg2+ primarily caused hyperphosphorylation of pSer/Thr residues and affected cytoskeletal systems.  Map Kinase 1 was exceptional as it was hyperphosphorylated at Tyr 185 following 20 uM and lower Hg2+ treatments.  These results contribute novel insight into the mechanism for immune system disruption by Hg2+.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular responses to the exposures were stopped by dispersing the cell suspension in ice cold HANK’s solution. Cells were pelleted then solubilized in 1% LiDS and heated to 95 C for 5 minutes to inactivate phosphatases. Following filtration through a course filter, samples were diluted 10 fold and digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin. Phosphopeptids were selected by TiO2 affinity selection and, separately, using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies pY and 4g10. All affinity selected samples were analyzed without further processing. All analyses were made using LC-MS/MS performed on Thermo QExactive or Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome discoverer version 1.4. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed.  All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 1.4.1.14), Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)).  The Uniprot mouse complete database (downloaded 2014.06.02, 16666 entries) was searched assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin.  To ensure that each run was searched with the optimum mass tolerances, mass error was assessed in a test analysis and then search tolerances were set accordingly so that the fragment ion mass tolerance was either 0.020 Da or 0.60 Da and the parent ion tolerance was either 10.0 parts per million (ppm) or 20 ppm.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification.  Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. In addition Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus and gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus were specified in just X! Tandem as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version 4.4.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability.  Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem Sequest and Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm.  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Phosphorylation site assignments were made in Scaffold PTM (version 2.1.1, Proteome Software Inc.) using the A-score algorithm.  Sites that could be localized with at least 80% confidence were accepted for analysis.  Spectral count data from the TiO2 and phosphotyrosine antibody extractions using pY and 4g10 were pooled prior to analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q exactive, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphoproteome, Mercury

### Affiliations
IEHS
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Wayne State University

### Submitter
Nicholas Carruthers

### Lab Head
Dr Paul M Stemmer
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Wayne State University


