### Accession
PXD020449

### Title
Interactomes of Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and its homologue D-dopachrome tautomerase (D-DT )

### Description
NIH 3T3 fibroblasts that express little detectable levels of the MIF binding receptor CD74 but do express the signalling component CD44 were used for the identification of interacting proteins that are shared by MIF and D-DT. Endogenously expressed MIF and D-DT were tagged at the C-terminus using a short sequence that is recognized and biotinylated by the bacterial biotin ligase BirA (Efficient biotinylation and single-step purification of tagged transcription factors in mammalian cells and transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 7480–5) as described in detail for MIF ﻿Filip, A. M. et al. (2009). Ribosomal Protein S19 Interacts with Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor and Attenuates Its Pro-inflammatory Function. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 7977–7985). After pulling down biotinylated proteins from stable NIH 3T3 clones that express tagged MIF or D-DT and BirA ligase with streptavidin agarose, bound proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and identified after elution and tryptic digestion by mass spectrometry in order to characterize the MIF and D-DT interactomes.

### Sample Protocol
﻿Rat MIF as well as human and mouse D-DT cDNA inserts were produced by standard PCR using an EcoRI restriction site in the upstream primer and a SalI site in the downstream primer. cDNAs were cloned via EcoRI/SalI-restricted cDNAs into the modified tagging construct pN3-CTB (﻿Rischitor, G. (2005). Transcription factor Sp3 as target for SUMOylation in vivo. Marburg: Thesis, Philipps-Universität Marburg). For stable transfection, pBudCE4.1-birA (﻿de Boer, E. et al. (2003). Efficient biotinylation and single-step purification of tagged transcription factors in mammalian cells and transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 7480–5) and pN3-CTB-rMIF, pN3-CTB-hD-DT and pN3-CTB-mD-DT were linearized with XhoI and Eco 01091I, respectively, and transfected together or individually (pBudCE4.1-birA - control) into NIH 3T3 cells using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen). After antibiotic selection with 100 µg/ml Geneticin and 150 µg/ml zeocin for 5-8 weeks stably transfected clones were isolated using small sterile filter discs soaked in trypsin solution. Clones were examined for expression of a biotinylated MIF or D-DT fusion protein using immunoblotting with anti-MIF and D-DT antisera. One clone each that strongly expressed the MIF or D-DT fusion protein and one control clone expressing birA only were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, biotin (0.1 µg/mL), geneticin (100 µg/ml), and zeocin (150 µg/ml) at 37 °C. Cells were lysed in 1% IGEPAL CA-630 (v/v), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, and proteinase inhibitors and applied to streptavidin-agarose beads (Novagen; 200 µl of bead slurry per mg of cell extract). After 1h on a rocking platform, beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling for 10 min in SDS sample buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE on a 4–12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen), and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue (Sigma). Both lanes were cut into 12 gel slices, and proteins in all slices were digested with trypsin. Extracted peptides were separated and sequenced by liquid chromatography-coupled electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectroscopy on a quadrupole-time of flight (TOF) instrument (Q-TOFUltima, Waters) under standard conditions. Proteins were identified by LC-MS on an Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) under standard conditions.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing peptide fragment spectra against mammalian entries in the NCBI database using the MASCOT search engine with standard settings.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitinated proteins can alternatively be delivered directly to the proteasome or via p97/VCP (valosin-containing protein). Whereas the proteasome degrades ubiquitinated proteins, the homohexameric ATPase p97/VCP seems to control the ubiquitination status of recruited substrates. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is also involved in the ubiquitin/proteasome system (UPS) as exemplified by regulating the neddylation of ubiquitin E3 ligases. Here, we show that p97/VCP colocalizes and directly interacts with subunit 5 of the CSN (CSN5) in vivo and is associated with the entire CSN complex in an ATP-dependent manner. Furthermore, we provide evidence that the CSN and in particular the isopeptidase activity of its subunit CSN5 as well as the associated deubiquitinase USP15 are required for proper processing of polyubiquitinated substrates bound to p97/VCP. Moreover, we show that in addition to NEDD8, CSN5 binds to oligoubiquitin chains in vitro. Therefore, CSN and p97/VCP could form an ATP-dependent complex that resembles the 19 S proteasome regulatory particle and serves as a key mediator between ubiquitination and degradation pathways.

### Keywords
Nih 3t3, Interactome, D-dt, Mif

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University
Institut für Anatomie und Zellbiologie
Aulweg 123
35392 Giessen
Justus Liebig University Giessen Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology Aulweg 123 35392 Giessen

### Submitter
Jörg Klug

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Andreas Meinhardt
Justus Liebig University Giessen Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology Aulweg 123 35392 Giessen


