### Accession
PXD006192

### Title
Salt stress phosphorylation network

### Description
We utilized high resolution, high mass accuracy quantitative proteomics to explore stress signaling in yeast. We accessed changes in protein phosphorylation at various time points after exposure to salt stress and used this information to reconstruct stress signaling networks. We performed similar experiments using yeast knockouts to monitor network re-wiring and performed co-IPs to validate protein-protein interactions predicted by the networks.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast samples were processed according to our lab's standard protocol (Hebert et al., MCP 2014). Generated tryptic peptides were labeled with 10-plex TMT and enriched in a single step for phosphorylated peptides with IMAC beads. Enriched peptides were fractionated into 16 fractions that were later concatenated into 8 final fractions, each of which was injected twice into the mass spectrometer. The raw spectra were collected using Orbitrap Elite (replica 1) or Orbitrap Fusion (replica 2).

### Data Protocol
Quantitation and data analysis for phosphorylated peptides were performed using in-house software COMPASS linked to PhosphoRS for localization of phosphoisoforms. Raw data processing and quantitation for follow-up co-IPs were performed using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to stressful conditions by coordinating a complex, multi-faceted response that spans many levels of physiology. Much of the response is coordinated by changes in protein phosphorylation. Although the regulators of transcriptome changes during stress are well characterized in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the upstream regulatory network controlling protein phosphorylation is less well dissected. Here, we developed a computational approach to infer the signaling network that regulates phosphorylation changes in response to salt stress. We developed an approach to link predicted regulators to groups of likely co-regulated phospho-peptides responding to stress, thereby creating new edges in a background protein interaction network. We then use integer linear programming (ILP) to integrate wild type and mutant phospho-proteomic data and predict the network controlling stress-activated phospho-proteomic changes. The network we inferred predicted new regulatory connections between stress-activated and growth-regulating pathways and suggested mechanisms coordinating metabolism, cell-cycle progression, and growth during stress. We confirmed several network predictions with co-immunoprecipitations coupled with mass-spectrometry protein identification and mutant phospho-proteomic analysis. Results show that the cAMP-phosphodiesterase Pde2 physically interacts with many stress-regulated transcription factors targeted by PKA, and that reduced phosphorylation of those factors during stress requires the Rck2 kinase that we show physically interacts with Pde2. Together, our work shows how a high-quality computational network model can facilitate discovery of new pathway interactions during osmotic stress.

### Keywords
Environmental stress response, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Stress signaling

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J Coon
Professor of Biomolecular Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison


