### Accession
PXD042046

### Title
Repeated bisphenol A exposure in low concentrations alters the functionality and environment of a human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte model

### Description
Early embryonic development represents a sensitive time-window during which the foetus might be highly vulnerable to the exposure of environmental contaminants, potentially leading to heart diseases also later in life (Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD) concept). Bisphenol A (BPA), a synthetic chemical widely used in plastics manufacturing, has been associated with heart developmental defects, even in low concentrations. This study aims to investigate the effects of environmentally relevant doses of BPA on developing cardiomyocytes using a human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived model.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 8 M urea/0.5 M NH4HCO3 with the aid of ultrasonication (18 cycles of 10 s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was used for protein quantification. 20 µg of protein was processed for digestion. Briefly, disulfide bonds were reduced (45 mM dithiothreitol/20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 30 min, 56°C) and cysteine residues were alkylated (100 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature), followed by quenching excess iodoacetamide with dithiothreitol (90 mM, 15 min, room temperature). Proteins were digested with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio).

### Data Protocol
1 μg of the digest was injected on an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Peptides were first transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm×2 cm, 5 µM particles) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm×50 cm, 2 µm particles) at 250 nl/min with an 80-min gradient of 5-20% of solvent B followed by a 9-min rise to 40%. Solvents A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0). For all searches, the human SwissProt reference proteome was used (downloaded in October 2022). Statistics and data visualization were performed in R using custom scripts. Reverse peptides, contaminants and identifications only by site were excluded from quantification. Proteins with at least two peptides with a minimum of three replicate measurements in each condition were quantified using MS-EmpiRe pipeline (citation) as described previously (citation). For peptides with measurements in all replicates of one condition and insufficient measurements in the other condition, missing values were imputed from normal distribution (downshift = 1.8, scale = 0.3). Proteins with a Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change above 1.3 were considered as significantly changed. Heatmap was generated using ComplexHeatmap R packagr. The k-means method was used for segregating the heatmap into homogeneous regions. WebGestaltR package and the functional category ‘GO Biological Process nonRedundant’ was used to perform over-representation analysis. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for multiple testing correction.

### Publication Abstract
Early embryonic development represents a sensitive time-window during which the foetus might be vulnerable to the exposure of environmental contaminants, potentially leading to heart diseases also later in life. Bisphenol A (BPA), a synthetic chemical widely used in plastics manufacturing, has been associated with heart developmental defects, even in low concentrations. This study aims to investigate the effects of environmentally relevant doses of BPA on developing cardiomyocytes using a human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived model. Firstly, a 2D in vitro differentiation system to obtain cardiomyocytes from hiPSCs (hiPSC-CMs) have been established and characterised to provide a suitable model for the early stages of cardiac development. Then, the effects of a repeated BPA exposure, starting from the undifferentiated stage throughout the differentiation process, were evaluated. The chemical significantly decreased the beat rate of hiPSC-CMs, extending the contraction and relaxation time in a dose-dependent manner. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed a high abundance of basement membrane (BM) components (e.g., COL4A1, COL4A2, LAMC1, NID2) and a significant increase in TNNC1 and SERBP1 proteins in hiPSC-CMs treated with BPA. Network analysis of proteomics data supported altered extracellular matrix remodelling and provided a disease-gene association with well-known pathological conditions of the heart. Furthermore, upon hypoxia-reoxygenation challenge, hiPSC-CMs treated with BPA showed higher rate of apoptotic events. Taken together, our results revealed that a long-term treatment, even with low doses of BPA, interferes with hiPSC-CMs functionality and alters the surrounding cellular environment, providing new insights about diseases that might arise upon the toxin exposure. Our study contributes to the current understanding of BPA effects on developing human foetal cardiomyocytes, in correlation with human clinical observations and animal studies, and it provides a suitable model for New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) for environmental chemical hazard and risk assessment.

### Keywords
Dohad, Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hipsc-cms), Extracellular matrix remodelling, Proteomics, New approach methodologies (nams), Bisphenol a (bpa)

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


