### Accession
PXD040438

### Title
Covid Human plasma LC-MS Multiplatform Analyses Reveal Distinct Drivers of Systemic Pathogenesis in Adult Versus Pediatric Severe Acute COVID-19

### Description
The adult data set. The pathogenesis of multi-organ dysfunction associated with severe acute SARS-CoV-2 infection remains poorly understood. Endothelial damage and microvascular thrombosis have been identified as drivers of COVID-19 severity, yet the mechanisms underlying these processes remain elusive. A multiomics approach identified alterations in analytes associated with fluid shear stress-responsive pathways in critically ill COVID-19 adults as compared to non-COVID critically ill adults.

### Sample Protocol
150 µg of total protein was transferred to a low binding centrifuge tube and diluted with sodium deoxycholate to a final concentration of 1% (w/v) and 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Thermofisher). The sample was then incubated at 60˚C for 30 minutes. After cooling for 5 min at room temperature, alkylation of the cysteines was initiated by the addition of iodoacetamide (SigmaAldrich) to a final concentration of 10 mM. This solution was incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at 37 ˚C. The alkylation reaction was quenched by the addition of DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 10 mM, followed by 30 minutes of incubation at 37˚C. From this reaction, 50 µg of total protein (~1/3 of the total) was removed and digested with TPCK treated trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and Lys-C protease (Pierce) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:10 for trypsin and 1:20 for LysC. The digestion was left to proceed overnight at 37 ˚C.  On the second day, samples were acidified with 10% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid, ThermoFisher) to precipitate sodium deoxycholate and stop the proteolysis. Samples were incubated for 15 min at room temperature and then centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was then desalted using solid phase extraction HLB matrix (Oasis HLB µelution plate plate, 30µm) with 0.1% FA (Formic acid) for the first wash and 5% methanol 0.1% TFA for the second wash. Samples were eluted with 75%ACN (Acetonitrile)/0.1% FA, dried using a centrifugal vacuum evaporator (LabConco) and stored in the -20 °C.   400 ng µL-1  and 1 µg was injected directly on to an analytical Aurora C18 column (15 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, Ionopticks, Australia) using an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer).  The column temperature was maintained at 60˚C with an integrated column oven equipped with a spray adaptor and larger chamber to accommodate the fittings of the column (Sonation, Biberach, Germany, PROSO-V1).  The samples were analyzed on an Eclipse Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Thermo Fisher). Data dependent LC-MS/MS was conducted at, the Spray voltage was set to 2-2.5 kV, FAIMS CV voltages of -50 and -70, RF funnel 40V, heated capillary 305 ˚C. orbitrap operated at 120k(@200m/z) and Iontrap used for MS2

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v 2.4. LFQ minor feature selector, Sequest HT search  with 10 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment tolerance. Trypsin with up to 2 miss cleavages. FASTA databases Homo sapiens (sp_canonical TaxID=9606) (v2021-06-03)  Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sp_canonical TaxID=2697049) (v2021-02-04)  Dynamic Modifications (protein terminus): - 1. N-Terminal Modification:  Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus) - 2. N-Terminal Modification:  Met-loss / -131.040 Da (M) - 3. N-Terminal Modification:  Met-loss+Acetyl / -89.030 Da (M)   Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Covid, Plasma

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Emory School of Medicine
Emory School of Medicine

### Submitter
Blaine Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Blanie R. Roberts
Department of Biochemistry, Emory School of Medicine


