### Accession
PXD008334

### Title
Exportin Crm1 is repurposed as a docking protein to generate microtubule organizing centers at the nuclear pore

### Description
Non-centrosomal microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs) are important for microtubule organization in many cell types. In fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, the protein Mto1, together with partner protein Mto2 (Mto1/2 complex), recruits the g-tubulin complex to multiple non-centrosomal MTOCs, including the nuclear envelope (NE). Here, we develop a comparative-interactome mass spectrometry approach to determine how Mto1 localizes to the NE. Surprisingly, we find that Mto1, a constitutively cytoplasmic protein, docks at nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), via interaction with exportin Crm1 and cytoplasmic FG-nucleoporin Nup146. Although Mto1 is not a nuclear export cargo, it binds Crm1 via a nuclear export signal-like sequence, and docking requires both Ran in the GTP-bound state and Nup146 FG repeats. In addition to determining the mechanism of MTOC formation at the NE, our results reveal a novel role for Crm1 and the nuclear export machinery in the stable docking of a cytoplasmic protein complex at NPCs.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free quantification mass spectrometry analysis of samples after two-step purification, ~18 µL of second-step elution was loaded onto a single lane (~0.5 cm wide) of a 4-20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Biorad). Samples were run at 150V for 12-14 min. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue at room temperature for 1 h and destained in 10% acetic acid overnight. On the following day, the gel was washed once in distilled water and the relevant region recovered after excision with a clean scalpel. In general, for all samples, we recovered the region of the gel above, but not including, the non-cross-linked Mto1 band, in order to increase the relative proportion of cross-linked Mto1 species vs. non-crosslinked Mto1.  Excised gel bands were destained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 13 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with an equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) (Figures 1, 3, and 6) and on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) (Figure 4), both coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated at 50oC. In both cases, mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradients: 2 to 40% buffer B in 90 min, then to 95% buffer B in 11 min (Figures 1, 3 and 4) and 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min and then to 95% buffer B in 11 min (Figure 6). For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the ten most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0E6 ions for MS scan, 5.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60 ms, dynamic exclusion for 50 s). For Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, survey scans were performed at 60,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) with an ion target of 7.0e5. MS2 was performed in the orbitrap with ion target of 5.0E3 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 25 (Olsen et al., 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.6. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.   To generate the SILAC data shown in Supplementary File 2 (preliminary results, from anti-GFP immunoprecipitation), sample processing and digestion was performed as described above. LC-MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (Ishihama et al., 2002) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany) was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm ID, 8-μm opening, 300-mm length; New Objective) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. The settings on the Q Exactive were the same as described above.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.2.8 was used to process raw files, and search was conducted against Schizosaccharomyces pombe complete/reference proteome set from PomBase (www.pombase.org; released in July, 2016), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Isotope mass tolerance was set to 2 ppm, and maximum charge state was set to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described (Cox et al., 2014). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. All LFQ MS was performed using two complete biological replicates of each of the two conditions being compared. For experiments shown in Fig. 6, additional biological replicates using cells grown in LowN medium were also performed, alongside those using cells grown in PMG (as normal). Including the LowN replicates during MaxQuant analysis improved the quality of peptide identifications from experiments using cells grown in PMG. Data shown in Fig. 6 are only from cells grown in PMG; however, data from cells grown in LowN are completely consistent with the data from cells grown in PMG and are included with the PMG data as part of Supplementary File 6.   For the SILAC experiment, the MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.3.0.5 was used to process raw files, and search was conducted against Schizosaccharomyces pombe complete/reference proteome set from PomBase (released in August, 2012), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge was set to 7. The MS/MS match tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine with acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2, and for heavy labels, Arginine-6 and Lysine-8 were selected, and peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR. Unique and non-unique peptides were used for quantification. Proteins with minimum of two quantified labeled peptide pairs/triplets were reported for quantification, and the isoforms with the highest peptide counts were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Non-centrosomal microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs) are important for microtubule organization in many cell types. In fission yeast <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i>, the protein Mto1, together with partner protein Mto2 (Mto1/2 complex), recruits the &#x3b3;-tubulin complex to multiple non-centrosomal MTOCs, including the nuclear envelope (NE). Here, we develop a comparative-interactome mass spectrometry approach to determine how Mto1 localizes to the NE. Surprisingly, we find that Mto1, a constitutively cytoplasmic protein, docks at nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), via interaction with exportin Crm1 and cytoplasmic FG-nucleoporin Nup146. Although Mto1 is not a nuclear export cargo, it binds Crm1 via a nuclear export signal-like sequence, and docking requires both Ran in the GTP-bound state and Nup146 FG repeats. In addition to determining the mechanism of MTOC formation at the NE, our results reveal a novel role for Crm1 and the nuclear export machinery in the stable docking of a cytoplasmic protein complex at NPCs.

### Keywords
Crm1, Nup146, Microtubules, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Mtocs, Nuclear envelope, Mto1, Mto2

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Kenneth Sawin

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Sawin
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh


