### Accession
PXD034155

### Title
LOSS OF DKC1 IN CUTANEOUS SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA RESULTS IN A METABOLIC REWIRING AND THE ACQUISITION OF METASTATIC TRAITS LOSS OF DKC1 RESULTS IN THE ACQUISITION OF A LIPIDIC METABOLISM AND METASTATIC TRAITS IN CUTANEOUS SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA OTROS TITULOS

### Description
Metastaticsis disease remains, by far, the leading cause of all cancer-related deaths, despite being a process highly inefficient. The metastatic process is highly inefficient as the initial dissemination of cancer cells from many primary tumors involves intravasation to lymphatics nodes or blood vessels, a process poorly understood. To investigate generalthe molecular mechanisms involved in this step we analyzed the expression of the epigenetic regulators small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC), a highly prevalent malignant tumor that mainly spreads to lymph nodes. Here we report the reduced expression of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) in primary cSCCs that metastasized when compared to non-metastasizing cSCCs, and the progressive loss of DKC1 (the protein that stabilizes the snoRNAs) along the metastasis of the carcinomas. DWe demonstrate that depletion of DKC1 in cSCC cells resulted in a switch totriggers lipid metabolism and the acquisition of metastatic traits. Treatment of DKC1-depleted cells with simvastatin, an inhibitor of the mevalonate pathway, blocked the expression of proteins involved in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), suggesting that the rewiring of the lipid metabolism is required to acquire the invasion abilities. Furthermore, the expression of the enzyme HMGCS1 is associated with pathologic features of high metastatic risk in cSCC patients, underpinning the relevance of the mevalonate metabolism in the lymphatic dissemination step.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (10 µg) were  precipitated with 6 volumes of cold acetone and the pellet was dissolve in 10 µl of of 6M Urea / 200mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Then, samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 100% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5 and injection time to 50ms. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, and an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a maximum injection time of 200 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science ). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (as in October 2018, 20408 entries) plus a list  of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were normalized by median and used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted q-values.

### Publication Abstract
The initial dissemination of cancer cells from many primary tumors implies intravasation to lymphatic nodes or blood vessels. To investigate the mechanisms involved, we analyzed the expression of small non-coding RNAs in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC), a prevalent tumor that mainly spreads to lymph nodes. We report the reduced expression of small nucleolar RNAs in primary cSCCs that metastasized when compared to non-metastasizing cSCCs, and the progressive loss of DKC1 (dyskerin, which stabilizes the small nucleolar RNAs) along the metastasis. DKC1 depletion in cSCC cells triggered lipid metabolism by altering the mevalonate pathway and the acquisition of metastatic traits. Treatment of DKC1-depleted cells with simvastatin, an inhibitor of the mevalonate pathway, blocked the expression of proteins involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Consistently, the expression of the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 was associated with pathological features of high metastatic risk in cSCC patients. Our data underpin the relevance of the mevalonate metabolism in metastatic dissemination and pave the possible incorporation of therapeutic approaches among the antineoplastic drugs used in routine patient care.

### Keywords
Squamous cell carcinoma, Lc-msms, Snorna, Dkc1, Epigenetics, Metastasis, Metabolism

### Affiliations
crg
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)

### Submitter
guadalupe espadas

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)


