### Accession
PXD015429

### Title
Galnt11 differential tissue glycoproteomics

### Description
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects more than 20 million Americans and approximately 10% of the population worldwide, and thus represents a major public health concern. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of kidney functional decline have identified genes associated with CKD, but the precise roles and mechanisms by which they influence kidney function remained largely unexplored. Here, we examine the role of one GWAS identified gene by creating mice deficient for Galnt11, which encodes a member of the enzyme family that initiates protein Oglycosylation, an essential post-translational modification known to influence protein function and stability. We find that Galnt11-deficient mice display low molecular weight proteinuria and have specific defects in proximal tubule-mediated resorption of vitamin D binding protein, a1-microglobulin and retinol binding protein. Moreover, we identify the endocytic receptor megalin (LRP2) as a direct target of Galnt11 in vivo. Megalin in Galnt11-deficient mice displays reduced ligand binding and undergoes age-related loss within the kidney. Differential mass spectrometry revealed specific sites of Galnt11-mediated glycosylation within mouse kidney megalin/LRP2 that are known to be involved in ligand binding, suggesting that Oglycosylation directly influences the ability to bind ligands. In support of this, recombinant megalin containing these sites displayed reduced albumin binding in cells deficient for Galnt11. Our results provide insight into the association between GALNT11 and CKD, and identify a role for Galnt11 in proper kidney function.

### Sample Protocol
The LWAC enriched fractions were subjected to StageTip desalting (Rappsilber et al., 2007), pooled, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. About 100 ng of each sample were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) running a 3 h gradient from 2% to 25% acetonitrile. A data-dependent shotgun proteomics approach was adopted with a MS1 scan in the Orbitrap followed by a HCDMS2 scan and a ETD-MS2 scan both also in the Orbitrap forthe five most abundant multiply-charged precursors.MS1 scans were collected over an m/z range of 350–1700 Thomson (Th), AGC 2 × 105, 120,000 resolution, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. A minimum MS1 signal threshold of 5 x 104was used to trigger the data-dependent fragmentation events.HCD MS2 was collected at 27% collision energy with 5% automatic control, AGC 5 x 104, 50,000 resolution, and a maximum injection time of 75 ms. ETD MS2 was collected with 20% supplemental activation of the charge-reduced species, AGC 1 x 105, 60,000 resolution, and a maximum injection time of 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion for 30 s was used to increase the chances of selecting different precursors.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Schjoldager et al., 2015; Khetarpal et al.2016). Extracted ETD spectra were initially searched with full trypsin cleavage specificity the less confidently assigned spectra were further searched with the semi-specific enzymatic cleavage. The dimethyl label (L or M) on lysine residues and peptide N termini and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Up to two missed cleavages were permitted. For the glycoproteome analysis a variable modification of either HexNAc or HexHexNAc was set on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. All spectra were searched against a concatenated forward/reverse human-specific database (UniProt, January 2013) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. For the quantification of the glycopeptides the resulting list was filtered to include only peptides with glycosylation as a modification and the L/M ratio of the dimethyl labeling was determined using the Precursor Ion Node of the Proteome Discoverer Workflow. The precursor ions without reported quantitative values (singlets) were manually validated

### Publication Abstract
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects more than 20 million Americans and &#x223c;10% of the population worldwide. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of kidney functional decline have identified genes associated with CKD, but the precise mechanisms by which they influence kidney function remained largely unexplored. Here, we examine the role of 1 GWAS-identified gene by creating mice deficient for <i>Galnt11</i>, which encodes a member of the enzyme family that initiates protein O-glycosylation, an essential posttranslational modification known to influence protein function and stability. We find that <i>Galnt11</i>-deficient mice display low-molecular-weight proteinuria and have specific defects in proximal tubule-mediated resorption of vitamin D binding protein, &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-microglobulin, and retinol binding protein. Moreover, we identify the endocytic receptor megalin (LRP2) as a direct target of Galnt11 in vivo. Megalin in <i>Galnt11</i>-deficient mice displays reduced ligand binding and undergoes age-related loss within the kidney. Differential mass spectrometry revealed specific sites of Galnt11-mediated glycosylation within mouse kidney megalin/LRP2 that are known to be involved in ligand binding, suggesting that O-glycosylation directly influences the ability to bind ligands. In support of this, recombinant megalin containing these sites displayed reduced albumin binding in cells deficient for <i>Galnt11</i> Our results provide insight into the association between <i>GALNT11</i> and CKD, and identify a role for Galnt11 in proper kidney function.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Liver, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics

### Submitter
Katrine Schjoldager

### Lab Head
Dr Katrine Schjoldager
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics


