### Accession
PXD039226

### Title
Insights into the role of a cardiomyopathy-causing genetic var-iant in ACTN2

### Description
Pathogenic variants in ACTN2, coding for alpha-actinin 2, are known to be rare causes of Hyper-trophic Cardiomyopathy. However, little is known about the underlying disease mechanisms. Adult heterozygous mice carrying the Actn2 M228T variant were phenotyped by echocardiog-raphy. For homozygous mice, viable E15.5 embryonic hearts were analysed by High Resolution Episcopic Microscopy and wholemount staining, complemented by unbiased proteomics, qPCR and Western blotting. Heterozygous Actn2 M228T mice have no overt phenotype. Only mature males show molecular parameters indicative of cardiomyopathy. By contrast, the variant is em-bryonically lethal in the homozygous setting and E15.5 hearts show multiple morphological ab-normalities. Molecular analyses, including unbiased proteomics, identified quantitative abnormal-ities in sarcomeric parameters, cell cycle defects and mitochondrial dysfunction. The mutant al-pha-actinin protein is found to be destabilised, associated with increased activity of the ubiqui-tin-proteosomal system. This missense variant in alpha-actinin renders the protein less stable. In response, the ubiquitin-proteosomal system is activated; a mechanism which has been implicated in cardiomyopathies previously. In parallel, lack of functional alpha-actinin is thought to cause energetic defects through mitochondrial dysfunction. This seems, together with cell cycle defects, the likely cause of death of the embryos. The defects also have wide-ranging morphological con-sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype and homozygous (n=6 per group) ventricular samples previously col-lected from embryos at E15.5 were prepared and labelled using solutions provided in EasyPepTM mini MS sample prep kit (ThermoFischer Scientific) following manufac-turer’s instructions. For data analysis, the MS and MS/MS scans were searched against Uniprot database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) criteria.

### Data Protocol
Multiple test correction was performed using Benjamini and Hochberg test (Perseus software [19]). Data were further analysed through the use of Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis [20]).

### Publication Abstract
Pathogenic variants in <i>ACTN2</i>, coding for alpha-actinin 2, are known to be rare causes of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. However, little is known about the underlying disease mechanisms. Adult heterozygous mice carrying the <i>Actn2</i> p.Met228Thr variant were phenotyped by echocardiography. For homozygous mice, viable E15.5 embryonic hearts were analysed by High Resolution Episcopic Microscopy and wholemount staining, complemented by unbiased proteomics, qPCR and Western blotting. Heterozygous <i>Actn2</i> p.Met228Thr mice have no overt phenotype. Only mature males show molecular parameters indicative of cardiomyopathy. By contrast, the variant is embryonically lethal in the homozygous setting and E15.5 hearts show multiple morphological abnormalities. Molecular analyses, including unbiased proteomics, identified quantitative abnormalities in sarcomeric parameters, cell-cycle defects and mitochondrial dysfunction. The mutant alpha-actinin protein is found to be destabilised, associated with increased activity of the ubiquitin-proteasomal system. This missense variant in alpha-actinin renders the protein less stable. In response, the ubiquitin-proteasomal system is activated; a mechanism that has been implicated in cardiomyopathies previously. In parallel, a lack of functional alpha-actinin is thought to cause energetic defects through mitochondrial dysfunction. This seems, together with cell-cycle defects, the likely cause of the death of the embryos. The defects also have wide-ranging morphological consequences.

### Keywords
Alpha-actinin, Mitochondria, Cardiomyopathy, Embryonic heart, Proteomics, Sarcomere

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
The Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences  College of Medical and Dental Sciences  Institute of Biomedical Research (IBR) room 229  University of Birmingham  Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT

### Submitter
Sophie  Broadway-Stringer

### Lab Head
Dr Katja Gehmlich
The Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences  College of Medical and Dental Sciences  Institute of Biomedical Research (IBR) room 229  University of Birmingham  Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT


