### Accession
PXD009237

### Title
Human protein phosphorylation analysis

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) protein kinase G (PknG) is a critical protein which can inhibit the maturation of phagosome and its fusion with the lysosome, providing Mtb’s latency and survival in the host. However, its signaling pathways and functions in the human body are still unclear and needed to be further studied. In our research, we used the human protein microarray to study the proteins interacting with PknG and have found a list of proteins that are potentially related to PknG in the host, which may contribute to the infection of Mtb. Among these positive hits, we found human protein CypA has strong interaction with PknG. We further validated the interaction between PknG and CypA in vitro and in vivo and investigated its role in the infection of macrophage cells. Finally, we found that PknG can significantly down-regulate protein expression level of CypA through phosphorylation in site of T107 as well as its induction of inflammatory response through NF-κB and ERK1/2 pathways. Meanwhile, the survival of Mycobacterium smegmetis (Msm) in the macrophages with overexpressing PknG is also improved with lessen of cytokines expression. Our results provided a resourceful research base of PknG in regards to various target human proteins and offered an insightful understanding of PknG’s function in the host.

### Sample Protocol
In-Solution Trypsin Digestion and Enrichment of Phosphopeptides with TiO2 Resin After phosphorylation reactions, to obtain high efficiency for MS analysis, >10 samples were grouped as one. In total, 8 groups were prepared. The grouped samples were concentrated to a protein adsorption film (Nanosep MF, PALL), washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 3 times at 4 ℃ centrifuged at 10,000 g for 20 minutes, and reduced with carboxyamidomethyl at 60℃ for 30 min. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h - 24 h. The tryptic digested protein sample was eluted from the membrane with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 2 times, and then dried by lyophilization. Phosphopeptides from digested peptides were enriched by using Phosphopeptide Enrichment TiO2 Mag Sepharose (GE healthcare life sciences, Parramatta, Australia) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the dried peptides were redissolved in 200 μl TiO2 phospho binding buffer containing 1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid and then mixed with 50 μl TiO2 phospho binding Resin. After 1 h incubation, the supernatant was discarded, and TiO2 resin was washed 3 times with the wash buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoroacetic acid). After that, the phosphopeptides were eluted by adding 50 μl elution buffer (5% ammonium hydroxide, pH ~ 12). The eluted fractions were combined and dried by lyophilization and reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) for LC−MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the LC/MS software Data Analysis 4.0 (Bruker Compass software). For the improved identification of phosphopeptides, all MS/MS samples were analyzed using MASCOT 2.3 (23). MASCOT were set up to search a database of M.tuberculosis database from SwissProt (http://web.expasy.org/docs/swiss-prot_guideline.html) containing 2,067 annotated protein sequences. The search criteria were as follows: trypsin digestion; carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phospho (ST), and phospho (Y) were considered as variable modifications; and two missed cleavages were allowed. Allowed maximum mass deviation was 0.4 Da (monoisotopic) for the precursor ion and fragment maximum mass deviation was 0.6 Da (monoisotopic). For results searching, the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered based on the score threshold of a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), according to the formula: FDR = 2[nDecoy / (nDecoy + nTarget)] (24). And also all fragmentation spectra of the phosphorylated peptides assigned to the corresponding proteins were manually evaluated and identified according to the neutral loss of ion MH+-80. Finally, to pinpoint the actual phosphorylation site within the identified peptide, the localization probabilities for phosphorylation sites were calculated from the posttranslational modification score algorithm with PhosphoRS analysis using Protein Discovery software (Thermo). Phosphorylation sites that were occupied with a probability > 0.95 were identified as phosphorylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) serine/threonine kinase PknG plays an important role in the Mtb-host interaction by facilitating the survival of Mtb in macrophages. However, the human proteins with which the PknG interacts, and the underlying molecular mechanisms are still largely unknown. In this study, a HuProt array is been applied to globally identify the host proteins to which PknG binds. In this way, 125 interactors are discovered, including a cyclophilin protein, CypA. This interaction between PknG and CypA is validated both in vitro and in vivo, and functional studies show that PknG significantly reduces the protein levels of CypA through phosphorylation, which consequently inhibit the inflammatory response through downregulation of NF-&#x3ba;B and ERK1/2 pathways. Phenotypically, overexpression of PknG reduces cytokine levels and promotes the survival of Mycobacterium smegmatis (Msm) in macrophages. Overall, it is expected that the PknG interactors identified in this study will serve as a useful resource for further systematic studies of the roles that PknG plays in the Mtb-host interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Ph.D., Professor, Vice Dean
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Fanlin Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Ce Tao
Ph.D., Professor, Vice Dean


