### Accession
PXD026449

### Title
Impaired amino acid uptake leads to global metabolic imbalance of Candida albicans biofilms

### Description
Candida albicans biofilms form complex structures that shield the fungus from antifungal agents and host immune responses, which is particularly problematic for the treatment of severe candidiasis. The increasing thickness and formation of hyphal networks of growing biofilms result in nutrient and gas shifts that lead to sequential metabolic rearrangements. This study provides very comprehensive insights into the molecular and metabolic mechanisms of C. albicans biofilm maturation by combining three state-of-the-art omics techniques. Adaptive nutrient and stress responses enabled wild type biofilms to mature in an increasingly nutrient- and oxygen-limited environment. C. albicans biofilms lacking Stp2, a transcriptional regulator of amino acid uptake, underwent extensive transcriptional changes resulting in metabolic adaptations such as broad restructuring of nitrogen metabolism, glucose uptake, and acquisition of alternative nutrients. This finding underscores the indispensable need for amino acid supply during biofilm development and emphasizes the tremendous metabolic flexibility to adapt to changing environments that have made C. albicans a successful opportunistic pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
The supernatant of spent liquid culture medium of wildtype and stp2 mutant Candida albicans (each 3 biological replicates) was treated as follows: 1 tablet of Complete Ultra protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was added to 50 ml supernatant.  The pH was set to 2 by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Proteins were enriched by using solid-phase extraction with Chromabond C4 SPE cartridges (Macherey-Nagel). The silica-bound C4  matrix was first reconstituted with 4 ml acetonitrile (ACN) and conditioned with 4 ml 0.1% TFA in water. Then the sample was loaded. The cartridges were washed using  4 ml  5% methanol (MeOH) / 0.1% TFA in water . Proteins were eluted with 4 ml 0.1% TFA in 80/20 ACN/water (v/v). The eluate was evaporated until dryness by a using a vacuum concentrator. The proteins were resolubilized in  100 µl  50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in 50/50 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE)/water (v/v). Protein thiols were reduced and alkylated for 30 min at 70°C after addition of each 4 µL 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and  625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). The samples were further cleaned up by methanol-chloroform-water precipitation using the protocol of Wessel and Flügge (1984; PMID: 6731838). The precipitate was resolubilized  in 100 µl  5% TFE / 95 mM TEAB in water and digested overnight (18 h) with a Trypsin+LysC mixture (Promega) at a protein to protease ratio of 25:1. Samples were again evaporated in vacuum concentrator, resolubilized in 25µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through Ultrafree-MC 0.2 µm PTFE membrane spin filters (Merck-Millipore). The filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials and injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Each sample was measured in triplicate (3 analytical replicates of 3 biological replicates ). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1-240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for further HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=120 ms, AGC= 2e5) using a fixed first mass of m/z 120 amu. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s and the underfill ratio was set to 1.0%. The LC-MS/MS instrument was controlled by Chromeleon 7.2, QExactive HF Tune 2.8  and Xcalibur 4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database of  Candida albicans (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000559; 2019/06/16) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation, and protein N-term acetylation as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) were required for positive protein hits. If only 1 peptide per protein has been identified the hit was accepted if the Mascot score was >30 or the MS Amanda score was >300 or the Sequest score was >4. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted. Label-free protein quantification was based on the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 using a signal-to-noise ratio >5. Imputation of missing quan values was applied by setting the abundance to 75% of the lowest abundance identified for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans biofilm maturation is accompanied by enhanced expression of amino acid acquisition genes. Three state-of-the-art omics techniques were applied to detail the importance of active amino acid uptake during biofilm development. Comparative analyses of normoxic wild-type biofilms were performed under three metabolically challenging conditions: aging, hypoxia, and disabled amino acid uptake using a strain lacking the regulator of amino acid permeases Stp2. Aging-induced amino acid acquisition and stress responses to withstand the increasingly restricted environment. Hypoxia paralyzed overall energy metabolism with delayed amino acid consumption, but following prolonged adaptation, the metabolic fingerprints aligned with aged normoxic biofilms. The extracellular metabolome of stp2&#x394; biofilms revealed deficient uptake for 11 amino acids, resulting in extensive transcriptional and metabolic changes including induction of amino acid biosynthesis and carbohydrate and micronutrient uptake. Altogether, this study underscores the critical importance of a balanced amino acid homeostasis for C. albicans biofilm development.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Biofilms, Hypoxia, Secretome, Amino acid metabolism, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Germany


