### Accession
PXD024339

### Title
Rapid and accurate detection of aminoglycoside modifying enzymes and 16S ribosomal RNA methyltransferases by targeted LC-MS/MS

### Description
New and rapid diagnostic methods are needed for the detection of antimicrobial resistance to aid in the curbing of drug-resistant infections. Targeted LC-MS/MS is a method that could serve this purpose, as it can detect specific peptides of resistance mechanisms with high accuracy. In the current study, we aimed to develop an accurate, rapid and high-throughput targeted LC-MS/MS assay based on parallel reaction monitoring for detection of the most prevalent aminoglycoside modifying enzymes and 16S ribosomal RNA methyltransferases in E. coli and K. pneumoniae that confer resistance to the most commonly used aminoglycosides. Specific tryptic peptides needed for detection were selected and validated for AAC(3)-Ia, AAC(3)-II, AAC(3)-IV, AAC(3)-VI, AAC(6’)-Ib, AAC(6’)-Ib-cr, ANT(2”)-I, APH(3’)-VI, ArmA, RmtB, RmtC and RmtF. In total, 205 different isolates containing different aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms that consisted mostly of E. coli and K. pneumoniae were selected for assay development and validation. MS results were automatically analyzed and were compared to WGS results which were regarded as the reference. The average sensitivity and specificity for the detection of the different mechanisms by LC-MS/MS compared to WGS was 95.1 % and 98.0 %, respectively. Furthermore, MS results were also used to predict resistance and susceptibility to gentamicin, tobramycin and amikacin in only the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates (n=191). The category interpretations were correctly predicted for gentamicin in 97.4 % of the isolates, for tobramycin in 97.4 % of the isolates, and for amikacin in 82.7 % of the isolates. The current study shows that targeted LC-MS/MS can be applied for accurate and rapid detection of aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Isolates stored at −80°C were subcultured on TrypticaseTM Soy Agar II plates with 5 % sheep blood (Becton Dickinson, New Jersey, United States) and incubated overnight at 37°C. Subsequently, one inoculation loop with bacteria was inoculated in Mueller Hinton II broth and cultured overnight at 37°C and 150 rpm. The resulting broth was diluted with Mueller Hinton II broth until absorbance of 0.98–1.02 at 600 nm wavelength was reached. Subsequently, 1 ml was centrifuged for 5 min at 21,000 × g and the resulting pellet was stored at −20°C awaiting LC-MS pretreatment.  Lysis and digestion Prior to LC-MS/MS, isolates were pre-treated using a short protocol. Bacterial pellets were lysed in 100 µl lysis solution consisting of 5 % sodium deoxycholate, 7.5 mM dithiothreitol in water. For the validation experiment, 22.3 µl SIL peptide solution was added containing SIL variants of each peptide (synthesized by Pepscan, Lelystad, the Netherlands). Concentrations of SIL peptides in this solution were optimized in pilot experiments to approach the concentrations of the endogenous peptides and were as follows: 22 fmol/µl for the RmtC and RmtF peptides, 45 fmol/µl for the AAC(3)-Ia, AAC(3)-IV and AAC(3)-VI peptides, 96 fmol/µl for the APH(3’)-VI peptides, 110 fmol/µl for VADLFEAR (internal control), 225 fmol/µl for the ArmA, RmtB, AAC(3)-II and AAC(6’)-Ib peptides, 450 fmol/µl for SLGQFNLDGINPAPR and GATVELADGVEGYLR (both internal controls) and 560 fmol/µl for the ANT(2”)-I peptide. After addition of the SIL peptide solution, samples were sonicated for 5 min using a Branson 2510 Ultrasonic Cleaner (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, USA) and incubated for 10 min at 80 °C and 450 rpm in a heater-shaker (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Samples were diluted 10-fold using MS grade water and 10 µl trypsin (1 µg/µl) (Worthington, New Jersey, USA) was added followed by 50 μl Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8). Subsequently, samples were incubated at 37 °C and 450 rpm to digest the proteins. Samples were incubated 2 h for peptide assessment and 1 h for assay validation. To stop the digestion, 30 μl 5 % trifluoroacetic acid was added followed by 5 min of incubation at 37 °C and 450 rpm. Finally, digests were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C, 21000 g and 500 µl of supernatant was stored at -20 °C.  LC-MS/MS For each sample, 20 μl of digest was loaded onto Evotips (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described. 23, 37 LC-MS/MS was performed using the Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). LC was performed using the manufacturers separation method of 11.5 min (100 samples/day) 37. The Q Exactive HF system was operated in PRM mode. Samples were sequentially measured and the column was not rinsed with a blank in between measurements. The following settings were used during method validation: a quadrupole isolation window of 0.6 m/z units, an automatic gain control target value of 1 x 106 ions, a maximum fill time of 150 ms and a resolving power of 30,000 at 400 m/z. A normalized collision energy of 27 % was used for all peptides. A retention time window of 2 min was used for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Skyline daily 19.1 or later was used for MS analysis (MacCoss Lab Software, University of Washington, USA). For the assay validation, Skyline results were analyzed using a custom-made software tool “Antibiotic Resistance Scanner” developed by Da Vinci Laboratory Solutions (Rotterdam, the Netherlands). By using this tool, Skyline results could be imported and evaluated in an automated manner by the applied selection criteria of mass error < 10 ppm, rdotp > 0.95, presence of all selected fragments and ratio of endogenous to SIL peptide > 0.025. Test characteristics including the 95 % CI were calculated using VassarStats: Website for Statistical Computation (http://vassarstats.net).

### Publication Abstract
New and rapid diagnostic methods are needed for the detection of antimicrobial resistance to aid in curbing drug-resistant infections. Targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is a method that could serve this purpose, as it can detect specific peptides of antimicrobial resistance mechanisms with high accuracy. In the current study, we developed an accurate and rapid targeted LC-MS/MS assay based on parallel reaction monitoring for detection of the most prevalent aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes and 16S rRNA methyltransferases in Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae that confer resistance to aminoglycosides. Specific tryptic peptides needed for detection were selected and validated for AAC(3)-Ia, AAC(3)-II, AAC(3)-IV, AAC(3)-VI, AAC(6')-Ib, AAC(6')-Ib-cr, ANT(2&#x2033;)-I, APH(3')-VI, ArmA, RmtB, RmtC, and RmtF. In total, 205 isolates containing different aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms that consisted mostly of E. coli and K. pneumoniae were selected for assay development and evaluation. Mass spectrometry results were automatically analyzed and were compared to whole-genome sequencing results. Of the 2,460 isolate and resistance mechanism combinations tested, 2,416 combinations matched. Discrepancies were further analyzed by repeating LC-MS/MS analysis and performing additional PCRs. Mass spectrometry results were also used to predict resistance and susceptibility to gentamicin, tobramycin, and amikacin in only the E. coli and K. pneumoniae isolates (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;191). The category interpretations were correctly predicted for gentamicin in 97.4% of the isolates, for tobramycin in 97.4% of the isolates, and for amikacin in 82.7% of the isolates. Targeted LC-MS/MS can be applied for accurate and rapid detection of aminoglycoside resistance mechanisms.

### Keywords
K. pneumoniae, Aminoglycosides, Parallel reaction monitoring, Aminoglycoside modifying enzymes, Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, Antimicrobial resistance, E. coli, 16s ribosomal rna methyltransferases

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Erasmus MC Neurology Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical and Cancer Proteomics

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Erasmus MC Neurology Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical and Cancer Proteomics


