### Accession
PXD033834

### Title
CDC50 interacting partners of Plasmodium falcipraum

### Description
Intefying the P4-ATPase interacting partners of CDC50B and CDC50C of Plasmodium falcipraum

### Sample Protocol
Tightly synchronised schizonts (~45 h old) of CDC50B-HA:loxP, CDC50C-HA:loxP and 3D7DiCre parental parasites were enriched on a 70% Percoll cushion. The schizonts were treated for 3 h with 1 μM C2 (to arrest egress) after which the cultures were treated with 0.15% saponin in PBS containing cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease and PhosSTOP Phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (both Roche) for 10 min at 4°C to lyse the host erythrocytes. Samples were washed twice in PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, snap-frozen and pellets stored at −80°C. Parasite pellets (70-100 μl packed volume) were resuspended in three volumes of NP-40 extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, pH 7.5, with 1× protease inhibitors (Roche). Samples were gently vortexed and incubated on ice for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Clarified lysates were then added to anti-HA antibody conjugated magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) which had been equilibrated in NP-40 extraction buffer. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h on a rotating wheel after which beads were precipitated using a magnetic sample rack. The supernatant was removed, and beads washed three times with NP-40 extraction buffer followed by three washes with extraction buffer lacking detergent. Washed beads were then resuspended in trypsinisation buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and samples reduced and alkylated by heated to 70°C for 5 minutes. 250 ng of trypsin was added to the samples and heated at 37°C overnight with gentle agitation followed by filtration using a 0.22 µm Costar® Spin-X® centrifuge tube filter (Sigma). Samples were then run on a LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Search engines, Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com/) and MaxQuant (https://www.maxquant.org/) were used for mass spectrometry data analysis. The PlasmoDB database was used for protein annotation. Peptide and proteins having minimum threshold of 95% were used for further proteomic analysis and peptide traces analysed using Scaffold5. Enrichment was determined by comparing results from tagged lines with that of immuno-precipitated material from 3D7DiCre parental parasites

### Publication Abstract
In model organisms, type IV ATPases (P4-ATPases) require cell division control protein 50 (CDC50) chaperones for their phospholipid flipping activity. In the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, guanylyl cyclase alpha (GC&#x3b1;) is an integral membrane protein that is essential for release (egress) of merozoites from their host erythrocytes. GC&#x3b1; is unusual in that it contains both a C-terminal cyclase domain and an N-terminal P4-ATPase domain of unknown function. We sought to investigate whether any of the three CDC50 orthologues (termed A, B, and C) encoded by P. falciparum are required for GC&#x3b1; function. Using gene tagging and conditional gene disruption, we demonstrate that CDC50B and CDC50C but not CDC50A are expressed in the clinically important asexual blood stages and that CDC50B is a binding partner of GC&#x3b1; whereas CDC50C is the binding partner of another putative P4-ATPase, phospholipid-transporting ATPase 2 (ATP2). Our findings indicate that CDC50B has no essential role for intraerythrocytic parasite maturation but modulates the rate of parasite egress by interacting with GC&#x3b1; for optimal cGMP synthesis. In contrast, CDC50C is essential for blood stage trophozoite maturation. Additionally, we find that the CDC50C-ATP2 complex may influence parasite endocytosis of host cell hemoglobin and consequently hemozoin formation. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Malaria morbidity arises due to successive rounds of replication of <i>Plasmodium</i> parasites within red blood cells. Mature daughter merozoites are released from infected erythrocytes to invade new cells in a tightly regulated process termed egress. Previous studies have shown that a unique bifunctional guanylyl cyclase, GC&#x3b1;, initiates egress by synthesis of cGMP. GC&#x3b1; has an N-terminal P4-ATPase domain of unknown function. In model organisms, P4-ATPases function through interaction with a CDC50 partner protein. Here, we investigate the role of CDC50 orthologues in P. falciparum and show that GC&#x3b1; binds CDC50B, an interaction that regulates egress efficiency. We also find that CDC50C is essential and binds a putative P4-ATPase, ATP2, in a complex that influences endocytosis of host hemaglobin. Our results highlight the heterogenous and critical role of CDC50 proteins in P. falciparum.

### Keywords
Cdc50 plasmodium facliparum p4-atpase

### Affiliations
Faculty of Infectious Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
LSHTM

### Submitter
Avnish Patel

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Baker
Faculty of Infectious Diseases, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom


