### Accession
PXD001348

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the effect of deletion and mutation of eIF4E binding proteins Caf20 and Eap1 on yeast via LC-MSMS.

### Description
There are multiple translational control pathways. These include pathways involving eIF4E binding proteins (4E-BPs), which inhibit translation by binding and sequestering the 5’ cap binding protein eIF4E away from its partner eIF4G. Saccharomyces cerevisiae has two 4E-BPs: Caf20p and Eap1p; and, microarray analysis has shown that each regulates different subsets of mRNAs. To assess the effect of these different regulatory responses at the protein level, we used label-free mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of wild-type strain with those of caf20Δ and eap1Δ single mutant strains; caf20Δ and eap1Δ double mutant strain; and, caf20Δ mutant strain transformed with one plasmid containing a mutated version of caf20. These analyses indicate that Caf20p and Eap1p may compensate for each other loss, and also reveal that Caf20p participates in translational control pathways that are independent of eIF4E binding.

### Sample Protocol
Quintuplicate repeats of the wild-type and mutated strains were grown in SCD-URA media to an OD600 of 0.6. Cultures were harvested, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed using the 6870 freezer mill (Spex) into 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). Ground samples were defrosted, cleared by centrifugation at 4°C (15,000g for 10 minutes), and 100 μg of cleared lysate was diluted to a final volume of 160 µl containing 1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters Corporation). Samples were incubated at 80°C, 600 rpm, for 10 minutes, reduced using a final concentration of 3.5 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 60°C, 600 rpm, for 10 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, in order to uniformly modify cysteine residues, and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were treated by two subsequent trypsin digestions (0.01 µg/µl trypsin in 10 mM acetic acid), initially for 4.5 h, and then overnight at 37°C, both at 600 rpm. Hydrochloric acid was added to a final concentration of 13 mM in between the two digestions to maximise trypsin digestion.  RapiGest was removed from the samples with the following steps: 1) 0.5 µl of trifluoroacetic acid was added and incubated at 37°C for 2h; 2) 7.5 µl of acetonitrile:water (2:1) was added and incubated at 4°C for 2h; and, 3) samples were centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 minutes.  Supernatant was removed and desalted using OLIGO™ R3 reversed-phase media on a microplate system. Peptides were eluted in three cycles of 50% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted to 10 µL with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data from five replicates of the five conditions were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using one LC-MS run as a reference, then the “Automatic Alignment” algorithm was used to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with charges ≥ +5 were masked and excluded from further analyses, as were features with less than 3 isotope peaks. The resulting peak lists were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, version 3rd February 2011) using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Science). Search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set to variable. The Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks. At least two peptides were required for protein quantification. Subsequently, protein abundances were compared using Progenesis statistics tools, and the p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg correction implemented in R. We accepted a 5% False Discovery Rate in the differential analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Translation initiation factor eIF4E mediates mRNA selection for protein synthesis via the mRNA 5'cap. A family of binding proteins, termed the 4E-BPs, interact with eIF4E to hinder ribosome recruitment. Mechanisms underlying mRNA specificity for 4E-BP control remain poorly understood. Saccharomyces cerevisiae 4E-BPs, Caf20p and Eap1p, each regulate an overlapping set of mRNAs. We undertook global approaches to identify protein and RNA partners of both 4E-BPs by immunoprecipitation of tagged proteins combined with mass spectrometry or next-generation sequencing. Unexpectedly, mass spectrometry indicated that the 4E-BPs associate with many ribosomal proteins. 80S ribosome and polysome association was independently confirmed and was not dependent upon interaction with eIF4E, as mutated forms of both Caf20p and Eap1p with disrupted eIF4E-binding motifs retain ribosome interaction. Whole-cell proteomics revealed Caf20p mutations cause both up and down-regulation of proteins and that many changes were independent of the 4E-binding motif. Investigations into Caf20p mRNA targets by immunoprecipitation followed by RNA sequencing revealed a strong association between Caf20p and mRNAs involved in transcription and cell cycle processes, consistent with observed cell cycle phenotypes of mutant strains. A core set of over 500 Caf20p-interacting mRNAs comprised of both eIF4E-dependent (75%) and eIF4E-independent targets (25%), which differ in sequence attributes. eIF4E-independent mRNAs share a 3' UTR motif. Caf20p binds all tested motif-containing 3' UTRs. Caf20p and the 3'UTR combine to influence ERS1 mRNA polysome association consistent with Caf20p contributing to translational control. Finally ERS1 3'UTR confers Caf20-dependent repression of expression to a heterologous reporter gene. Taken together, these data reveal conserved features of eIF4E-dependent Caf20p mRNA targets and uncover a novel eIF4E-independent mode of Caf20p binding to mRNAs that extends the regulatory role of Caf20p in the mRNA-specific repression of protein synthesis beyond its interaction with eIF4E.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Talavera

### Lab Head
Dr Graham Pavitt
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom


