### Accession
PXD043543

### Title
iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis of style proteins and S-RNase-related proteins in Huanghua and its homozygous S-genotype offspring

### Description
We used iTRAQ technology to investigate the protein expression characteristics of S-RNases in S-gene homozygous germplasm. By using MaxQuant to search the raw mass spectrometry data files against the protein database, a total of 30,503 identified spectra, 13,568 peptides, and 4,472 proteins were identified in the styles of Huanghua (S1S2) and its homozygous S-genotype offspring (S1S1 and S2S2). These identified proteins were predicted to be located in extracellular regions, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum, peroxisomes, vacuoles, nucleoplasm, and other cellular compartments. The number of DEPs among the three varieties was calculated. According to the overall distribution of these proteins, the highest number of DEPs was between S2S2 and S1S2, while the lowest number of DEPs was between S2S2 and S1S1. This indicated that the protein expression patterns of S2S2 and S1S1 were more similar to each other, while both offspring samples showed significant differences in protein expression when compared with the parent S1S2. In this study, we conducted DEP analyses focusing on S-RNases and the proteins that interact with them in the styles of the three pear varieties. Figure 6 shows the heat-map of the expression levels of the 13 identified S-RNase-related proteins, which reflects their differences in expression levels across the three samples. In terms of the overall expression trend, using the offspring sample S1S1 as a normal expression standard, most of the S-RNase-related proteins were down-regulated in the parent S1S2. In contrast, in the offspring sample S2S2, most of the S-RNase-related proteins were up-regulated relative to their levels in the other offspring sample S1S1, with only a few exceptions. Compared with the parent S1S2, both offspring samples, S1S1 and S2S2, showed up-regulated expression of 12 out of the 13 S-RNase-related proteins, except for S1-RNase. Comparing S1S1 and S2S2, the expression levels of F-box/WD-repeat_TBL1XR1, SKP1-like_1A_2, and S2-RNase were higher in S1S1 than in S2S2, while the expression levels of the other 10 S-RNase-related proteins were higher in S2S2 than in S1S1.

### Sample Protocol
The pear varieties ‘Huanghua’ (H-H，S1S2) ,and the S1-homozygote H-7 (S1S1) and the S2-homozygote H-9 (S2S2). One gram of frozen style from H-H, S1S1, and S2S2 was ground to a powder in liquid nitrogen.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol Each dried peptide fraction was reconstituted in buffer A (0.1% FA, 5% ACN) and then centrifuged at 20,000×g for 10 min. The average concentration of final peptides was about 0.5 μg/μL. For the LC analysis, 10 μL of supernatant was injected into a LC-20AD nanoHPLC equipped with a 2-cm C18 trap column. The peptides were separated on an internally packed analytical column. All samples were loaded at a rate of 8 μL/min over 4 min, and separated by a gradient of buffer A and B (0.1% FA, 95% ACN) supplied at a flow rate of 300 μL/min. The gradient program was as follows: 2% to 35% B over 35 min, increased with a linear gradient to 60% over 5 min, then to 80% over 2 min, and held at 80% B for 4 min before returning to 5% buffer B within 1 min. Data were acquired from the Triple TOF 5600 System equipped with a pulled quartz tip as transmitter and a Nanospray III source, with the following settings: 30 psi curtain gas, 150 °C interface heater temperature, 15 psi atomization gas, and 2.5 kV ion spray voltage. A RP (≥ 30,000 FWHM) was used for operating the MS for TOF-MS scanning (Unwin et al. 2010). For IDA, if the threshold was exceeded at 120 counts per s above 2 to 5+, survey scans were performed every 250 ms and 30 production scans were assembled. The total cycle time was fixed at 3.3 s and the Q2 transfer window at 100 Da was set to 100%. By monitoring the 40 GHz multi-channel TDC detector with a four-anode channel detector, four time bins were summarized at 11 kHz pulse frequency per scan. The 35 ± 5 eV sweep collision energy setting was used in conjunction with iTRAQ to adjust the rolling collision energy to perform collision-induced dissociation of all precursor ions. Finally, dynamic exclusion was set to 50% of the peak width (15 s), and precursors were refreshed from the exclusion list. The raw data files obtained from the Triple TOF 5600 system were converted into MGF files using 5600 MS converter and then the MGF files were searched. The triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer used in this study had a high mass accuracy (less than 2 ppm), allowing for reliable peptide identification. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. For proteome analyses, the MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software with default parameters to produce a list of peaks. Data were collected using Analyst QS 2.0 software, and proteins were identified and quantified by Mascot 2.3.02. For iTRAQ quantification, peptides for quantification were automatically selected by an algorithm to calculate reporter peak area, error factor (EF), and p-value (using the default parameters in the Mascot software package). The resulting data sets were automatically corrected for deviations to eliminate any changes due to uneven mixing of samples with different markers. The sequences of Chinese white pear proteins (https://www.peargenome.njau.edu.cn/) were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science). The ratios between samples were obtained directly based on the protein abundance for any given protein. Proteins showing 1.5-fold or higher difference in abundance between the treated and control samples and a p-value of less than 0.05 were identified as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Gametophytic self-incompatibility (SI) is regulated by S-allele recognition; that is, pollen in a style with the same S-genotype will undergo programmed cell death and stop growing so that it is unable to complete double fertilization, ultimately resulting in the SI response. S-RNase is the female determinant of SI in pear (Pyrus). In the Pyrus genome, there are two different S-RNase alleles at the S-locus, which generate two different S-RNase products in the pistil. The extracted S-glycoprotein is actually a protein complex. In this study, artificial self-pollination was conducted at the bud stage to overcome SI in 'Huanghua' (S<sub>1</sub>S<sub>2</sub>) pear. Seven plants homozygous for S<sub>1</sub>-RNase and four homozygous for S<sub>2</sub>-RNase were selected from the selfed progeny of 'Huanghua' by S-gene molecular identification biotechnology. We investigated the function of single S-RNases isolated from the pistils of S-gene homozygous Pyrus germplasm. The pollen of 'Huanghua' could smoothly pass through the style of the S-gene homozygous germplasm and complete fertilization. S-RNases were extracted from flower styles of different genotypes and used to treat different types of pollen. The S-RNase from 'Huanghua' completely inhibited the growth of S<sub>1</sub>S<sub>2,</sub> S<sub>1</sub>S<sub>1</sub>, and S<sub>2</sub>S<sub>2</sub> pollen, while the S-RNase from homozygous germplasm allowed some S<sub>1</sub>S<sub>2</sub> pollen and different single genotypes of pollen to continue growing. These results further validate the core events of SI including cytoskeleton depolymerization and programmed cell death. By iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis of style proteins, a total of 13 S-RNase-related proteins were identified. In summary, we have created reliable S-RNase gene homozygous germplasm, which will play a crucial role in further research on SI in pear and in the development of the pear industry.

### Keywords
S-rnase, Pyrus, Style, Itraq, Homozygous

### Affiliations
Institute of Horticulture Research, Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Crop Germplasm Innovation and Utilization(Co-construction by Ministry and Province)，Institute of Horticulture，Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences，Hefei 230031, China

### Submitter
Yongjie Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yongjie Qi
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Crop Germplasm Innovation and Utilization(Co-construction by Ministry and Province)，Institute of Horticulture，Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences，Hefei 230031, China


