### Accession
PXD032158

### Title
Exploration of the nurse shark (Ginglymostoma cirratum) plasma immunoproteome using high-throughput LC-MS/MS

### Description
LC-MS/MS proteomics was used to identify immune proteins in the plasma of the nurse shark (Ginglymostoma cirratum), using a de novo multi-tissue transcriptome generated for this species. LC-MS/MS was then used to assess the host response to immunization with human serum albumin (HSA) and Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA).

### Sample Protocol
Wild-caught nurse sharks, aged between 2-3 years and weighing between 1.4-1.7 kg, were maintained in a 12,000L tank containing continuously recirculating sea water at 28C at the Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology (IMET), Baltimore, USA. Animals were acclimatized for at least 3 months prior to sampling/immunization and all experimental procedures were conducted in accordance with University of Maryland, School of Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved protocols. Four sharks (three females, one male) were immunized subcutaneously into the ventral face of the lateral fin with 250 μg HSA, emulsified in an equal volume of Complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA). An additional shark (female) was sham-immunized with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to serve as a control. Blood samples (0.2 ml) were taken from the caudal vein immediately prior to immunization on day 0, then again on days 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, and 49; animals were anaesthetized in MS-222 prior to each procedure as per the approved IACUC protocol. Blood samples were added to 20 μl sterile sodium citrate to prevent clotting and spun at 1000 rpm for 10 min to separate the blood constituents. Plasma was aliquoted into low protein-binding 1.5ml tubes (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), flash frozen, and stored at -80oC.  Plasma samples for n=5 nurse shark individuals were prepared for proteomic analysis at the University of Aberdeen Proteomics facility. 1 μl of plasma was diluted with 99 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were reduced in 2 mM dithiothreitol for 25 min at 60°C, S-alkylated in 4 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25°C in the dark, digested with porcine trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C, then freeze-dried. The protein pellets were dissolved in 40 µl 0.1% TFA and desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 stage tips (Merck Millipore) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptide solutions were dried and dissolved in 10 µl LC-MS/MS loading solvent (98 parts UHQ water: 2 parts acetonitrile: 0.1 parts formic acid). Samples were transferred to a 96-well microtitre plate ready for injection into an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap MS system (Thermo Scientific). The LC was configured for pre-concentration onto a PepMap RSLC C18 50 µm x 25 cm column (Thermo Scientific P/N ES802) fitted to an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The loading pump solvent was UHQ water: acetonitrile: formic acid (98: 2: 0.1) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min; nano pump solvent A was UHQ water: formic acid (100: 0.1); nano pump solvent B was acetonitrile: UHQ water: formic acid (80: 20: 0.1). The LC gradient was programmed to increase the proportion of solvent B from 3-10% between 5-15 min, from 10-40% between 15-95 min, from 40-80% from 95-100 min and hold for 10 min before re-equilibration of the nano-column in 3% solvent B for 25 min. MS data acquisition was started at 10 min into the LC gradient, 5 min after switching the flow through the pre-column and continued for a total of 100 min. The electrospray voltage was 1.9kV, capillary temperature 270°C and S-lens RF level 60. The MS scans were performed between 375-1750 m/z at resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) with an automatic gain control of 3E+6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 10 most intense ions of charge state 2-5 were sequentially selected (isolation window 1.6 m/z), followed by fragmentation in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at a normalized collision energy of 26%. MS/MS scans were conducted at resolution 17,500, with an automatic gain control of 5E+4 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Additional data-dependent settings included: peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes turned one, and a 40 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS data were uploaded to MaxQuant v1.5.3.30. As remains the case for many species, comprehensive protein annotations (e.g., derived from a reference genome or transcriptome) were not available for the nurse shark, necessitating the generation of our de novo transcriptome. The Andromeda peptide search engine within MaxQuant was used to match the MS of all detected peptides against proteins predicted from our de novo transcriptome. Digestion type was “trypsin”, two missed cleavages were permitted. The fixed modification of carbamidomethyl of cysteine residues, and the variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, were allowed. “Match between runs” was used to maximise peptide detection. The false discovery rate was set at 0.01, using a target-decoy based search applied at both peptide and protein group levels. Proteins identified as contaminants and false positives were removed. Protein abundance values for each sample were generated using the label-free quantification (LFQ) method. Only MPGs were considered in subsequent statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Many animals of scientific importance lack species-specific reagents (e.g., monoclonal antibodies) for in-depth studies of immune proteins. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has emerged as a useful method for monitoring changes in protein abundance and modifications in non-model species. It can be used to quantify hundreds of candidate immune molecules simultaneously without the generation of new reagents. Here, we used MS-based proteomics to identify and quantify candidate immune proteins in the plasma of the nurse shark (<i>Ginglymostoma cirratum</i>), a cartilaginous fish and representative of the most basal extant vertebrate lineage with an immunoglobulin-based immune system. Mass spectrometry-based LC-MS/MS was performed on the blood plasma of nurse sharks immunized with human serum albumin (n=4) or sham immunized (n=1), and sampled at days 0 (baseline control), 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 14, 21, 28, 25, 42 and 49. An antigen-specific antibody response was experimentally confirmed post-immunization. To provide a high-quality reference to identify proteins, we assembled and annotated a multi-tissue <i>de novo</i> transcriptome integrating long- and short-read sequence data. This comprised 62,682 contigs containing open reading frames (ORFs) with a length &gt;80 amino acids. Using this transcriptome, we reliably identified 626 plasma proteins which were broadly categorized into coagulation, immune, and metabolic functional groups. To assess the feasibility of performing LC-MS/MS proteomics in nurse shark in the absence of species-specific protein annotations, we compared the results to an alternative strategy, mapping peptides to proteins predicted in the genome assembly of a related species, the whale shark (<i>Rhincodon typus</i>). This approach reliably identified 297 proteins, indicating that useful data on the plasma proteome may be obtained in many instances despite the absence of a species-specific reference protein database. Among the plasma proteins defined against the nurse shark transcriptome, fifteen showed consistent changes in abundance across the immunized shark individuals, indicating a role in the immune response. These included alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M) and a novel protein yet to be characterized in diverse vertebrate lineages. Overall, this study enhances genetic and protein-level resources for nurse shark research and vastly improves our understanding of the elasmobranch plasma proteome, including its remodelling following immune stimulation.

### Keywords
Plasma, Immunoproteome, Nurse shark, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
Institute of Marine & Environmental Technology (IMET), University of Maryland School of Medicine, 701 E. Pratt St, Baltimore MD21202, USA

### Submitter
David Stead

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Helen Dooley
Institute of Marine & Environmental Technology (IMET), University of Maryland School of Medicine, 701 E. Pratt St, Baltimore MD21202, USA


