### Accession
PXD026651

### Title
Expression of a human cDNA in moss results in spliced mRNAs and fragmentary protein isoforms

### Description
Production of biopharmaceuticals relies on the expression of mammalian cDNAs in host organisms. Here we show that the expression of a human cDNA in the moss Physcomitrium patens generates the expected full-length and four additional transcripts due to unexpected splicing. This mRNA splicing results in non-functional protein isoforms, cellular misallocation of the proteins and low product yields. We integrated these results together with the results of our analysis of all 32,926 protein-encoding Physcomitrella genes and their 87,533 annotated transcripts in a web application, physCO, for automatized optimization. A thus optimized cDNA results in about twelve times more protein, which correctly localizes to the ER. An analysis of codon preferences of different production hosts suggests that similar effects occur also in non-plant hosts. We anticipate that the use of our methodology will prevent so far undetected mRNA heterosplicing resulting in maximized functional protein amounts for basic biology and biotechnology.

### Sample Protocol
The reduced and alkylated protein extracts were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Appropriate gel bands showing FIX fractions were excised and processed for in-gel digestion: Following the destaining of the gel bands with 30% acetonitrile (ACN), they were treated with 100% ACN and dried completely in a vacuum concentrator. Tryptic in-gel digestion of gel slices was performed overnight at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using 0.1 µg trypsin (Promega) per gel band. Afterwards, peptides were extracted from the gel with 5% formic acid. Analyses were performed using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The UHPLC systems was equipped with a C18-precolumn (Ø: 0.3 mm, 5 mm; PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Acclaim® PepMap analytical column (ID: 75 m, 500 mm, 2 m, 100 Å, Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific).   MS analyses were performed using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (FA, solvent A, “A”) and 0.1% FA/86% ACN (solvent B, “B”). Samples were washed and concentrated on a C18 pre-column with 0.1% TFA for 5 min before switching the column in line with the analytical column. Peptide separation was performed applying a 45-min gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptide samples were eluted with a gradient of 4–40% B in 30 min and 40–95% B in 5 min. After each gradient, the analytical column was washed with 95% B for 5 min and re-equilibrated for 15 min with 4% B. The MS instrument was externally calibrated using standard compounds and equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and distal coated SilicaTips (FS360–20-10-D, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA), and MS/MS analyses were performed on multiply charged peptide ions. The measurement was performed using UltiMate 3,000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled online to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS (max. of 1x10 ions) and MS/MS. Each MS scan was followed by a maximum of 12 MS/MS scans using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 35%. The mass range for MS was m/z = 375–1,700 and resolution was set to 70,000. MS parameters were as follows: spray voltage 1.5 kV; ion transfer tube temperature 200°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Mascot Distiller V2.5.1.0 (Matrix Science, USA) and the peak lists were searched with Mascot V2.6.0 against an in-house database containing all Physcomitrella V3.3 protein models (doi: 10.1111/tpj.13801.) as well as the human FIX sequence (complete and alternative ones based on splicing). The peptide mass tolerance was set to 8 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021464 Da) was specified as fixed modification. Variable modifications were Gln->pyro-Glu (-17.026549 Da), oxidation/hydroxylation (M, P, +15.994915 Da) and deamidation (N, +0.984016 Da). A total of two missed cleavages was allowed as well as semitryptic peptides. Search results were loaded into Scaffold4 software (Version 4.11.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Production of biopharmaceuticals relies on the expression of mammalian cDNAs in host organisms. Here we show that the expression of a human cDNA in the moss Physcomitrium patens generates the expected full-length and four additional transcripts due to unexpected splicing. This mRNA splicing results in non-functional protein isoforms, cellular misallocation of the proteins and low product yields. We integrated these results together with the results of our analysis of all 32,926 protein-encoding Physcomitrella genes and their 87,533 annotated transcripts in a web application, physCO, for automatized optimization. A thus optimized cDNA results in about twelve times more protein, which correctly localizes to the ER. An analysis of codon preferences of different production hosts suggests that similar effects occur also in non-plant hosts. We anticipate that the use of our methodology will prevent so far undetected mRNA heterosplicing resulting in maximized functional protein amounts for basic biology and biotechnology.

### Keywords
Blood coagulation factor ix, Heterologous expression systems, Aberrant mrna-splicing, Physcomitrium patens

### Affiliations
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg (Chair Plant Biotechnology), Schaenzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Ralf Reski

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Reski
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany


