### Accession
PXD008525

### Title
Khib proteome in response to p300 KO

### Description
We used quantitative proteomics to characterize the p300-regulated lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome in wild type (WT) and p300 knockout (KO) cells.

### Sample Protocol
WT and p300 KO HCT116 cells were cultured in lysine-free DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, and with “heavy” lysine (13C615N2-Lys) or “light” lysine (12C614N2-Lys) (100 mg/L, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Tewksbury, MA). Equal amounts of proteins from WT and p300 KO HCT116 cells were mixed, tryptic digested, and separated into 6 fractions. Pan anti-Khib antibody (PTM Biolabs, Chicago, IL, catalogue number PTM-501) was used for the immunoaffinity enrichment. The enriched peptides were desalted by C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched by MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.3.0.5). All the data were searched against UniProt Human protein database (88,277 entries, http:// http://www.uniprot.org). Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, lysine acetylation, and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation were specified as variable modifications. FDR thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. The following peptides were considered as false positives and removed from our list: peptides identified from reverse or contaminant protein sequences, peptides with score below 40, site localization probability below 0.75, Kac or Khib sites on peptide C-terminus unless the peptide C-terminal was also the corresponding protein C-terminal. To ensure that the Khib level change in p300 KO cells is not caused by the protein level change, we quantified the protein expression levels. Briefly, the proteolytic peptides obtained in previous step were separated on preparative HPLC into 20 fractions, or separated into 12 fractions with SDS-PAGE. These samples were analyzed using the same procedures for the Khib peptides quantification. Then all the ratios of quantified Khib peptides were normalized by the ratios of their corresponding protein expression levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, P300

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago


