### Accession
PXD022190

### Title
Integrity of the short arm of nuclear pore Y-complex is required for mouse embryonic stem cell growth and differentiation

### Description
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are established players in cell division and differentiation. However studies on the contribution of individual NPC subunits to these processes are still scarce. Here we have used mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) to characterize the role of structural components of the NPCs, focusing on the short arm of the Y-complex that comprises Nup85, Seh1 and Nup43. We show that Seh1 and Nup43, although dispensable at the pluripotent stage, are required for normal cell growth rates at that stage and for mESC viability upon differentiation. Lack of Seh1 or Nup43 in mESCs is associated with a mild reduction of NPC density that is also observed when Seh1 interaction with Nup85 is impaired. Nevertheless, mESC proliferation and differentiation are not altered in these ∆E2-GFP-Nup85 mutants, indicating that it is the integrity of the Y-complex, rather than the number of NPCs, that is critical to ensure these processes.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down experiments:  Protein G beads were washed three times with Wash buffer (100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 25mM TRIS pH 7.5, 1mM DTT + protease inhibitor [Pi] solution); (bead centrifugations were performed at 500g 4°C). 90µL of beads were then incubated with 70µL of rabbit polyclonal anti-Nup107 or anti-Nup85 serum (listed in Table S4) or with a pre-immune rabbit serum as control, in 750µL wash buffer 2 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed 4 times with Wash buffer. In the meantime, lysates were prepared from WT or ∆E2-GFP-Nup85 mESCs by resuspending frozen pellets of 4•106 mESCs (~500μg total proteins) in 200 μl Lysis buffer (100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 25mM TRIS pH 7.5, 1mM DTT, Tween-20 0.5%, Triton-100 1.2%  + PI solution). Samples were vortexed and incubated 15 min on ice. 600µL of Dilution buffer (100mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 25mM TRIS pH 7.5, 1mM DTT, Tween-20 0.5%, + PI solution) was then added and samples were centrifuged at 16.000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was pre-cleared by a 1 hour incubation with Protein G beads equilibrated with wash buffer at 4°C.  The cleared supernatant (input) was then incubated for 2 hours at 4°C with 30μL of the control, anti-Nup107- or anti-Nup85-coated Protein G beads. After incubation, samples were centrifuged and washed 5 times in wash buffer. The samples were split in 2 and the proteins were then either eluted in 20μL of Laemmli and boiled 3 minutes for subsequent western blot analyses, or processed for mass-spectrometry analysis.  Samples preparation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis:  Proteins on beads were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in a 25-mM NH4HCO3 buffer (0.2 µg trypsin in 20 µL). The resulting peptides were desalted using ZipTip μ-C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA).  Samples were sent for Mass- spectrometry analysis:   ID 1719002 with date 2017-05-10 1719002-1  HM1 WT control serum 1719002-2 *  (Unpublished ) Ab Nup107 1719002-3 *  (Unpublished)  Ab Nup85 1719002-4  GFP-NUP85 Mutant Ab Nup107 1719002-5  GFP-NUP85 Mutant Ab Nup85 1719002-6  HM1 WT Ab Nup107 1719002-7  HM1 WT Ab Nup85 Note that samples 2 and 3 arose from a dubious mutant cell line that was not used  in this study.  LC-MS/MS acquisition: The samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1200 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (75 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 28 % solvent B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 105 minutes then to 40% of solvent B over a period of 120 minutes, followed by a column regeneration for 20 min, giving a total run time of 140 minutes. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4.105. Fragments were obtained by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in Ion trap in a Cycle time of 3 seconds in rapid mode, with an AGC target of 1.104, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. Peptides with unassigned charge states or monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS acquisition and 35 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with the mascot node (Mascot version 2.5.1) and the Swissprot protein database release 2017_06.  The Mus musculus taxonomy was used and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage was authorized. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da. The following Post-translational modifications were included as variable: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY). Spectra were filtered using a 1% FDR with the percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear pore, Cell growth, Mios, Nup85, Nup43, Nuclear size, Seh1, Nucleoporin, Cell differentiation, Mouse escs

### Affiliations
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592, CNRS and Paris University, France)
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592, CNRS and Paris University, France)


