### Accession
PXD011533

### Title
Glycoproteomics with AI-ETD -  Capturing site-specific heterogeneity with large-scale N-glycoproteome analysis

### Description
Protein glycosylation is a highly important, yet a poorly understood protein post-translational modification. Thousands of possible glycan structures and compositions create potential for tremendous site heterogeneity and analytical challenge. A lack of suitable analytical methods for large-scale analyses of intact glycopeptides has ultimately limited our abilities to both address the degree of heterogeneity across the glycoproteome and to understand how it contributes biologically to complex systems. Here we show that N-glycoproteome site-specific microheterogeneity can be captured at a global level via glycopeptide profiling with activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD), enabling characterization of nearly 2,100 N-glycosites (> 7,500 unique N-glycopeptides) from mouse brain tissue. Moreover, we have used this unprecedented scale of glycoproteomic data to develop several new visualizations that will prove useful for analyzing intact glycopeptides in future studies. Our data reveal that N-glycosylation profiles can differ between subcellular regions and structural domains and that N-glycosite heterogeneity manifests in several different forms, including dramatic differences in glycosites on the same protein.

### Sample Protocol
A whole mouse brain was homogenized in lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM tris) using a probe sonicator, and protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit. Tryptic digestion was performed by bringing 4 mg of mouse brain lysate to 90% methanol by volume, and proteins were precipitated by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 12,000 G. The supernatant was discarded, and the resultant protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and 100 mM tris pH 8. The sample was diluted with 100 mM tris to a final urea concentration of 1.5 M urea and digested with trypsin overnight at room temperature (1:50, enzyme/protein). Peptides were desalted using Strata X columns.  Following desalting, peptides were resuspended in 10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl (wash buffer) and were split into 4 equal mass equivalents. Each aliquot of tryptic peptide mixture was enriched for glycopeptides using 150 μL of agarose-bound concanavalin A (ConA). The ConA solution was added to the SigmaPrep spin column and washed with 500 μL of wash buffer three times. The agarose-bound ConA was then suspended in 500 μL wash buffer and transferred to the mixture of tryptic peptides, and rotated at ambient temperature for 2 hours. The sample was then washed five times with 500 μL wash buffer and glycopeptides were eluted with two 500 μL washes of elution buffer (0.2% TFA in water). Eluted glycopeptide enriched material from all four equivalents were desalted and combined. For de-glycan analyses, 20% of the total mixture was incubated at 37 °C with PNGaseF and fractionated into 16 high pH reversed phase fractions using a 1260 Infinity II HPLC with a 4.6 x 150 mm  XBridge C18 column and a 30 minute gradient (mobile phase A: 10 mM ammonium formate pH 10, mobile phase B: 80% ACN, 10 mM ammonium formate pH 10). The remaining 80% of the glyco-enriched sample was fractionated into 12 fractions. All samples were injected onto and separated over an in-house fabricated 75/360 μm I.D/O.D. bare fused silica capillary with an integrated nanoelectrospray tip and packed 30 cm with 1.7 μm, 130 Å, BEH C18 particles. The mobile phases (A: 0.2% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid) were driven and controlled by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system For intact glycopeptide analyses, two microliters of glycopeptides (10% of total sample) were injected onto the column and gradient elution was performed at 325 nL/min, B was increased to 4% over 6 min, followed by an increase to 53% at 75 min, a ramp to 99% B at 76 min, and a wash at 99% B for 3 min. The column was then re-equilibrated at 0% B for 10 min, for a total analysis of 90 minutes. All MS data was collected on a quadrupole-Orbitrap-linear ion trap hybrid MS system modified to perform AI-ETD as previously described. Precursors were ionized using a nanoelectrospray source held at +2 kV compared to ground and the inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected from 350-1800 Th with an AGC target of 400,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enable for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-8 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor. Priority was given for higher precursor charge states and lower precursor m/z values, and an isolation window of 2 Th was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole. MS/MS scans were collected in a higher-energy collision dissociation-product dependent-activated ion electron transfer dissociation manner (HCD-pd-AI-ETD), where MS/MS scans were collected using HCD at 28 normalized collision energy (nce) with an AGC target of 50,000 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and product ions were mass analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. If oxonium ions 204.0867, 138.0545, or 366.1396 were present in the top 20 fragment ions, an AI-ETD scan was triggered for that precursor ion. For the triggered AI-ETD scans, calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters were enabled to determine ETD reagent ion AGC and ETD reaction times,60 a laser power of 18 W was used, the laser was on for the duration of the ETD reaction only (adding no time to the standard ETD scan cycle), and product ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
A focused protein database was created from the de-glycopeptide data by searching the data with Byonic. A mass tolerance of ±10 ppm was used for precursors, monoisotopic mass tolerance was set to ±0.4 Da for product ions, and HCD fragmentation type was selected. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine were specified as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a set as a fixed modification. Trypsin specificity allowing for < 3 missed cleavages was used and spectra was searched against a UniProt mouse (mus musculus) database (canonical and isoforms) downloaded on May 12, 2016, which was concatenated with a reversed sequence version of the forward database. Results were filtered at a 1% protein FDR, and a focused database was made of proteins that were identified with at least one peptide that had both a deamidated asparagine modification and the N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T, where X is any residue but proline) present (a total of 3,574 proteins). Intact glycopeptide data were also searched with Byonic by converting .raw files to .mgf files using MSConvert.62 The focused protein database described above and a glycan database of 182 mammalian N-glycans compiled from literature sources were used. N-glycosylation was set as a variable modification, and each glycan was only allowed to be used once per identified peptide (common1 setting). Oxidation of methionine was set as a common variable modification (common2) and conversion of glutamine and glutamate residues to pyroglutamate were set as rare variable modifications (rare1). A total of three common and one rare modification were allowed per identification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a set as a fixed modification. Trypsin specificity was used with three missed cleavages allowed, and the mass tolerance settings were ±10 ppm and ±20 ppm for precursor and product ions, respectively. The fragmentation type was set to EThcD (no AI-ETD option exists). Results were filtered at a 1% protein FDR, and data was further processed using in-house scripts written in C#, some of which used the C# Mass Spectrometry Library (CSMSL, https://github.com/-dbaileychess/CSMSL). Further processing included setting a 1% FDR at the peptide spectral match level (Byonic typically retains identifications that are above the 1% FDR cutoff but pass protein FDR, especially for glycopeptides), removing identifications that had a Byonic Score below 50, and setting a threshold for peptide length at 5 residues or greater. This allowed for an estimated 1.1% FDR at the glycopeptide spectral match level (i.e., specifically counting the number of target and decoy hits that are glycopeptides and not including non-modified sequences). A further filtering step was added that only allowed for identifications with a Delta Mod Score of 10 or greater, which removed all decoy hits, and this pool of filtered identifications comprises the reported identifications in the manuscript. Note, Byonic only considers glycopeptide identifications for peptides with the N-X-S/T sequon. It is important to note that glycopeptide identification remains challenging with automated methods due to difficulties associated with calculating accurate FDRs. Using the four steps of filtering here was our attempt to best control false discovery rates in large-scale glycopeptide analyses, although this is still an area of development in the field. Our 1.1% estimated FDR prior to our final DeltaMod score filtering, which left no decoy hits in the final dataset used, indicates a promising level of FDR mediation. That said, the data presented here are still subject to the challenges of glycopeptide FDR estimation. Supplemental Figure 3 provides a distribution of identified glycopeptide masses in addition to the masses of the peptide and glycan moieties separately. Note, structural information about glycans cannot yet be reliably discerned from AI-ETD spectra (although this is under investigation), so we report only compositional information about glycans here (as is standard in high-throughput intact glycopeptide analyses). Overlap in glycosites from this study and two deglycoproteomic experiments were performed from Zielinska et al. and Fang et al. studies. Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID66 with a mouse brain proteome as the background. The Byonic search files can be viewed with the free Byonic viewer available through the Protein Metrics website, which allows viewing of identifications and annotated spectra. 

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is a highly important, yet poorly understood protein post-translational modification. Thousands of possible glycan structures and compositions create potential for tremendous site heterogeneity. A lack of suitable analytical methods for large-scale analyses of intact glycopeptides has limited our abilities both to address the degree of heterogeneity across the glycoproteome and to understand how this contributes biologically to complex systems. Here we show that N-glycoproteome site-specific microheterogeneity can be captured via large-scale glycopeptide profiling methods enabled by activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD), ultimately characterizing 1,545 N-glycosites (&gt;5,600 unique N-glycopeptides) from mouse brain tissue. Our data reveal that N-glycosylation profiles can differ between subcellular regions and structural domains and that N-glycosite heterogeneity manifests in several different forms, including dramatic differences in glycosites on the same protein. Moreover, we use this large-scale glycoproteomic dataset to develop several visualizations that will prove useful for analyzing intact glycopeptides in future studies.

### Keywords
Electron transfer dissociation, Glycosylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Stanford University
University of Wisconsin, Departments of Chemistry and Biomolecular Chemistry Morgridge Institute for Research

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J. Coon
University of Wisconsin, Departments of Chemistry and Biomolecular Chemistry Morgridge Institute for Research


