### Accession
PXD027288

### Title
Dynamic re-configuration of pro-apoptotic BAK on membranes

### Description
BAK and BAX, the effectors of intrinsic apoptosis, undergo major reconfiguration to an activated conformer that self-associates to damage mitochondria and cause cell death. However, the dynamic structural mechanisms that describe this reconfiguration in the presence of a membrane have yet to be fully elucidated. To explore the metamorphosis of membrane-bound BAK, we employed hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) on liposomes comprising mitochondrial lipids. The HDX-MS profile of BAK on a membrane was broadly consistent with the known solution structures of inactive BAK. Following activation, HDX-MS resolved major reconfigurations in BAK. Mutagenesis led by our HDX-MS profiling revealed that the BCL-2 homology (BH) 4 domain maintains BAK in its inactive conformation and disrupting this was sufficient for constitutive BAK activation. Moreover, the entire BAK N-terminus that precedes the BAK oligomerisation domains became disordered post-activation and remained disordered in the activated oligomer. Cleavage of the N-terminus potentiated BAK-mediated membrane permeabilisation on liposomes and mitochondria. Together, HDX-MS reveals new insights into the dynamic nature of BAK activating conformation change in a membrane that will reveal new opportunities for therapeutic targeting.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS was performed essentially as previously described (Robin et al, 2018). Recombinant BAK-6H (mBAKΔC21/6His) on liposomes was diluted 20-fold in deuterated buffer containing PBS pH 7.5 at room temperature. Aliquots were taken at multiple time points (10 sec, 60 sec, 10 min, 30 min) with the hydrogen/deuterium exchange reaction suppressed by acidification of the sample to pH 2.5 using formic acid before snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen. Digestion of the protein was carried out by thawing the sample in a 10-fold dilution of H2O before addition of an equimolar concentration of pepsin (Sigma, USA) for 5 min on ice. Peptides were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a dual pump (capillary for sample loading and nano flow for analytical) 1100 series HPLC (Agilent, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo, USA). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed, reverse phase trap column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany), 2 mm x 2 mm, 5 m particle) before separation on an in-house packed, reverse phase analytical column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH), 200 mm x 150 m, 3 m particle) housed at 1oC. Peptides were loaded onto the trap column at 5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid and elution performed using a gradient rising from 5% to 40% acetonitrile over 15 minutes, then 85% acetonitrile for 5 min before reconditioning the column at 5% acetonitrile for 15 min. Spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with m/z range from 250-1850.

### Data Protocol
Experiments were performed as experimental replicates (three independent exchange time courses with one batch of protein). Deuteration of peptides was determined by analysis of samples using HDX workbench, as previously described (Pascal et al, 2012). Additional analysis of HDX workbench output was performed using in-house scripts written in R (version 3.3.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bak, Hdx, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
WEHI
Laboratory Head Ubiquitin Signalling Division

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Grant Dewson
Laboratory Head Ubiquitin Signalling Division


