### Accession
PXD033485

### Title
Dissociation of β2m from MHC Class I triggers formation of noncovalent, transient heavy chain dimers

### Description
At the plasma membrane of mammalian cells, major histocompatibility complex class I molecules (MHC-I) present antigenic peptides to cytotoxic T cells. Following the loss of the peptide and the light chain beta-2 microglobulin (beta2m), the resulting free heavy chains (FHCs) can associate into homotypic complexes in the plasma membrane. Here, we investigate the stoichiometry and dynamics of MHC-I FHCs assemblies by combining a micropattern assay with fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) and with single molecule co-tracking. We identify non-covalent MHC-I FHC dimers mediated by the alpha-3 domain as the prevalent species at the plasma membrane, leading a moderate decrease in the diffusion coefficient. MHC-I FHC dimers show increased tendency to cluster into higher order oligomers as concluded from an increased immobile fraction with higher single molecule colocalization. In vitro studies with isolated proteins in conjunction with molecular docking and dynamics simulations suggest that in the complexes, the alpha-3 domain of one FHC binds to another FHC in a manner similar to the beta2m light chain.

### Sample Protocol
In advance of native MS measurements, a small amount (<1%) of covalent dimers of the alpha-3 domain, which had formed as side product during refolding, were removed by size exclusion chromatography on Superdex 75 10/300 GL (Cytiva). Amicon Ultra 0.5 mL centrifugal filter units (molecular weight cut-off 3 kDa; Merck Millipore) were used at 14,000 x g and 4 °C to exchange purified protein samples to 150 mM ammonium acetate (99.99 %; Sigma- Aldrich), pH 7.2. The final concentration of the alpha-3 domain monomer was 5 μM, 10 μM or 20 μM. Native MS analysis was implemented on a Q-Tof II mass spectrometer in positive electrospray ionization mode. The instrument was modified to enable high mass experiments (Waters and MS Vision, (van den Heuvel et al., 2006)). Sample ions were introduced into the vacuum using homemade capillaries via a nano-electrospray ionization source in positive ion mode (source pressure: 10 mbar). Borosilicate glass tubes (inner diameter: 0.68 mm, outer diameter: 1.2 mm; World Precision Instruments) were pulled into closed capillaries in a twostep program using a squared box filament (2.5 mm × 2.5 mm) within a micropipette puller (P-1000, Sutter Instruments). The capillaries were then gold-coated using a sputter coater (5.0 × 10-2 mbar, 30.0 mA, 100 s, 3 runs to vacuum limit 3.0 × 10-2 mbar argon, distance of plate holder: 5 cm; CCU-010, safematic). Capillaries were opened directly on the sample cone of the mass spectrometer. In regular MS mode, spectra were recorded at a capillary voltage of 1.45 kV and a cone voltage of 100 V to 150 V. Protein species with quaternary structure were assigned by MS/MS analysis. These experiments were carried out using argon as collision gas (1.2 × 10-2 mbar). The acceleration voltage ranged from 10 V to 100 V. Comparability of results was ensured as MS quadrupole profiles and pusher settings were kept constant in all measurements. A spectrum of cesium iodide (25 g/L) was recorded on the same day of the particular measurement to calibrate the data.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were evaluated regarding experimental mass (MassLynx V4.1, Waters) and area under the curve (AUC; UniDec (Marty et al., 2015)) of the detected mass species. The values of the shown averaged masses and AUC of the different species as well as the corresponding standard deviation result from at least three independent measurements.

### Publication Abstract
At the plasma membrane of mammalian cells, major histocompatibility complex class I molecules (MHC-I) present antigenic peptides to cytotoxic T cells. Following the loss of the peptide and the light chain beta-2 microglobulin (&#x3b2;2m, encoded by B2M), the resulting free heavy chains (FHCs) can associate into homotypic complexes in the plasma membrane. Here, we investigate the stoichiometry and dynamics of MHC-I FHCs assemblies by combining a micropattern assay with fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) and with single-molecule co-tracking. We identify non-covalent MHC-I FHC dimers, with dimerization mediated by the &#x3b1;3 domain, as the prevalent species at the plasma membrane, leading a moderate decrease in the diffusion coefficient. MHC-I FHC dimers show increased tendency to cluster into higher order oligomers as concluded from an increased immobile fraction with higher single-molecule colocalization. In vitro studies with isolated proteins in conjunction with molecular docking and dynamics simulations suggest that in the complexes, the &#x3b1;3 domain of one FHC binds to another FHC in a manner similar to that seen for &#x3b2;2m.

### Keywords
Human, Mhc class i, Native ms, Hla-a, Dimerization

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute for Virology (LIV), Germany; Centre for Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), Germany; University of Siegen, Germany; Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Germany; European XFEL GmbH, Germany.
CSSB Centre for Structural Systems Biology

### Submitter
Janine-Denise Kopicki

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Leibniz Institute for Virology (LIV), Germany; Centre for Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), Germany; University of Siegen, Germany; Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Germany; European XFEL GmbH, Germany.


