### Accession
PXD013288

### Title
Histone PTM profiling during the cell cycle

### Description
To investigate how histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) change during the cell cycle, we profiled histone H3 and histone H4 in breast cancer and normal breast cell lines arrested in G1/S or G2/M phases.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 and MCF10A cells were arrested in G1/S phase by incubating subconfluent cells for 38 and 24 hours, respectively, in growing media supplemented with 5 mM thymidine. MDA-MB-231 were arrested in G1/S phase by performing a double thymidine block consisting in 18h of incubation in growing medium supplemented with 3.5 mM thymidine, 9 hours of release and 24 hours of re-incubation with 3.5 mM thymidine. To arrest the cells in G2/M phase, subconfluent MCF7, MCF10A and MDA-MB-231 were incubated for 24 hours in growing media supplemented with 5 mM thymidine. Cells were then released for three hours and incubated for 20 hours (MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells) or 15 hours (MCF10A) in medium containing 100 ng/ml nocodazole. Cell-cycle profiles of synchronized cell lines were verified by flow cytometry according to propidium iodide content.  Histone were enriched from the cell lines by resuspending 0.5-2*106 cells in 1 ml of PBS buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors. Nuclei were isolated through a 10-min centrifugation at 2300×g, resuspended in the same buffer containing 0.1% SDS and incubated for few minutes at 37°C in the presence of 250 U of benzonase (Merk Millipore) to digest nucleic acids.  About 5 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount ofsuper-SILAC mix and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. Bands corresponding to histone H3 were excised, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride, in-gel digested with trypsin (the combination of chemical alkylation and trypsin digestion generates an “Arg-C-like” digestion). Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter  75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which were connected online  to a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through  or an EASY-Spray™ Ion Sources (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50 to 100-min linear gradient of 0–40% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. One missed cleavage was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications for in-gel digestions included lysine D6-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine monomethylation (+ 59.0454, corresponding to the sum of D6-acetylation (+45.0294) and monomethylation (+14.016 Da)), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da). To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search, the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs, setting different combinations of variable modifications, as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Cell proliferation, Lc/ms, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, Milan


