### Accession
PXD006991

### Title
Pig novel protein from multiple tissues

### Description
We identified 24,431 protein isoforms encoded by 19,914 genes across 34 normal tissues using high-resolution mass spectrometry. This includes 7,693 protein isoforms corresponding to 5,875 genes which were firstly detected in current study.

### Sample Protocol
34 pig tissues were histologically confirmed to be normal and healthy by an experienced pathologist. Then, all these samples were snap frozen within the first 20 minutes after slaughter and stored in liquid nitrogen (-196°C) until usage. PBMC were isolated using Ficoll-Hypaque PLUS (GE Healthcare), following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the whole blood was first diluted by an equal volume of phosphate buffer solution (PBS). Then, 20 ml of diluted blood was carefully added on top of 10 ml of Ficoll-Hypaque solution in a 50 ml conical tube and centrifuged at 460 g for 20 min at room temperature. After centrifugation, the middle whitish interface containing mononuclear cells was transferred to a new tube, and washed by PBS followed by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 10 min twice. Fresh pig frozen tissue was thawed, cut into small pieces and extensively washed with precooled phosphate buffered saline. A pool of equally amount tissues from three unrelated pigs was homogenized and sonicated in cold lysis buffer. Extraction of 100 μg protein using protein extraction buffer (8 M urea, 0.1% SDS) containing additional 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, USA) on ice for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and determined with BCA assay (Pierce, USA) and 10-20% SDS-PAGE. The cell lysis was stored at -80°C before LC-MS analysis Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a reversed phase chromatography on a DIONEX nano-UPLC system using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 nano-Trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, USA). Before loading, the sample was dissolved in sample buffer, containing 4% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were washed with 97% mobile phase A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) for concentration and desalting. Subsequently, peptides were eluted over 85 min using a linear gradient of 3–80% mobile phase B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: 3% B for 5 min; 3–5% B for 1 min; 5–18% B for 42 min; 18–25% B for 11 min; 25–30% B for 3 min; 30–80% B for 1 min; hold at 80% B for 5 min; 80–3% B for 0.5 min; and then hold at 3% B for 21.5 min. High mass resolution and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was employed for peptide identification. The nano-LC was coupled online with the Q Exactive mass spectrometer using a stainless steel emitter coupled to a nanospray ion source. The eluent was sprayed via stainless steel emitters at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 320°C. The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in a data dependent manner with full scans (350-1,600 m/z) acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z on Q Exactive using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1×106 charges. All the tandem mass spectra were produced by HCD. Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS from each duty cycle and detected at a mass resolution of 17,500 at m/z of 400 in Orbitrap analyser using an AGC target value of 2×105 charges. The maximum injection time for MS2 was 100 ms and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the pig databases (UniProt, De novo, Assembly, Ab initio database) and the cRAP database (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins; download date: 07 Jul 2015; 116 sequences) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin.   The high resolution peaklist files were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) prior to database search. X!Tandem was set up to search a subset of the pig databases, also assuming trypsin. The target-decoy option of Mascot and X!Tandem were enabled (decoy database with reversed protein sequences). Mascot and X! Tandem were used to search with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be achieve a FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm(Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.   In the database searching workflow, unmatched MS/MS spectra generated from the Uniport database search were then searched against next level protein database (De novo, Assembly, Ab initio).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multi-tissues, Ls-mcmc, Pig

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University
China Agricultural University (West Campus)  College of Animal Science and Technology

### Submitter
Jian-Feng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Feng Liu
China Agricultural University (West Campus)  College of Animal Science and Technology


