### Accession
PXD021529

### Title
Identification of RPA1 interactome in mouse liver tissue

### Description
To examine the molecular mechanisms by which RPA1 regulates transcription in liver, we conducted immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry to characterize RPA1-associated proteins in mouse liver.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293FT cells were transfected with Vector-control or Flag-tagged RPA1 and harvested 36 hours after transfection. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.5% (v/v) NP40, 1 mM EDTA] with brief sonication. Cell lysates were incubated with ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (A2220, Sigma) for 2 hours at 4°C. Precipitants were washed three times with lysis buffer and followed by incubation with mouse liver homogenate for 4 hours. The beads were washed for another 4 times with lysis buffer and the bounded proteins were eluted with 3X FLAG® Peptide (F4799, Sigma). Potential interacting proteins were identified with mass spectrum analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were acquired with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). Fragmentation was performed by high-energy collision dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation time, 0.1 ms) with a target value of 50,000 ions. The raw files were searched with the SEQUEST engine against a database from the Uniprot protein sequence database. Parameters were set as follows: protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed), oxidation (M) (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin; amaximum missed cleavages were set to 2; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disease, with a prevalence of 25% worldwide. However, the underlying molecular mechanism involved in the development and progression of the NAFLD spectrum remains unclear. Single-stranded DNA-binding protein replication protein A1 (RPA1) participates in DNA replication, recombination, and damage repair. Here, we show that Rpa1<sup>+/-</sup> mice develop fatty liver disease during aging and in response to a high-fat diet. Liver-specific deletion of Rpa1 results in downregulation of genes related to fatty acid oxidation and impaired fatty acid oxidation, which leads to hepatic steatosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Mechanistically, RPA1 binds gene regulatory regions, chromatin-remodeling factors, and HNF4A and remodels chromatin architecture, through which RPA1 promotes HNF4A transcriptional activity and fatty acid &#x3b2; oxidation. Collectively, our data demonstrate that RPA1 is an important regulator of NAFLD through controlling chromatin accessibility.

### Keywords
Interactome, Mouse liver, Rpa1

### Affiliations
Peking University
Institute of Systems Biomedicine Peking University Health Science Center Beijing 100191, P.R. China

### Submitter
Qi Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxin Yin
Institute of Systems Biomedicine Peking University Health Science Center Beijing 100191, P.R. China


