### Accession
PXD024604

### Title
Chd1 regulates repair of promoter-proximal DNA breaks to sustain hypertranscription in embryonic stem cells

### Description
Stem and progenitor cells undergo a global elevation of nascent transcription, or hypertranscription, during key developmental transitions involving rapid cell proliferation. The chromatin remodeler Chd1 binds to RNA Pol I and II genes and is required for hypertranscription in embryonic stem (ES) cells in vitro and the early post-implantation epiblast in vivo. Biochemically, Chd1 has been shown to facilitate transcription at least in part by removing nucleosomal barriers to elongation, but its mechanism of action in stem cells remains poorly understood. Here we report a novel role for Chd1 in the repair of promoter-proximal endogenous double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) in ES cells. An unbiased proteomics approach revealed that Chd1 interacts with several DNA repair factors including ATM, Parp1, Kap1 and Topoisomerase 2. We show that wild-type ES cells display high levels of phosphorylated H2AX and Kap1 at chromatin, notably at rDNA in the nucleolus, in a Chd1-dependent manner. Loss of Chd1 leads to an extensive accumulation of DSBs at Chd1 target Pol II genes and rDNA. Genes prone to DNA breaks in Chd1-null ES cells tend to be longer genes with GC-rich promoters, a more labile nucleosomal structure and roles in chromatin organization, transcription and signaling. These results reveal a vulnerability of hypertranscribing stem cells to endogenous DNA breaks, with important implications for developmental and cancer biology.

### Sample Protocol
Chd1-Flag knock-in, Chd1fl/ and Chd1/ ES cells were used.Cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments prior to immunoprecipitation. For cytoplasmic extracts, cells were lysed in Buffer A (10mM Hepes pH7.9, 5mM MgCl2, 0.25M Sucrose and 0.1% NP-40 supplemented with 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78425), 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM NaF and 1 mM NaVO4) and were centrifuged for 10 min, 4400 rpm at 4oC. For nuclear extracts, the resulting pellets were resuspended in buffer B (10mM Hepes pH 7.9, 1mM MgCl2, 0.1mM EDTA, 25% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100 and 0.5M NaCl supplemented with 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78425), 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM NaF and 1 mM NaVO4) and homogenized by passing through 18Gx1 1/2’’ size needles. Nuclear extracts were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (23225). For immunoprecipitation, 100 g of extract was adjusted to 500 l total volume and 150 mM final NaCl concentration, and incubated in the presence of 20 l pre-washed Protein A or G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1002D or 1004D) and  the following antibodies: Flag (Sigma, F1804), Kap1 (Abcam, ab22553), Atm phospho S1981 (Active Motif, 39529), Atr (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-1887), Parp1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-25780), Top2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-13059), Xrcc1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-11429). Beads were washed three times in buffer B, then boiled in 2x Laemmli Buffer with 5% -mercaptoethanol. Western blot was performed as described below. IP- Mass Spectrometry Chd1-Flag ES cells were lysed and processed as above. For mass spectrometry, Flag IP and beads control were run on a denaturing gel. Gel was stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue. IP and control lanes were cut into 10 pieces avoiding light and heavy antibody chains and frozen until processed for mass spectrometry.Acquisition using LCMS.

### Data Protocol
Analysis using mouse swissprot database using Proteme Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse stem cell orbitrap immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada

### Submitter
Andrew Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Ramalho-Santos
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada


