### Accession
PXD019763

### Title
Sirt2 Inhibition Reprograms T Cell Metabolism to Confer Superior Anti-Tumor Immunity

### Description
Dysregulated metabolism is a key driver of maladaptive tumor-reactive T lymphocytes within the tumor microenvironment (TME). Actionable mechanisms that rescue the effector activity of anti-tumor T cells in a metabolically restricted TME remain elusive. Here, we report that the Sirtuin-2 (Sirt2) protein deacetylase functions as a master metabolic checkpoint that inhibits T cell metabolic fitness and impairs T cell effector functions and anti-tumor immunity. Mechanistically, Sirt2 suppresses glycolysis and oxidative-phosphorylation (OxPhos) by deacetylating key enzymes involved in glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid (TCA)-cycle, fatty acid oxidation (FAO) and glutaminolysis. Accordingly, Sirt2-deficient T cells exhibit a hyper-metabolic activity with increased glycolysis and OxPhos, resulting in enhanced proliferation and effector functions at tumor beds and subsequently exhibiting superior anti-tumor activity. Importantly, pharmacologic inhibition of Sirt2 endows human lung tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) with these superior metabolic fitness and enhanced effector functions. Furthermore, upregulation of Sirt2 expression in human TILs negatively correlates with response to Nivolumab and TIL therapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our findings unveil Sirt2 as an unexpected actionable target for reprogramming T cell metabolism to augment a broad spectrum of cancer immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) coupled to an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (100 μm ID x 2 cm in length packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 μm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 min with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 μm ID x 25 cm in length, 2 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, Dionex). The 90-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 min, solvent B(90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 min, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 min and held at 90% for 5 min, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 min. The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using 15 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, both MASCOT(Perkins et al., 1999) and SEQUEST(Eng et al., 1994) search algorithms were used to identify proteins from IP samples. The results were summarized in Scaffold (proteomesoftware.com). MaxQuant(Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.2.2.5) was used to identify and quantify relative intensities of acetyllysine containing peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation, Sirt2, T cells, Anti-tumor immunity

### Affiliations
Immunology and Radiation Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Sungjune Kim, MD/PhD
Immunology and Radiation Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


