### Accession
PXD025863

### Title
Macaca fascicularis liver LC-MS/MS

### Description
In order to develop new safe and potent therapeutics, insights into the mechanisms underlying diabetes mellitus are urgently needed. We used proteomics profiling of the liver tissue from Macaca fascicularis with spontaneously occurred diabetes mellitus at their middle age and including two groups of the monkeys fed with the same food and high-fat and high-sugar diet for comparison.We hoped to find something new for diabetes mellitus treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue sample was ground into a powder in liquid nitrogen and mixed with 4 volumes (v/w) of lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The mixture was sonicated three times (30 s each time, 2 s gap) on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. After that, trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the same volume of each sample to a final concentration of 20%. After 1 min vortex, the samples were placed still at 4 °C for 2 h, followed by 5 min centrifuge at 4500 ×g. The protein pellets were washed with pre-cooled acetone three times and completed dried with nitrogen blow. The dried pellets were subsequently resuspended in 200 ml of TEAB with ultrasonication. Trypsin was then added at a 1:50 (trypsin:protein, w/w) ratio for digestion overnight. The tryptic peptide solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C, followed by 15 min of alkylation with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in darkness. The peptides were then separated with C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried for LC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed by coupling a NanoElute and timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). The tryptic peptide sample was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (solvent A) and directly loaded onto the NanoLC-MS/MS platform. A constant flow rate of 450 nl/min was used for the LC system and the solvent B of mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, with a gradient from 4% to 22% in 0~70 min, 22% to 30% in 70~84 min, 30% to 80% in 84~87 min, and holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The peptides were subjected to a glass capillary ion source with an electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV for tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The data were collected in parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode in which one MS full scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans with 30 s dynamic exclusion was used. Both the precursor ions and fragment ions were analyzed with high-resolution TOF. The peptide precursors of changes from +1 to +5 were detected in a scan range from 100 to 1700.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data for proteomics were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant search engine (Ver 1.6.6.0). MS2 were searched against the Macaca fascicularis (UP000233100_9541,  46,259 sequences) from the Uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org/) concatenating with the contaminants database. Target-decay search strategy was applied with decoy databases of reversed sequences. The search parameters were specified as following: cleavage enzyme, Trypsin/P; missing cleavages, up to 2; the mass tolerances for precursor ions, 20 ppm in both the first search and the main search; the mass tolerance for fragment ions, 20 ppm; fixed modification, Carbamidomethyl on cysteine; variable modifications, acetylation at protein N-terminus, oxidation on methionine, and deamidation on both N-terminus and glutamine. False discovery rate, or say FDR, for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein identification were both 1%. The quantification method was set as LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of diabetes mellitus has been increasing for decades worldwide. To develop safe and potent therapeutics, animal models contribute a lot to the studies of the mechanisms underlying its pathogenesis. Dietary induction using is a well-accepted protocol in generating insulin resistance and diabetes models. In the present study, we reported the multi-omics profiling of the liver and sera from both peripheral blood and hepatic portal vein blood from <i>Macaca fascicularis</i> that spontaneously developed Type-2 diabetes mellitus with a chow diet (sDM). The other two groups of the monkeys fed with chow diet and high-fat high-sugar (HFHS) diet, respectively, were included for comparison. Analyses of various omics datasets revealed the alterations of high consistency. Between the sDM and HFHS monkeys, both the similar and unique alterations in the lipid metabolism have been demonstrated from metabolomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data repeatedly. The comparison of the proteome and transcriptome confirmed the involvement of fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) in the diet-induced pathogenesis of diabetes in macaques. Furthermore, the commonly changed genes between spontaneous diabetes and HFHS diet-induced prediabetes suggested that the alterations in the intra- and extracellular structural proteins and cell migration in the liver might mediate the HFHS diet induction of diabetes mellitus.

### Keywords
Macaca fascicularis. spontaneous diabetes mellitus. lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Dianqiang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Shuhai Lin
School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.


