### Accession
PXD011129

### Title
PRM detection of NEDD4-2 in human IPF and control tissue

### Description
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease that shares key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome.

### Sample Protocol
For parallel reaction monitoring of Nedd4-2, cryo-preserved surgical lung biopsies from IPF patients and controls were ground as described above and lysed in 8 M Urea. Samples were prepared as described for Pirfenidone-treated mice. Standard peptides unique for NEDD 4-2 (listed below) labeled with 15N13C6 Leucine (PSL GmbH) were spiked in after sample preparation at the amount of 2 fmol/peptide. Samples were measured using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by direct injection into a 30 cm 75 µm inner diameter column (New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). A two-hour gradient (10 min to 8% ACN, 90 min to 28% ACN  20 min to 48% ACN) was used. A full scan at resolution of 120,000 was followed by 6 DIA scans at the resolution of 30,000 targeting the 6 peptides specific for Nedd4-2 listed below. Ion collection time was set to 400 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using Skyline version 4.1.0.18169. 6-7 fragment ions were extracted per peptide. The cumulative peak area from these transitions was used to calculate the ratio between the heavy and the light form of each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 (Nedd4l) in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease sharing key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome. NEDD4-2 is implicated in the regulation of the epithelial Na<sup>+</sup> channel critical for proper airway surface hydration and mucus clearance and the regulation of TGF&#x3b2; signaling, which promotes fibrotic remodeling. Our data support a role of mucociliary dysfunction and aberrant epithelial pro-fibrotic response in the multifactorial disease pathogenesis. Further, treatment with the anti-fibrotic drug pirfenidone reduced pulmonary fibrosis in this model. This model may therefore aid studies of the pathogenesis and therapy of IPF.

### Keywords
Nedd4-2, Ipf

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


