### Accession
PXD020255

### Title
Proteomic analysis of adipose depots after intermittent fasting reveals visceral fat preservation mechanisms

### Description
Objectives Intermittent fasting is an effective dietary intervention to combat metabolic disease. Here, we explore the adipose depot specific response to every-other-day fasting (EODF) in mice to identify mechanisms that underly the beneficial effects. Methods Male C57BL/6J mice were placed on a 12-day EODF or ad libitum diet, after which tissues were harvested including visceral (vWAT) and subcutaneous (scWAT) white adipose tissue, as well as brown adipose tissue (BAT), which was then analysed by unbiased mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Results After EODF treatment, pathway enrichment analysis of our dataset showed that both WAT depots showed increased mitochondrial protein content, with scWAT also showing increased UCP1, but mitochondrial protein content was decreased in BAT. This effect on mitochondria is correlated to the increased abundance of proteins involved in glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism, the TCA cycle and fatty acid synthesis in both WAT depots. Furthermore, EODF-treated mice downregulated the lipolysis pathway in vWAT including a 5-fold decrease in the abundance of the beta3 adrenergic receptor (ADRB3). Enrichment analysis lso revealed that vWAT of EODF treated mice had significantly reduced ECM proteins, which lowers the inflammatory potential of this organ. Our adipose depot proteomic survey also allowed us to identify depot-enriched protein expression, such as the vWAT enrichment for the AKAP12 protein related to PKA signalling that was down-regulated by EODF treatment. Conclusions These findings show how the adipose depots have adapted to the EODF regime to preserve the lipid store, with the most striking changes occurring in the vWAT depot to downregulate the lipolysis pathway and induce expression of pathways needed for fatty acid synthesis. This substrate cycling and reduced inflammatory potential of the adipose tissue may contribute to the improved insulin sensitivity observed in these animals.

### Sample Protocol
2.7 Tissue collection Between 0850 -1050 h, mice were sacrificed using CO2 suffocation, and adipose tissue excised in the order: both epididymal fat pads, abdominal subcutaneous adipose then interscapular brown adipose tissue. All tissues were immediately snap frozen using LN2. 2.8 Sample preparation of adipose tissue for protein mass-spectrometry Frozen adipose tissue was lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 10mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) at RT using an Ultra-Turrax T8 stick homogensier (IKA ® - Werke) to blend the tissue prior to immediate heating of the lysates to 95oC for at least 10 min. Then, lysates were sonicated at 70% amplitude for 15:15 s pulses for 10 min on-time at RT using a Q800R2 sonicator (QSonica, Connecticut, USA). Lysates were clarified by chloroform-methanol precipitation (see 2.9). 2.9 Chloroform-methanol precipitation Protein lysates post-sonication were clarified by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Where, 1-part (200uL) lysate was mixed with 4-parts (800uL) methanol and vortexed for 1 min. Next, 2-part (400ul) chloroform was added and vortexed for 1 min. Lastly, 3-parts (600ul) MQ water were added and vortexed until solution was completely milk-white. Solution was centrifuged at 7,000 x g for 5 min, if solution was still cloudy, centrifugation was repeated. The top aqueous phase was aspirated until 1cm above the protein suspension and 3-parts (600ul) methanol was added and the solution vortexed for 1 min. Centrifugation was repeated at 7,000 x g for 5 min, if solution was still cloudy, repeat centrifugation until clear. All liquid was carefully aspirated, and protein pellet air-dried in a recycling fume hood for 5 min. Pellet was resuspended in 4% SDC and 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) prior to heating to 95oC for at least 30 min or until most of the pellet was resuspended. Lysate was then clarified by centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 min and supernatant taken for subsequent steps. 2.10 Trypsin digestion for proteome analysis Protein concentration was determined by BCA total protein assay (Pierce) or CBQCA total protein assay (ThermoFisher). 20ug of protein was reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with 40mM chloroacetamide simultaneously at 95oC for 1 h. Lysates were then diluted to a final concentration of 1% SDC using MQ water and digested overnight with 400ng MS-grade trypsin (in 50mM acetic acid) at 37oC with constant rocking. Samples were diluted with ethyl acetate (50% final concentration, v/v) and vortexed until all the precipitated SDC was resuspended. StageTips were prepared and sample purification performed as done previously [40], with the addendum that only the top aqueous phase of the sample was added to the StageTips. Peptides were reconstituted with 5% formic acid in MS-grade water, sealed and stored at 4oC until LC-MS/MS acquisition. 2.12 Protein LC-MS/MS and spectra analysis Peptide samples prepared as in 2.8, were directly injected onto a 30cm x 70 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 um) fused silica analytical column with a 10 um pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over a gradient from 5% - 40% acetonitrile over 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. MS/MS analysis was performed using either a Q-Exactive HFX or Q-Exactive Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) with HCD fragmentation. Spectra were attained in a data-dependent acquisition of the top 20 most abundant ions at any individual point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files including the high pH fractions were analysed using the integrated quantitative proteomics software and search engine MaxQuant [42] (version 1.6.14). A false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy was used for protein and peptide identification with protein filtering such that all proteins must have >2 razor and unique peptides. The database provided to the search engine for identification contained the Uniprot mouse database downloaded on the 5th of May, 2020 alongside the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS-2 mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, pyro-Glu, carbamidomethylation of Cys, N-ethylmaleimide modification of Cys and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. There were no fixed modifications. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment [43; 44]. Data was processed as in 2.13. 2.13 Statistical analysis The animal number required for each treatment group was established based for prior intermittent fasting studies [41]. All proteomics data was analysed using R (version 3.6.1) and plotted using Tableau (version 2019.1.2), outliers greater than 1.5 times the inter-quartile range were excluded for some plots to aid visualisation. Fold changes were calculated based on median values on a per group basis. Imputation was used for statistical analysis where the mean and standard deviation was determined for each protein using the three lowest values which was used to impute values for proteins. A protein was imputed if the protein was detected in 1 or 2 out of 5 samples in a condition and detected in >3 samples in every other condition [45]. Statistical significance was determined using a two-way ANOVA for diet (Ad Libitum vs EODF), harvest state (fed vs fasted) and interaction between the two conditions. Outputs were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction, with significance being set at P<0.05 at an FDR of 5%. High pH RP fractions were not included in fold change or statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intermittent fasting; proteomics; adipose; lipolysis; lipogenesis; adrb3.

### Affiliations
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Sydney.
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Larance
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Sydney.


