### Accession
PXD007092

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mousekidney cortices with and without VPS34 knockout

### Description
We analyzed the proteome of mouse with a tubule-specific VPS34 knockout and compared it to control mice.

### Sample Protocol
We lysed renal cortices in urea, reduced the proteins using DTT, alkylated using IAA; and digested proteins with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed the datasets using MaxQuant as indicated in the methods section of the respective paper.

### Publication Abstract
The lipid kinase VPS34 orchestrates autophagy, endocytosis, and metabolism and is implicated in cancer and metabolic disease. The proximal tubule in the kidney is a key metabolic organ that controls reabsorption of nutrients such as fatty acids, amino acids, sugars, and proteins. Here, by combining metabolomics, proteomics, and phosphoproteomics analyses with functional and superresolution imaging assays of mice with an inducible deficiency in proximal tubular cells, we revealed that VPS34 controlled the metabolome of the proximal tubule. In addition to inhibiting pinocytosis and autophagy, VPS34 depletion induced membrane exocytosis and reduced the abundance of the retromer complex necessary for proper membrane recycling and lipid retention, leading to a loss of fuel and biomass. Integration of omics data into a kidney cell metabolomic model demonstrated that VPS34 deficiency increased &#x3b2;-oxidation, reduced gluconeogenesis, and enhanced the use of glutamine for energy consumption. Furthermore, the omics datasets revealed that VPS34 depletion triggered an antiviral response that included a decrease in the abundance of apically localized virus receptors such as ACE2. VPS34 inhibition abrogated SARS-CoV-2 infection in human kidney organoids and cultured proximal tubule cells in a glutamine-dependent manner. Thus, our results demonstrate that VPS34 adjusts endocytosis, nutrient transport, autophagy, and antiviral responses in proximal tubule cells in the kidney.

### Keywords
Proximal tubule, Proteomics, Cortex, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


