### Accession
PXD016171

### Title
Investigating the autotrophic and mixotrophic metabolism of an anammox bacterium

### Description
Anaerobic ammonium oxidizing (anammox) bacteria mediate a key step in the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle and have been applied worldwide for the energy-efficient removal of nitrogen from wastewater. However, outside their core energy metabolism, little is known about the metabolic networks driving anammox bacterial anabolism and mixotrophy beyond genome predictions. Here, we experimentally resolved the central carbon metabolism using metabolomics (LC-MS and GC-MS), metabolic flux analysis and proteomics (shot-gun proteomics).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from bioreactor cell pellets using glass bead beating (acid, washed, 0.1 mm diameter) in a suspension containing B-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, 1% (w/w) NaDOC at pH 8). Following DTT reduction and alkylation using iodo acetamide (IAA) protein extracts were subject to proteolytic digestion using trypsin. Resulitng peptides were solid phase extraction purified using an Oasis HLB 96 well plate (Waters, UK), according to the manufacturer protocols. The purified peptide fraction was analysed via an one-dimensional reverse phase separtaion (Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18, 50 µm x 150 mm, 2µm, 100A) coupled to a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) operating in data depenedend aquision mode (DDA, shot-gun proteomics). The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min over a linear gradient from 5% to 30% over 90 minutes and finally to 75% B over 25 minutes. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data depended acquisition mode acquiring peptide signals form 350-1400 m/z, where the top 10 signals (with a charge between 2-7) were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 30. The AGC target was set to 1e5, at a max IT of 54 ms and 17.5 K resolution.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative isotope abundances were determined from Tandem-MS data using PEAKS Studio X (BSI, Canada) and MetaProSIP (OpenMS, Univ Tuebingen/Berlin, Germany)47 integrated into the KNIME 4.0.1 analysits platform (Zurich, Switzerland), respectively. All peptide spectra wer matached against a protein database generated from predicted open reading frames from the K. stuttgartiensis genome.

### Publication Abstract
Anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) bacteria mediate a key step in the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle and have been applied worldwide for the energy-efficient removal of nitrogen from wastewater. However, outside their core energy metabolism, little is known about the metabolic networks driving anammox bacterial anabolism and use of different carbon and energy substrates beyond genome-based predictions. Here, we experimentally resolved the central carbon metabolism of the anammox bacterium Candidatus 'Kuenenia stuttgartiensis' using time-series <sup>13</sup>C and <sup>2</sup>H isotope tracing, metabolomics, and isotopically nonstationary metabolic flux analysis. Our findings confirm predicted metabolic pathways used for CO<sub>2</sub> fixation, central metabolism, and amino acid biosynthesis in K. stuttgartiensis, and reveal several instances where genomic predictions are not supported by in vivo metabolic fluxes. This includes the use of the oxidative branch of an incomplete tricarboxylic acid cycle for alpha-ketoglutarate biosynthesis, despite the genome not having an annotated citrate synthase. We also demonstrate that K. stuttgartiensis is able to directly assimilate extracellular formate via the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway instead of oxidizing it completely to CO<sub>2</sub> followed by reassimilation. In contrast, our data suggest that K. stuttgartiensis is not capable of using acetate as a carbon or energy source in situ and that acetate oxidation occurred via the metabolic activity of a low-abundance microorganism in the bioreactor's side population. Together, these findings provide a foundation for understanding the carbon metabolism of anammox bacteria at a systems-level and will inform future studies aimed at elucidating factors governing their function and niche differentiation in natural and engineered ecosystems.

### Keywords
Shot-gun proteomics, Anammox, Metabolism, Microbial proteomics

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, TUD, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, TUD, The Netherlands.


