### Accession
PXD014968

### Title
Indole-3-acetic acid degradation in a novel strain Pseudomonas composti LY1

### Description
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), knows as common plant hormone, is one of the most distributed indole derivatives in the environment. A novel strain, which was able to use IAA as sole source of carbon and nitrogen, was isolated from farm soil, identified and classified as Pseudomonas composti LY1 based on 16S rRNA sequence and genome analysis. The optimal growth conditions for LY1 with IAA are characterized. Proteome profile of strain LY1 to IAA and citrate were analyzed and compared using label free strategy with LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Strain LY1 was grown in IAA or citrate/NH4Cl as the sole source of carbon and nitrogen, respectively. Cells in the late exponential phase (OD600 = 0.6 ~ 0.8) were collected by centrifugation (8000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C), and washed twice with PBS buffer (pH 7.5). Then, cells were re-suspended with 1 mL extraction buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.6) and lysed with QIAGEN TissueLyser II at 150 Hz for 60 seconds. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The protein concentration was measured with microBCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, USA) before adding DTT. Enzymolysis was performed with FASP methods according to the methods of Jacek R Wiśniewski. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed using an Nano-LC system coupled with Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (ThermalFisher). The MS instrument was operated in date-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap (120 K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 100,000. Different chromatographic gradient lengths from 60 to 240 min were tested for peptide separation. All gradient started at 5% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid) and went up to 32% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation were performed by Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.4, Matrix Science). The date were searched against the protein database of strain LY1. The analysis of each sample was repeated two times.

### Publication Abstract
Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), known as a common plant hormone, is one of the most distributed indole derivatives in the environment, but the degradation mechanism and cellular response network to IAA degradation are still not very clear. The objective of this study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of IAA degradation at the protein level by a newly isolated strain <i>Pseudomonas</i> sp. LY1. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of strain LY1 cultivated with IAA or citrate/NH<sub>4</sub>Cl was applied. A total of 2,604 proteins were identified, and 227 proteins have differential abundances in the presence of IAA, including 97 highly abundant proteins and 130 less abundant proteins. Based on the proteomic analysis an IAA degrading (<i>iad</i>) gene cluster in strain LY1 containing IAA transformation genes (organized as <i>iadHABICDEFG</i>), genes of the &#x3b2;-ketoadipate pathway for catechol and protocatechuate degradation (<i>catBCA</i> and <i>pcaABCDEF</i>) were identified. The <i>iadA</i>, <i>iadB</i>, and <i>iadE</i>-disrupted mutants lost the ability to grow on IAA, which confirmed the role of the <i>iad</i> cluster in IAA degradation. Degradation intermediates were analyzed by HPLC, LC-MS, and GC-MS analysis. Proteomic analysis and identified products suggested that multiple degradation pathways existed in strain LY1. IAA was initially transformed to dioxindole-3-acetic acid, which was further transformed to isatin. Isatin was then transformed to isatinic acid or catechol. An in-depth data analysis suggested oxidative stress in strain LY1 during IAA degradation, and the abundance of a series of proteins was upregulated to respond to the stress, including reaction oxygen species (ROS) scavenging, protein repair, fatty acid synthesis, RNA protection, signal transduction, chemotaxis, and several membrane transporters. The findings firstly explained the adaptation mechanism of bacteria to IAA degradation.

### Keywords
Indole-3-acetic acid, Pseudomonas composti ly1, Proteomics, Microbial degradation

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Hao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Yu
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China


