### Accession
PXD011000

### Title
Proteomic analysis of tape-stripped actininc keratosis

### Description
This project aims to evaluates Tape Stripping (TS) of stratum corneum (SC) for non-invasive proteomic analysis of AK using mass spectrometry approach.

### Sample Protocol
Tape-stripped stratum corneum samples were obtained from patient with actinic keratosis. Proteins were extracted by the addition of 600μl protein extraction buffer (RapiGest™ SF Surfactant) in the microcentrifuge tubes containing the samples. Following a vigorous vortex, the sample homogenate was sonicated for 10 min at 4°C in an ultrasonic bath. The resulting sample homogenates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4oC for 30 min followed by incubation at 95˚C for 30 min. Following centrifugation at 16,000 × g at 4˚C for 20 min, the protein yield was quantified using Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies). Protein extracts were then reduced in 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 60˚C followed by alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteolytic digestion was performed following the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:40 trypsin:protein ratio; Promega) followed by overnight incubation at 37˚C. Rapigest™ (Waters Corporation) detergent was cleaved by acidification to pH<2, 37˚C incubation for 30 min and removed from the samples by centrifugation (13,000 × g, 20 min, 4˚C). Peptide mixtures were desalted using 1cc Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters Corporation); final yields were determined by Qubit quantitation and 10 μg aliquots vacuum were concentrated using Savant Speedvac Plus sample concentrator (Thermo Savant) and stored at −20˚C.

### Data Protocol
Digested peptide mixtures were re-suspended in loading buffer followed by their separation using a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a classic Q-Exactive™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples (2 g) were loaded at a flow rate of 200 nL/min onto in-house C18-reversed phase columns over a 2 h linear gradient. The MS data was acquired in duplicate and searched against the protein sequence database Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold Q+ (version 4.4.1.1; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to visualize MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. The resulting database search files were uploaded into the Scaffold software (version 4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) for visualization and label-free quantification of the data at the peptide level. Scaffold’s normalization was applied to the samples at the MS level to eliminate potential experimental variations across the samples. Fold change and differential abundance analysis were performed on the normalized spectral counting data using Scaffold’s mean-based t-test analysis, and data was exported to Microsoft Excel for further downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tape-stripping, Actininc keratosis, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Ali Azimi

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pablo Fernandez penas
The University of Sydney


