### Accession
PXD024089

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia and proteomic biomarker trajectory inform prognostication in COVID-19 patients admitted to intensive care

### Description
Prognostic characteristics inform risk stratification in intensive care unit (ICU) patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We obtained blood samples (n = 474) from hospitalized COVID-19 patients (n = 123), non-COVID-19 ICU sepsis patients (n = 25) and healthy controls (n = 30). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA was detected in plasma or serum (RNAemia) of COVID-19 ICU patients when neutralizing antibody response was low. RNAemia was associated with higher 28-day ICU mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.84 [95% CI, 1.22–2.77] adjusted for age and sex). In longitudinal comparisons, COVID-19 ICU patients had a distinct proteomic trajectory associated with RNAemia and mortality. Among COVID-19-enriched proteins, galectin-3 binding protein (LGALS3BP) and proteins of the complement system were identified as interaction partners of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Finally, machine learning identified ‘Age, RNAemia’ and ‘Age, pentraxin-3 (PTX3)’ as the best binary signatures associated with 28-day ICU mortality.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion. 10 µL of inactivated serum or plasma were denatured by the addition of urea (final concentration 7.2 M) and reduced using dithiothreitol (final concentration 5 mM) for 1 h at 37 °C and 180 rpm. Reduced proteins were cooled down to room temperature before being alkylated in the dark for 1 h using iodoacetamide (final concentration 25 mM). An aliquot equivalent to 40 µg of alkylated protein was added to a 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate solution (pH 8.2) and digested for 18 h at 37 °C, at 180 rpm using 1.6 µg of Trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5072). Digested peptide solutions were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration 1 %).  Peptide clean-up and stable isotope-labelled standard (SIS) spike-in. Peptide clean-up was achieved using a Bravo AssayMAP Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent). After conditioning and equilibration of the resin, acidified peptide solutions were loaded onto AssayMAP C18 Cartridges (Agilent, 5190-6532), washed using 1 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % TFA (aq) and eluted using 70 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA (aq). Eluted peptides were vacuum centrifuged (Thermo Scientific, Savant SPD131DDA) to dry and resuspended in 40 µL of 2 % ACN, 0.05 % TFA (aq). For clinical cohort analysis, 6 µL of cleaned peptide solution was added to two injection equivalents of PQ500 SIS mix (Biognosys) using a Bravo Liquid Handling Platform (Agilent).  Data-independent acquisition-mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) analysis. Peptides were analyzed using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-MS assembly consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) which was equipped with a capillary flow selector and coupled via an EASY-Spray NG Source (Thermo Scientific) to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). To generate DIA data for serum samples (GSTT COVID-19 ICU cohort) and plasma samples (KCH COVID-19 ICU cohort, the pre-pandemic sepsis ICU cohort and the pre-pandemic control patients before elective cardiac surgery), peptides were injected onto a C18 trap cartridge (Thermo Scientific, 160454) at a flow rate of 25 µL / min for 1 min, using 0.1% formic acid (FA, aq). The initial capillary flow rate was reduced from 3 to 1.2 µL / min in 1 min at 1% B. Peptides were then eluted from the trap cartridge and separated on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific, ES806A, at 50 °C) using the following gradient: 1–11 min, 1–5% B; 11–32 min, 5–18% B; 32–52 min, 18–40% B; 52–52.1 min, 40–99% B; 52.1–58 min, 99% B. The flow rate was increased to 3 µL/min and the column was washed using the following gradient: 58–58.1 min, 99–1% B; 58.1–59.9 min, 1–99% B; 59.9–60 min, 99–1% B. Finally, the column was equilibrated at 1% B for 6 min. In all HPLC-DIA-MS analyses, mobile phase A was 0.1% FA (aq) and mobile phase B was 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (aq). Precursor MS1 spectra were acquired using Orbitrap detection (resolution 60000 at 200 m/z, scan range 329–1201 m/z). Quadrupole isolation was used to sequentially scan 30 precursor m/z windows of variable width. Per isolation window, semi-targeted Orbitrap MS2 spectra (resolution 30000 at 200 m/z) were collected following higher-energy C-trap dissociation.

### Data Protocol
PQ500 SIS-spiked DIA data from all serum and plasma samples of the GSTT COVID-19 ICU cohort, the KCH COVID-19 ICU cohort, the non-COVID-19 sepsis ICU cohort and the control patients before elective cardiac surgery were analyzed in Spectronaut v14 (Biognosys AG), using the provided PQ500 analysis plug-in. MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance strategies were set to relative at a tolerance of 20 ppm, while MS2 mass tolerance was set to dynamic. Retention time calibration was achieved using the spiked iRT peptides included in the PQ500 SIS mix. Precursor and protein Q-value cutoff was set to 0.01. Quantification was conducted at an MS2 level using peak areas and individual runs were normalized using the global strategy set to median. All peptides for reported proteins were manually checked to ensure accurate peak integration across all samples. Peptides with a Q-value of more than 0.01 or a signal to noise ratio of less than 5 were marked as missing.

### Publication Abstract
Prognostic characteristics inform risk stratification in intensive care unit (ICU) patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). We obtained blood samples (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;474) from hospitalized COVID-19 patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;123), non-COVID-19 ICU sepsis patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25) and healthy controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RNA was detected in plasma or serum (RNAemia) of COVID-19 ICU patients when neutralizing antibody response was low. RNAemia is associated with higher 28-day ICU mortality (hazard ratio [HR], 1.84 [95% CI, 1.22-2.77] adjusted for age and sex). RNAemia is comparable in performance to the best protein predictors. Mannose binding lectin 2 and pentraxin-3 (PTX3), two activators of the complement pathway of the innate immune system, are positively associated with mortality. Machine learning identified 'Age, RNAemia' and 'Age, PTX3' as the best binary signatures associated with 28-day ICU mortality. In longitudinal comparisons, COVID-19 ICU patients have a distinct proteomic trajectory associated with mortality, with recovery of many liver-derived proteins indicating survival. Finally, proteins of the complement system and galectin-3-binding protein (LGALS3BP) are identified as interaction partners of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. LGALS3BP overexpression inhibits spike-pseudoparticle uptake and spike-induced cell-cell fusion in vitro.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Biomarker, Pentraxin-3, Covid-19, Proteomics, Rnaemia

### Affiliations
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.


