### Accession
PXD029502

### Title
Arabidopsis Coilin mutant LC-MS/MS

### Description
Determining the steady-state levels of proteins in the Arabiopsis coilin mutant plants

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis WT and Atcoilin seedlings grown on ½ MS plates were frozen in liquid nitrogen and powdered using a pestle and mortar. 1 g of powdered plant material was resuspended in 1 ml of SDT lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 4% SDS, 1mM DTT supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and homogenized with a Dounce homogenizer followed by sonication (20 Hz, 30 seconds, 3 times). The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C and the clarified lysates were purified by methanol/chloroform precipitation, vacuum dried and resuspended in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5.  The proteins were quantified using microBCA kit (Thermo Scientific) and 10 μg of protein were processed following the FASP method [66]. The digested samples were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column, dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 3% acetonitrile (ACN) in water supplemented with indexed retention time (iRT) peptide standards according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Biognosys, Switzerland) prior to data-independent acquisition (DIA) by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.   DIA-MS analysis  The peptide samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an UltiMateTM 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) as described previously [65].  Briefly, approximately 1.5 μg of peptide mixture was injected into a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm particle size) and desalted for 15 min with 3% ACN and 0.1% FA in water at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. The peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap MS through an integrated Easy-Spray LC column (50 cm x 75 μm I.D., 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated with a 130-min gradient at constant 300 nL/min flow rate, at 40 °C. The gradient was established using mobile phase A (0.1% FA in H2O) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA, 95% ACN in H2O): 2.1–5.3% B for 5 min, 5.3–10.5% for 15 min, 10.5– 21.1% for 70 min, 21.1–31.6% B for 18 min, ramping from 31.6% to 94.7% B in 2 min, maintaining at 94.7% for 5 min, and 4.7% B for 15-min column conditioning. The electrospray potential was 1.9 kV and the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 270°C. The MS parameters included application mode as standard for peptide, default charge state of 3 and the use of EASY-IC as internal mass calibration in both precursor ions (MS1) and fragment ions (MS2).   For each sample, DIA-MS data were acquired from three injections for three precursor mass ranges 400–650; 650–900 and 900–1200 m/z, respectively. The DIA isolation windows were between 6-8 Da for each precursor mass range and the mass defect was 0.9995. The HCD collision energy was set at 30%. The MS1 was acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) while all MS/MS spectra were acquired in a centroid mode at a resolution of 30,000. The scan range of MS/MS was set between 350 and 1500 m/z. A maximum ion accumulation time was set as 100 ms and a target value of was at 1e6.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed using Spectronaut software (version 14) against the Arabidposis spectral library that was generated inhouse and published recently [65] to identify and quantify peptides and proteins. The Biognosys default settings were applied for identification: excluding duplicate assay; generation decoy based on mutated method at 10% of library size; and estimation of FDRs using Q-value as 0.01 for both precursors and proteins. The p-value was calculated by kernel-density estimator. Interference correction was activated and a minimum of 3 fragment ions and 2 precursor ions were kept for the quantitation. The area of extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) at MS/MS level were used for quantitation. Peptide (stripped sequence) quantity was measured by the mean of 1–3 best precursors, and protein quantity was calculated accordingly by the mean of 1–3 best peptides. Local normalization strategy and q-value sparse selection were used for cross-run normalization. A paired Student’s t-test (one sample, null hypothesis, no change, mean μ = 0) was performed to uncover differential expression between control and mutant samples. The t-test was performed based on the log2 ratios of the peptide intensities of the individual peptides of a protein. The resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the q-value approach to control the overall FDR. Proteins with a fold-change of higher than 1.5 (log2 FC = 0.6) and a q-value of less than 0.01 were considered as differentially expressed proteins. The candidate proteins were then checked for Gene ontology (GO) enrichment using AgriGO (V2) followed by Revigo to reduce and visualize the redundant GO terms.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenesis of ribonucleoproteins occurs in dynamic subnuclear compartments called Cajal bodies (CBs). COILIN is a critical scaffolding component essential for CB formation, composition, and activity. We recently showed that Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) AtCOILIN is phosphorylated in response to bacterial elicitor treatment. Here, we further investigated the role of AtCOILIN in plant innate immunity. Atcoilin mutants are compromised in defense responses to bacterial pathogens. Besides confirming a role of AtCOILIN in alternative splicing (AS), Atcoilin showed differential expression of genes that are distinct from those of AS, including factors involved in RNA biogenesis, metabolism, plant immunity, and phytohormones. Atcoilin mutant plants have reduced levels of defense phytohormones. As expected, the mutant plants were more sensitive to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Our findings reveal an important role for AtCOILIN in innate plant immunity.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Coilin, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
Center for Desert Agriculture 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal 23955-6900 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
KAUST

### Submitter
Naganand Rayapuram

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Heribert Hirt
Center for Desert Agriculture 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal 23955-6900 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


