### Accession
PXD000509

### Title
Identification and monitoring of host cell proteins by mass spectrometry combined with high performance immunochemistry testing

### Description
Biotherapeutics are often produced in non-human host cells like Escherichia coli, yeast, and various mammalian cell lines. A major focus of any therapeutic protein purification process is to reduce host cell proteins to an acceptable low level. In this study, various E. coli host cell proteins were identified at different purifications steps by HPLC fractionation, SDS-PAGE analysis, and tryptic peptide mapping combined with online liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). However, no host cell proteins could be verified by direct LC-MS analysis of final drug substance material. In contrast, the application of affinity enrichment chromatography prior to comprehensive LC-MS was adequate to identify several low abundant host cell proteins at the final drug substance level. Bacterial alkaline phosphatase (BAP) was identified as being the most abundant host cell protein at several purification steps. Thus, we firstly established two different assays for enzymatic and immunological BAP monitoring using the cobas® technology. By using this strategy we were able to demonstrate an almost complete removal of BAP enzymatic activity by the established therapeutic protein purification process. In summary, the impact of fermentation, purification, and formulation conditions on host cell protein removal and biological activity can be conducted by monitoring process-specific host cell proteins in a GMP-compatible and high-throughput (> 1000 samples/day) manner. 

### Sample Protocol
Please see paper.

### Data Protocol
CID spectra were searched against an in-house E. coli database using Proteome Discoverer V1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The custom protein database was compiled from 5,967 E.coli protein sequences (from actual Swiss Prot K12 database), the sequence of the therapeutic protein, and the sequence of porcine trypsin. The following SEQUEST® search parameters were applied: (1) trypsin with a maximum of one missed cleavage, (2) carboxymethylation of cysteines as fixed and (3) oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was calculated. Only proteins specified with a score value ≥ 20 and with high confidence unique peptides (FDR < 1%) were considered as positive hits.

### Publication Abstract
Biotherapeutics are often produced in non-human host cells like Escherichia coli, yeast, and various mammalian cell lines. A major focus of any therapeutic protein purification process is to reduce host cell proteins to an acceptable low level. In this study, various E. coli host cell proteins were identified at different purifications steps by HPLC fractionation, SDS-PAGE analysis, and tryptic peptide mapping combined with online liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS). However, no host cell proteins could be verified by direct LC-MS analysis of final drug substance material. In contrast, the application of affinity enrichment chromatography prior to comprehensive LC-MS was adequate to identify several low abundant host cell proteins at the final drug substance level. Bacterial alkaline phosphatase (BAP) was identified as being the most abundant host cell protein at several purification steps. Thus, we firstly established two different assays for enzymatic and immunological BAP monitoring using the cobas&#xae; technology. By using this strategy we were able to demonstrate an almost complete removal of BAP enzymatic activity by the established therapeutic protein purification process. In summary, the impact of fermentation, purification, and formulation conditions on host cell protein removal and biological activity can be conducted by monitoring process-specific host cell proteins in a GMP-compatible and high-throughput (&gt; 1000 samples/day) manner.

### Keywords
Host cell protein; protein purification; mass spectrometry; affinity enrichment chromatography; cobas; high throughput immunochemistry testing

### Affiliations
Roche

### Submitter
Patrick Bulau

### Lab Head


