### Accession
PXD000906

### Title
Deciphering changes to human platelet proteome and degradome during storage before transfusion

### Description
Proteases, and specifically metalloproteinases, have been linked to the loss of platelet function during storage before transfusion, albeit the mechanism remains unknown. We used a dedicated N-terminomics technique, multiplex iTRAQ-TAILS (Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates), to characterize the human platelet proteome, N-terminome, and their post-translational modifications throughout platelet storage under blood banking conditions. From the identified 2,938 proteins and 7,503unique peptides we characterized N-terminal methionine excision, co- and post-translational N-acetylation, maturation and proteolytic processing of proteins in human platelets. We also identified for the first time in platelets 10 proteins previously classified as “missing” in the human proteome. Most of identified N-termini (77%) were internal, of which 105 were novel potential alternative translation start sites, with 2,180 representing stable proteolytic products, thus highlighting a prominent previously uncharacterized role of proteolytic processing during platelet storage. Protease inhibitor studies revealed metalloproteinases as being primarily responsible for proteolytic processing (as opposed to degradation) during storage. System-wide identification of metallo- and other proteinase substrates and their respective cleavage sites offers novel potential mechanisms of their effect on protein activity and platelet function during storage.

### Sample Protocol
We aimed to analyze clinically- and transfusion-relevant changes during platelet storage. Therefore, platelet concentrates were prepared, handled and stored using standard blood banking protocols.  To assess both global proteome and protease-specific N-terminome changes during platelet storage we used a two-pronged quantitative proteomics approach in combination with protease inhibitor studies. Thus, human platelets were stored with or without EDTA-free broad-spectrum protease inhibitor cocktail or a broad-spectrum metalloproteinase inhibitor marimastat for up to 9 days. Platelets were sampled, washed, lysates prepared and the resulting proteomes subjected to TAILS protocol (Kleifeld et al, Nature Protocols 2010).  We used 4-plex and 8-plex iTRAQ labeling for relative quantification of time-resolved changes between multiple conditions in a single analysis. In TAILS analyses, enrichment of natural N-termini (protein termini as they were translated or after methionine excision or protein maturation) and those generated by proteolysis (internal or neo-N-termini) expands the proteome dynamic range, increases coverage of low abundance proteins and enables simultaneous identification of protease cleavage sites and assessment of N-terminal PTMs. In addition, analysis of the samples before the N-terminal enrichment (pre-TAILS) provides traditional shotgun-like data. Specifically, platelets were sedimented (500 x g, 10 min) and washed as described previously (Thon et al, Transfusion 2008) with minor modifications. To prevent proteolysis during washing steps all buffers were supplemented with protease inhibitors (10 mM EDTA+ Complete protease inhibitor cocktail by Roche; 1 tablet/10 mL). Following washes, different cell types were counted using hematology analyzer (Advia) to ensure consistent preparations. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (16.6% final), incubated on ice for 30 min, and sedimented (20,000 x g, 20 min, 4°C). The resulting pellets were broken up and thoroughly washed three times with ice-cold methanol, air-dried and resuspended in a minimal volume of 8 M guanidinium chloride. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford reagents (BioRad). Samples were adjusted with water and 1 M HEPES, pH 8.0 to achieve protein concentrations of 2 mg/mL and 200 mM HEPES. Aliquots of 0.3-0.5 mg/tube were prepared and stored at -80°C. TAILS workflow and mass spectrometry analysis Platelet proteomes were analyzed by iTRAQ-TAILS using 4-plex iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems) as described previously (Kleifeld et al, Nature Protocols 2010). TAILS utilizes a commercially available hyperbranched polyaldehyde polymer (HPG-ALD) to bind and remove internal trypsin-generated peptides under reductive conditions. HPG-ALD was obtained without commercial or company restriction from Flintbox Innovation Network, The Global Intellectual Exchange and Innovation Network (http://www.flintbox. com/public/project/1948/). For 8-plex analyses, 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems) were used in 5-fold reagent/protein weight excess with 50% DMSO final. The 8-plex TAILS was performed essentially as with 4-plex reagents (30 min labeling), except that the labeling reaction was for 1 h at room temperature. For 4-plex and 8-plex analyses, 0.5 and 0.3 mg protein/condition/iTRAQ channel were used, respectively. The resulting TAILS and preTAILS samples were fractionated offline using a strong cation exchange and were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using QSTAR XL Hybrid electrospray ionization mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems/MDS SCIEX) as described previously (a. d. Keller et al, Science Signalling 2013). In total, 5 platelet proteome analyses were performed (one 4-plex TAILS, one 4-plex pre-TAILS and three 8-plex TAILS experiments).

### Data Protocol
MS2 data were searched against a human Uniprot protein database (v.3.42) by Mascot version 2.3.0 software (Matrix Science) or X! Tandem as described previously  (a. d. Keller et al, Science Signalling 2013), with the following parameters: Semi-ArgC cleavage specificity with up to three missed cleavages and peptide lysine iTRAQ were set as fixed modifications; N-terminal iTRAQ, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal pyroglutamate, cysteine carbamidomethylation or cyclization and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were both set at 0.4 Da, and the scoring scheme used was ESI-QUAD-TOF. Search results were evaluated on the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v4.6, rev 0) with PeptideProphet and iProphet for peptide and protein identification, and Libra for quantification of iTRAQ reporter ion intensities. Only one N-terminal modification/peptide was allowed. Mascot and X! Tandem searches were combined by iProphet (false discovery rate, FDR less/equal 5%) after PeptideProphet analyses. Missing proteins in the human proteome were analyzed at FDR less/equal 1% and the spectra were manually inspected.  Peptides were quantified by summing iTRAQ reporter ion intensities using our open source CLIPPER software  (a. d. Keller et al, Science Signalling 2013; a. d. Keller, Overall, Biol Chem 2012). We also used CLIPPER to assign N-terminal peptides to proteins and annotate for their positions. The experimental variation was derived from the day 4 to day 4 plus protease inhibitor ratio (D4/D4+Inh) distribution of natural N-termini. A normal distribution was fitted to the data after removal of outliers by including only values between the 10th and 90th percentiles. The resulting standard deviation (SD) was used to calculate ratio cutoffs for peptides that were statistically significantly increased or decreased, where 2xSD (corresponding to the iTRAQ ratio of 2) was chosen as a significance cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases, and specifically metalloproteinases, have been linked to the loss of platelet function during storage before transfusion, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. We used a dedicated N-terminomics technique, iTRAQ terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), to characterize the human platelet N-terminome, proteome, and posttranslational modifications throughout platelet storage over 9 days under blood-banking conditions. From the identified 2938 proteins and 7503 unique peptides, we characterized N-terminal methionine excision, co- and posttranslational N&#x3b1; acetylation, protein maturation, and proteolytic processing of proteins in human platelets. We also identified for the first time 10 proteins previously classified by the Human Proteome Organization as "missing" in the human proteome. Most N termini (77%) were internal neo-N termini (105 were novel potential alternative translation start sites, and 2180 represented stable proteolytic products), thus highlighting a prominent yet previously uncharacterized role of proteolytic processing during platelet storage. Protease inhibitor studies revealed metalloproteinases as being primarily responsible for proteolytic processing (as opposed to degradation) during storage. System-wide identification of metalloproteinase and other proteinase substrates and their respective cleavage sites suggests novel mechanisms of the effect of proteases on protein activity and platelet function during storage. All data sets and metadata are available through ProteomeXchange with the data set identifier PXD000906.

### Keywords
Human, Proteases, Ls-msms, Platelets, Metalloproteinases, Degradome, Tails

### Affiliations
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Anna Prudova

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.


