### Accession
PXD017329

### Title
GFP-CSB and GFP-UVSSA Domain-specific interactors

### Description
The response to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) involves the assembly of the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) complex on actively transcribed strands. The function of the TCR proteins CSB, CSA and UVSSA and the manner in which the core DNA repair complex, including transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), is recruited are largely unknown. Here, we define the assembly mechanism of the TCR complex in human isogenic knockout cells. We show that TCR is initiated by RNAPIIobound CSB, which recruits CSA through a newly identified CSA-interaction motif (CIM). Once recruited, CSA facilitates the association of UVSSA with stalled RNAPIIo. Importantly, we find that UVSSA is the key factor that recruits the TFIIH complex in a manner that is stimulated by CSB and CSA. Together these findings reveal a sequential and highly cooperative assembly mechanism of TCR proteins and reveal the mechanism for TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate repair.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were UV Irradiated (20 J/m2) harvested 1 h after UV. Chromatin enriched fractions were prepared by incubating the cells for 20 min on ice in IP buffer. For GFP IPs cell pellets were lysed in IP-150 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen)) for 1 h at 4 C. Protein complexes were pulled down by 1.5 h or GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek). We did at least three independent replicates of each IP experiment.the beads were washed 4 times with EBC-2 buffer without NP-40 and 2 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37 C under constant shaking. The bead suspension was loaded onto a 0.45 µm filter column (Millipore) to elute the peptides. The peptides were passed through a C-18 stage tips for desalting. The stagetips were activated by washing with methanol followed by washing with buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were acidified with 2% Trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on the stagetips. The peptides were eluted twice with 25 µl 60% Acetonitrile/ 0.1% Formic acid and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analysed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30) with th efollowing modifications from default settings: the maximum number of mis-cleveages by trypsin/p was set to 4, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled disabling the Fast LFQ feature. Match-between-runs feature was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (14th December 2017).

### Publication Abstract
The response to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) involves the assembly of the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) complex on actively transcribed strands. The function of the TCR proteins CSB, CSA and UVSSA and the manner in which the core DNA repair complex, including transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), is recruited are largely unknown. Here, we define the assembly mechanism of the TCR complex in human isogenic knockout cells. We show that TCR is initiated by RNAPIIo-bound CSB, which recruits CSA through a newly identified CSA-interaction motif (CIM). Once recruited, CSA facilitates the association of UVSSA with stalled RNAPIIo. Importantly, we find that UVSSA is the key factor that recruits the TFIIH complex in a manner that is stimulated by CSB and CSA. Together these findings identify a sequential and highly cooperative assembly mechanism of TCR proteins and reveal the mechanism for TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate repair.

### Keywords
Csb, Uvssa, Tc-ner

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands


