### Accession
PXD002960

### Title
Interactome -  RNA/DNA Hybrid Interactome Identifies DXH9 as a Molecular Player in Transcriptional Termination and R-Loop-Associated DNA Damage

### Description
AP-MS from non-crosslinked HeLa cells was carried out as described in the paper.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted using LDS, heated at 70°C. Eluted proteins were digested using FASP protocol.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant 1.5.0.35, Andromeda and Perseus 1.5.2.6

### Publication Abstract
R-loops comprise an RNA/DNA hybrid and displaced single-stranded DNA. They play important biological roles and are implicated in pathology. Even so, proteins recognizing these structures are largely undefined. Using affinity purification with the S9.6 antibody coupled to mass spectrometry, we defined the RNA/DNA hybrid interactome in HeLa cells. This consists of known R-loop-associated factors SRSF1, FACT, and Top1, and yet uncharacterized interactors, including helicases, RNA processing, DNA repair, and chromatin factors. We validate specific examples of these interactors and characterize their involvement in R-loop biology. A top candidate DHX9 helicase promotes R-loop suppression and transcriptional termination. DHX9 interacts with PARP1, and both proteins prevent R-loop-associated DNA damage. DHX9 and other interactome helicases are overexpressed in cancer, linking R-loop-mediated DNA damage and disease. Our RNA/DNA hybrid interactome provides a powerful resource to study R-loop biology in health and disease.

### Keywords
Hela

### Affiliations
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road Oxford OX1 3RE
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Matthias Groh

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Gromak
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road Oxford OX1 3RE


