### Accession
PXD025170

### Title
Proteomic study of fig inflorescence and receptacle

### Description
The common fig cultivar Zibao, planted at the Shangzhuang Experimental Station of China Agricultural University (Peking, China). Based on the three fig development phases (Flaishman et al., 2008), we subdivided the fig development process into six stages: stages 1 and 2 belonging to phase Ⅰ, a rapid growth stage; stages 3 and 4 belonging to phase Ⅱ, during which fruit size and hardness remain almost unchanged; stages 5 and 6 belonging to phase Ⅲ, the mature stage, where stage 5 corresponded to commercial ripeness. Inflorescences and receptacles at each stage were separated, marked as F1–F6 and R1–R6, respectively. Stage 1, 3 and 5 inflorescences and receptacles were used for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were performed for each sample. The digested peptides were labeled with TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. A Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to detect peptide signals.

### Data Protocol
The MS scans were run as described in our previous publication (Cui et al., 2019). The MS results were input into PD software (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo) to screen the spectra. The selected peptides were identified using Mascot (version 2.3.01) and annotated according to the UniProt database. Then the peptides were quantified by PD software based on their annotation and spectrum. ANOVA was performed to evaluate the significance of the differences. Proteins with a p-value less than 0.05, and fold change ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.83 were considered differentially abundant proteins (DAPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflorescence, Tmt, Receptacle, Ficus carica

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China
College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yanlei Zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Huiqin Ma
College of Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China


