### Accession
PXD025843

### Title
Structural analysis of the native TREX complex from S. cerevisiae

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the endogenously purified S. cerevisiae TREX complex. Cross-linking was performed using (a) bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate (BS3) or (b) a combination of adipic dihydrazide (ADH) and 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium (DMTMM) chloride.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., PNAS, 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Thermo Orbitrap Elite system. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled by a target/decoy search using reversed and shuffled sequences as decoys. xQuest search parameters included: enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on Cys, initial MS1 error tolerance = ±15 ppm, MS2 error tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common” fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink” fragment ions (ion trap) or = ±20 ppm (Orbitrap), respectively. Cross-linking specificity was set to K and N terminus for BS3, D or E for ADH, and K with D or E for DMTMM. The scoring scheme from Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012, was used. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format, with one tab per experiment or cross-linking chemistry. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual replicates. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved TREX complex has multiple functions in gene expression such as transcription elongation, 3' end processing, mRNP assembly and nuclear mRNA export as well as the maintenance of genomic stability. In <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, TREX is composed of the pentameric THO complex, the DEAD-box RNA helicase Sub2, the nuclear mRNA export adaptor Yra1, and the SR-like proteins Gbp2 and Hrb1. Here, we present the structural analysis of the endogenous TREX complex of <i>S. cerevisiae</i> purified from its native environment. To this end, we used cross-linking mass spectrometry to gain structural information on regions of the complex that are not accessible to classical structural biology techniques. We also used negative-stain electron microscopy to investigate the organization of the cross-linked complex used for XL-MS by comparing our endogenous TREX complex with recently published structural models of recombinant THO-Sub2 complexes. According to our analysis, the endogenous yeast TREX complex preferentially assembles into a dimer.

### Keywords
Tho complex, Chemical cross-linking; bs3; adh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; protein complex; trex complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


