### Accession
PXD038660

### Title
Aging-triggered iron-rich insoluble protein aggregates in the spleen originate chiefly from red pulp macrophages.

### Description
Both iron homeostasis and erythropoiesis are known to be affected by aging. Iron needs in mammals are met primarily by iron recycling from senescent red blood cells (RBCs), a task chiefly accomplished by red pulp macrophages (RPMs) in the spleen. Given that RPMs continuously process iron, their cellular functions might be susceptible to age-dependent decline, a possibility that has been unexplored to date. In our project, we identified a formation of undegradable iron- and heme-rich extracellular aggregates in the spleens of 10-11-month-old female mice. To better understand the origin of these aggregates, here, we performed: i) protein identification and intrasample quantification (iBAQ) of proteins of magnetically-isolated red pulp macrophages from spleens of two female 8-weeks-old C57BL/6J (maintained on a standard diet) and ii) label-free quantification of proteins of the splenic protein aggregates formed in the mouse spleen 24 hours after intraperitoneal iron dextran injection, using dextran-injected mice as a control. Two 8-week-old C57BL/6J mice per group were analyzed. This dataset is related to the project PXD032900, which describes quanytitative analysis of proteins in aggregates magnetically isolated from spleen of aged (standard or iron-reduced diet) and young mice (standard diet).

### Sample Protocol
Magnetically-isolated aggregates were dissolved in neat trifluoroacetic acid. Protein solutions were neutralized with 10 volumes of 2M Tris base, supplemented with TCEP (8mM) and chloroacetamide (32mM), heated to 95 ⁰C for 5min, diluted with water 1:5, and subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were then incubated with Chelex 100 resin (25mg) for 1h at RT, desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio C18 (Affinisep), and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Magnetically-isolated red pulp macrophages were isolated from spleens of two female 8-weeks-old C57BL/6J. Cell were lysed in RIPA buffer. Proteins were precipitated with chloroform/methanol, protein pellet washed with methanol and then reconstituted in 100mM HEPES pH 8.0 containing 10mM TCEP and 10mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (final conc. 1%), desalted with the use of AttractSPE™ Disks Bio C18 (Affinisep), and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50cm long × 75μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55°C by applying a 90min (protein aggregates) or a 180min (RPM extract) acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 12 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 96ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 (protein aggregates) or v. 2.1.3.0 (RPM extract), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Mouse Reference Proteome (UP000000589) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Relative quantification of proteins was performed on samples corresponding to the protein aggregates dataset (LFQ), proteins in the RPM extract were identified and intrasample quantified (iBAQ).

### Publication Abstract
Aging affects iron homeostasis, as evidenced by tissue iron loading and anemia in the elderly. Iron needs in mammals are met primarily by iron recycling from senescent red blood cells (RBCs), a task chiefly accomplished by splenic red pulp macrophages (RPMs) via erythrophagocytosis. Given that RPMs continuously process iron, their cellular functions might be susceptible to age-dependent decline, a possibility that has been unexplored to date. Here, we found that 10- to 11-month-old female mice exhibit iron loading in RPMs, largely attributable to a drop in iron exporter ferroportin, which diminishes their erythrophagocytosis capacity and lysosomal activity. Furthermore, we identified a loss of RPMs during aging, underlain by the combination of proteotoxic stress and iron-dependent cell death resembling ferroptosis. These impairments lead to the retention of senescent hemolytic RBCs in the spleen, and the formation of undegradable iron- and heme-rich extracellular protein aggregates, likely derived from ferroptotic RPMs. We further found that feeding mice an iron-reduced diet alleviates iron accumulation in RPMs, enhances their ability to clear erythrocytes, and reduces damage. Consequently, this diet ameliorates hemolysis of splenic RBCs and reduces the burden of protein aggregates, mildly increasing serum iron availability in aging mice. Taken together, we identified RPM collapse as an early hallmark of aging and demonstrated that dietary iron reduction improves iron turnover efficacy.

### Keywords
Spleen, Red pulp macrophages, Iron-rich protein aggregates, Mouse, Iron-dextran injection

### Affiliations
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Katarzyna Mleczko-Sanecka
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology in Warsaw, Poland


