### Accession
PXD037183

### Title
The structural basis for the self-inhibition of DNA binding by apo-σ70 - CLMS data

### Description
Performing crosslinking mass spectrometry and intergrative structural modelling to elucidate, for the first time, structure models of apo-σ70. Conclusively, we provide structural information to show that most of the DNA-binding capabilities of apo-σ70 are conformationally-inhibited and can be activated mostly in the context of transcription. CL-MS performed in E. coli detects crosslinks unique to the compact fold of apo-σ70 occurring at stationary growth phase.

### Sample Protocol
The cross-linked complex was precipitated by acetone at −80°C, centrifuged at 10,000 rpm, 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was discarded and the precipitated protein dried in a SpeedVac. The protein was reconstituted in 15 μL 8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The sample was reduced with 50 mM DTT at 55 °C for 30 min and then alkylated with 100 mM propionamide for 30 min at room temperature. Digestion volume was adjusted to keep the Urea concentration to less than 1 M, and trypsin was added at a 1∶50 enzyme to protein ratio. Digestion occurred overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were further purified and enriched using an in-house packed stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was converted into MGF format. The mass of each precursor ion was compared to the list of possible cross-linked species. Matching candidates within a mass tolerance of 6 ppm were further analyzed for MS/MS fit. After the MS/MS scores of all the candidate matches were assessed, a precursor ion is assigned with a specific cross-link entry in the list if the right conditions are fulfilled. The resulting list of cross-links is subjected to a final filtering step to check for identical lysine pairs originating from alternative trypsin digestion sites: only the occurrence with highest MS/MS-score is kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Σ70, Transcription, Rpod, Sigma70

### Affiliations
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Biological chemistry department, Alexander Silberman Institute Of Life Sciences, Hebrew University

### Submitter
Khalil Joron

### Lab Head
Dr Eitan Lerner
Biological chemistry department, Alexander Silberman Institute Of Life Sciences, Hebrew University


