### Accession
PXD008707

### Title
Encoding the human serine phosphoproteome in an engineered bacterial system

### Description
We synthesize a synthetic representation of the human serine phosphoproteome, expressed heterologously as >=31 amino acid phosphopeptides in an engineered strain of E. coli. We confirm that tens of thousands of these phosphopeptides can be successfully expressed and retain important functional characteristics of serine phosphorylation as it occurs in native eukaryotic systems.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of the expressed phosphopeptides and their corresponding non-phosphorylated versions, we purified the recombinant peptide library using glutathione and NiNTA resins (the peptides were expressed with an N-terminal GST tag and a C-terminal 6xHis tag). After trypsin digest, phosphopeptides were enriched using either an ERLIC column or by TiO2. Desalted samples were injected onto a 50cm C18 column, eluted over a 90- or 290-minute gradient, and peptides were observed using a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo). For co-IP experiments, MBP-fusion proteins from HEK cells were immobilized using an amylose resin, and interacting proteins were trypsin digested on the resin. Desalted samples were then run using the same parameters above with a 90-minute gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated with the following parameters: (MS1) 70,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 300-1700 m/z scan range; (data dependent-MS2) 17,500 resolution, 1e6 AGC target, top 10 mode, 1.6 m/z isolation window, 27 normalized collision energy, 90 s dynamic exclusion, unassigned and +1 charge exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched with MaxQuant36 v1.5.1.2 using a custom database containing all possible 110,139 synthetic phosphosites encoded on the original oligonucleotide array (≤ 31 amino acid phosphosites plus the encoded lysine residue on the C-terminus) in addition to the E. coli proteome (EcoCyc K-12 MG1655 v17, downloaded 24 Jun 2015). The searches treated carbamidomethyl (Cys) as a fixed modification, and acetyl (N-terminal), oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn, Gln), and phosphorylation (Ser/Thr/Tyr) as variable modifications. Up to 3 missed trypsin cleavage events were allowed, and peptides identified have a minimum length of 5 amino acids. The false discovery rate was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational phosphorylation is essential to human cellular processes, but the transient, heterogeneous nature of this modification complicates its study in native systems. We developed an approach to interrogate phosphorylation and its role in protein-protein interactions on a proteome-wide scale. We genetically encoded phosphoserine in recoded E. coli and generated a peptide-based heterologous representation of the human serine phosphoproteome. We designed a single-plasmid library encoding &gt;100,000 human phosphopeptides and confirmed the site-specific incorporation of phosphoserine in &gt;36,000 of these peptides. We then integrated our phosphopeptide library into an approach known as Hi-P to enable proteome-level screens for serine-phosphorylation-dependent human protein interactions. Using Hi-P, we found hundreds of known and potentially new phosphoserine-dependent interactors with 14-3-3 proteins and WW domains. These phosphosites retained important binding characteristics of the native human phosphoproteome, as determined by motif analysis and pull-downs using full-length phosphoproteins. This technology can be used to interrogate user-defined phosphoproteomes in any organism, tissue, or disease of interest.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology Systems Biology Institute USA

### Submitter
Karl Barber

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse Rinehart
Yale University Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology Systems Biology Institute USA


