### Accession
PXD004364

### Title
Rat testis LC-MS/MS -  Integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis of rat testis: Mechanism of arsenic-induced male reproductive toxicity

### Description
Arsenic is a widespread metalloid in environment, whose exposure has been associated with a broad spectrum of toxic effects. However, a global view of arsenic-induced male reproductive toxicity is still lack, and the underlying mechanisms remain largely unclear. Our results revealed that arsenic exposure decreased testosterone level and reduced sperm quality in rats. By conducting an integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis, the present study aims to investigate the global influence of arsenic exposure on the proteome and metabolome in rat testis. The abundance of 70 proteins (36 up-regulated and 34 down-regulated) and 13 metabolites (8 increased and 5 decreased) were found to be significantly altered by arsenic treatment. Among these, 19 proteins and 2 metabolites were specifically related to male reproductive system development and function, including spermatogenesis, sperm function and fertilization, fertility, internal genitalia development, and mating behavior. It is further proposed that arsenic mainly impaired spermatogenesis and fertilization via aberrant modulation of these male reproduction-related proteins and metabolites, which may be mediated by the ERK/AKT/NF-κB-dependent signaling pathway. Overall, these findings will aid our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for arsenic-induced male reproductive toxicity, and from such studies useful biomarkers indicative of arsenic exposure could be discovered.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion After thawed, 100 mg of testis tissue were homogenized in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.1% SDS, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.1). After 30 min of extraction on ice, centrifugation was performed at 12 000 ×g for 15 min to remove the unlysed debris. The protein extracts were then precipitated with trichloroacetic acid/acetone and maintained at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 12 000 ×g for 30 min, the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 20 mM DTT, 30 mM Tris, 0.1% SDS) and centrifuged at 12 000 ×g for 30 min. The supernatants were then collected, and protein content was measured using the Bradford assay. Fifty microgram of protein sample was reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated by 40 mM iodoacetamide. Before tryptic digestion, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to reduce the concentration of urea to 1 M. For in-solution digestion, trypsin was added to the protein mixture at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After incubation at 37 °C for 16 h, additional trypsin (1:100, w/w) was added to the sample and incubation was continued for 3 h to ensure complete digestion. C18 ZipTips were used to clean the tryptic peptides before nano-UPLC/MS/MS analysis. Nano-UPLC/MS/MS analysis Nano-UPLC/MS/MS analysis was performed on a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The trapping was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-VIMTrap C18 column (5 μm, 20 mm × 180 μm i.d.), whereas elution was performed on an nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH130 C18 column (1.7 μm, 100 mm × 100 μm i.d.) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phases were (A) 98% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and (B) 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; the elution was carried out by following procedure: 0 min, 3% A; 25 min, 8% A; 135 min, 35% A; 145 min, 65% A; 180 min, 100% A. The flow rate was 0.3 µL/min and the injection volume of peptide sample was 5 µL. Online electrospray of the eluting peptides into the Q Exactive mass spectrometer was achieved with the Easy Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Full MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 70,000 over a mass range of 350 to 1800 m/z. The automatic gain control target was set to 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was allowed. The 15 most intense peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation. The MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17500 with the automatic gain control target set to 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. A mass window of 2.0 m/z was applied to precursor selection. Normalized collisional energy for the higher-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was set to 28%. A dynamic exclusion with a time window of 45 s was applied. Singly charged molecules were not selected for fragmentation and the monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled. The underfill ratio (minimum percentage of the estimated target value at maximum fill time) was set to 1%. Triplicate analyses were performed for each protein sample.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.5.2.8) for protein identification and quantification29. The Andromeda search engine was used for matching the peak lists against a concatenated forward and reverse database including the complete UniProt-SwissProt rat database (reviewed, with a total of 9638 entries) and the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. The following settings were chosen for the MaxQuant software analysis: Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification; Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme and the maximum number of missed cleavages was 2. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 0.01. Quantification was achieved using the LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) algorithms. Protein fold changes were obtained by normalizing the LFQ intensity of treatment groups to that of control.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic is a widespread metalloid in environment, whose exposure has been associated with a broad spectrum of toxic effects. However, a global view of arsenic-induced male reproductive toxicity is still lack, and the underlying mechanisms remain largely unclear. Our results revealed that arsenic exposure decreased testosterone level and reduced sperm quality in rats. By conducting an integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis, the present study aims to investigate the global influence of arsenic exposure on the proteome and metabolome in rat testis. The abundance of 70 proteins (36 up-regulated and 34 down-regulated) and 13 metabolites (8 increased and 5 decreased) were found to be significantly altered by arsenic treatment. Among these, 19 proteins and 2 metabolites were specifically related to male reproductive system development and function, including spermatogenesis, sperm function and fertilization, fertility, internal genitalia development, and mating behavior. It is further proposed that arsenic mainly impaired spermatogenesis and fertilization via aberrant modulation of these male reproduction-related proteins and metabolites, which may be mediated by the ERK/AKT/NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent signaling pathway. Overall, these findings will aid our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for arsenic-induced male reproductive toxicity, and from such studies useful biomarkers indicative of arsenic exposure could be discovered.

### Keywords
Testis, Rat, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Qingyu Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Qingyu Huang
Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences


