### Accession
PXD009564

### Title
Gut Microbiome LC-MS

### Description
Gut microbiota has profound effects on obesity and associated metabolic disorders. Targeting and shaping the gut microbiota via dietary intervention using probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics can be effective in obesity management. Despite the well-known association between gut microbiota and obesity, the microbial alternations by synbiotics intervention, especially at the functional level, are still not characterized. In this study, we investigated the effects of synbiotics on high fat diet (HFD)-induced metabolic disorders, and systematically profiled the microbial profile at both the phylogenetic and functional levels. Synbiotics significantly reversed the HFD-induced change of microbial populations at the levels of richness, taxa and OTUs. Potentially important species Faecalibaculum rodentium and Alistipes putredinis that might mediate the beneficial effects of synbiotics were identified. At the functional level, short chain fatty acid and bile acid profiles revealed that interventions significantly restored cecal levels of acetate, propionate, and butyrate, and synbiotics reduced the elevated total bile acid level. Metaproteomics revealed the effect of synbiotics might be mediated through pathways involved in carbohydrate, amino acid, and energy metabolisms, replication and repair, etc. These results suggested that dietary intervention using our novel synbiotics alleviated HFD-induced weight gain and restored microbial ecosystem homeostasis phylogenetically and functionally.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria suspension preparation The two probiotics strains were cultured with MRS broth (OXOID, Basingstoke, UK) at 37°C to reach early stationary phase. The number of the bacterial cells was determined by plating the serial dilutions of the inoculum suspensions on MRS agar plates. The culture broth supernatants were discarded after centrifugation, and then bacteria cells were re-suspended with fresh MRS broth to 108 colony-forming units (CFUs) per 200 μL. The bacteria suspensions were prepared one week ahead, stored at -20°C and thawed 1 hour before administered to the mice by gavage. The ND and HFD control mice received 200 μL of fresh MRS as placebo. Sample collection Dietary interventions lasted for 12 weeks, during which the body weight of each mouse was measured weekly. Food intake of every cage of mice (three or four mice per cage) was measured three times a week when adding the food. Fecal samples were collected from each mouse at both baseline and 12th week by keeping individual animals in a clean cage for 5 hours. The feces were collected on two adjacent days at each time points, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and immediately stored at -80°C for subsequent microbiota analysis. To monitor the fecal recoveries of the strains, three mice were randomly selected in each group at baseline, 2nd, 6th and 11th week of dietary interventions. Fecal samples from these mice were collected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for DNA extraction and subsequent quantification analysis. At the end of the 12th week, after 12 h of food deprivation, bloods were collected from the orbital plexus, and serum was isolated by centrifugation at 3,000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min and stored at -80°C for subsequent biochemical testing. Mice were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxiation. Liver, jejunum, epididymal adipose tissue, and cecum were excised. For liver, the middle part of largest lobe was cut into two halves; one was sampled in RNALater (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) and the other in paraformaldehyde. For jejunum, around 2 cm of intestine tissues 2-3 cm away from the stomach pylori were excised and kept in RNALater. The middle parts of left and right epididymal adipose tissues were cut and sampled in RNALater and paraformaldehyde, respectively. All samples were collected from each mouse with the clear mice ID designation. Cecal content of each mouse was collected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at -80°C until analysis. Mass spectrometry and metaproteome analysis Bacterial cell lysis for protein extraction Samples were thawed and re-suspended in 1 mL Lysis-buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.4% SDS, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, pH=8). Four glass beads as well as approx. 0.5 g Zirconia beads were added to each sample. Three cycles of disruption by bead beating using a Fastprep (FastPrep -24, MP Biomedicals) was performed with the parameters set to 5.5 ms, duration 1 min, 4°C. Between cycles samples were kept on ice for 1 min. Then samples were heated in a Thermomixer (Thermomixer comfort 5355, Eppendorf) at 60°C with shaking at 1400 rpm for 15 min. This was followed by sonication using an ultra sound probe (UP50H, Hielscher) set with parameters cycle 0.5 and amplitude 60%. Sonication was done for one minute, followed by a minute rest on ice and sonication for a further minute. Samples were spun at 10,000 rcf at 4°C for 10 min. Supernatants, containing protein content, were kept and frozen at -20°C for storage.

### Data Protocol
Metaproteomics: bioinformatics, statistics and data analysis Raw spectra data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Spectra searches were performed by the tandem mass ion search algorithms Sequest HT. The genomic database for spectral searches was constructed by downloading and combining protein sequences from sequence depository Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) of all the bacteria families identified in the 16S rRNA gene sequencing data with protein sequences from the taxa Mus musculus and from plants commonly found in feed added (Supplemental Table 1). Additional search parameters were tryptic cleavage, maximum of two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance threshold of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance threshold of 0.02 Da. In addition, carbamidomethylation at cysteines was selected as a static and oxidation of methionine selected as a variable modification. Data was filtered with a peptide FDR set at 1% and only “rank one” peptides were considered for later analysis. Protein grouping was enabled. Label free quantification of protein group intensities were calculated by averaging the peak areas of the top 3 peptides for protein group using the precursor ions area detector node of Proteome discoverer software. For functional and taxonomic annotation of possible identified proteins, a sequence database of all possible protein hits was exported in *.fasta format from the Proteome discoverer software and imported to the Ghostkoala web tool provided by the KEGG website (Kanehisa et al., 2011). Functional and taxonomic annotation of protein groups was done with an in-house written R script (www.r-project.org) which clusters the possible protein hits to their respective identified protein groups and determines the lowest common ancestor for taxonomic annotation from the possible protein hits for each protein groups. Functional annotation of a protein group was only done if all functions of all possible proteins from the protein group were identical with the caveat that if fewer than 30% of possible protein hits in a group have unknown function, then these unknown were ignored. Protein group raw intensity values were log2 transformed then divided by the median log2 value from the sample and then multiplied by the median of all median log2 values from all samples investigated, these were the LFQ values. P-values were calculated using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis Rank Sum Test followed by independent two-sided Students test. All p-values were corrected for multi-testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Visualization of data was done for the bar charts with the ggplot2 R package, for the nMDS plots with the vegan package. P-values for the data used for the nMDS plots were calculated using the adonis function for PERMANOVA analysis in R. Heatmaps of log2 median normalized protein group intensities were constructed using the pheatmap R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mice, Gut microbiome, Synbiotics

### Affiliations
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department Molekulare Systembiologie Helmholtz-Zentrum für Umweltforschung GmbH - UFZ Permoserstraße 15 | 04318 Leipzig Telefon +49 341 235 4767 | Fax +49 341 235 450823


