### Accession
PXD044451

### Title
iBench Ground Truth Validation Tool 2.0

### Description
iBench is an open-source tool that provides enhanced validation of Mass Spectrometry identification methods. In this updated version, iBench 2.0 takes high confidence peptide identifications from previously measured MS data and embeds the sequences in an in silico-only proteome as spliced or non-spliced peptides. The MS data can then be reanalyzed with the modified proteome, thereby representing a (pseudo) ground truth dataset, to enable benchmarking of an identification method. In particular, precision-recall curves are generated, comparing the fraction of PSMs identified which are correct and the fraction of all PSMs assigned by a method.

Reference to this dataset:
Soh WT, Roetschke HP, Cormican JA, Teo BF, Chiam NC, Raabe M, Pflanz R, Henneberg F, Becker S, Chari A, Liu H, Urlaub H, Liepe J, Mishto M. Degradation of proteins by human 20S proteasomes sheds light on the interplay between peptide hydrolysis and peptide splicing. Nat. Comm., accepted.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic polypeptide substrates (40 μM) were digested by human 20S standard proteasome isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 20 mM KCl, 5 mM MgAc, 1 mM DTT at 37 °C.Reactions were stopped by acidification. Samples were diluted with loading buffer (2 % ACN, 0.05 % TFA) to a substrate concentration of 25 μM and 8 μL was measured by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc) was used to measure the samples. Briefly, peptides were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (30 cm length, 75 mm internal diameter; ThermoFisherScientific), coupled on-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–55% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 88 min at 50°C. The instrument was programmed within Xcalibur 4.1 to acquire MS data in a data-dependent acquisition mode using top 20 precursor ions. We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 120,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1,000,000 ions and a scan range of 300-1600m/z. The MS2 fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (35%) with an orbitrap resolution of 30,000. The AGC target value was set up as 100,000 with a max injection time of 128 ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 30 s and 1-6 included charged states were defined within this method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pcps, Mhc-i presentation, Benchmarking, Mass spectrometry, 20s proteasomes

### Affiliations
Juliane Liepe, Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head). Email: jliepe@mpinat.mpg.de Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk
King's College London

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Juliane Liepe, Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head). Email: jliepe@mpinat.mpg.de Michele Mishto, Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk


