### Accession
PXD036109

### Title
Placental mammal derived microRNAs alter pathways in the endometrial epithelia important for endometrial function

### Description
We tested the hypothesis that a panel of placental mammal-specific miRNAs and their targets play important to establish receptivity to implantation and their dysregulated expression may be a feature in women with early pregnancy loss. Relative expression levels of miR-340-5p, −542-3p, and −671-5p all increased following treatment of Ishikawa cells with progesterone (10 μg/ml) for 24 hrs (p < 0.05). RNA sequencing of these P4-treated cells identified co-ordinate changes to 6,367 transcripts of which 1713 were predicted targets of miR-340-5p, 670 of miR-542-3p, and 618 of miR-671-5p. Quantitative proteomic analysis of Ishikawa cells transfected with mimic or inhibitor (48 hrs: n=3 biological replicates) for each of the P4-regulated miRNAs was carried out to identify targets of these miRNAs. Excluding off target effects, mir-340-5p mimic altered 1,369 proteins while inhibition changed expression of 376 proteins (p < 0.05) of which, 72 were common to both treatments. A total of 280 proteins were identified between predicted (mirDB) and confirmed (in vitro) targets. In total, 171 proteins predicted to be targets by mirDB were altered in vitro by treatment with miR-340-5p mimic or inhibitor and were also altered by treatment of endometrial epithelial cells with P4. In vitro targets of miR-542-3p identified 1,378 proteins altered by mimic while inhibition altered 975 a core of 200 proteins were changed by both. 100 protein targets were predicted and only 46 proteins were P4 regulated. miR-671-mimic altered 1,252 proteins with inhibition changing 492 proteins of which 97 were common to both, 95 were miDB predicted targets and 46 were also P4-regulated. All miRNAs were detected in endometrial biopsies taken from patients during the luteal phase of their cycle, irrespective of prior or future pregnancy outcomes Expression of mir-340-5p showed an overall increase in patients who had previously suffered a miscarriage and had a subsequent miscarriage, as compared to those who had infertility or previous miscarriage and subsequently went on to have a life birth outcome. The regulation of these miRNAs and their protein targets regulate the function of transport and secretion, and adhesion of the endometrial epithelia required for successful implantation in humans. Dysfunction of these miRNAs (and therefore the targets they regulate) may contribute to endometrial-derived recurrent pregnancy loss in women.

### Sample Protocol
Fifty μg of protein from each sample, described above, was digested with trypsin (1.25 μg trypsin; 37 °C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) eleven plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. One hundred μg of the sample pool was desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95 % over 60 mins. The resulting fractions (15 in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1 % formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1 % (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5 % (vol/vol) acetonitrile, and 0.1 % (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 mins organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6 % solvent B over 1 mins, 6-15 % B over 58 mins, 15-32 % B over 58 mins, 32-40 % B over 5 mins, 40-90 % B over 1 mins, held at 90 % B for 6 mins and then reduced to 1 % B over 1 mins) with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300 °C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60 secs +/-10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7. m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35 %. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60 % to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2021: 169297 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (−89.03 Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163 Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5 %. Protein groupings were determined by PD2.1, with minor modifications to allow inferrence of biological trends without any loss in the quality of identification or quantification. The MS data were searched against the human Uniprot database retrieved on 2021-01-14 and updated with additional annotation information on 2021-11-15. The protein abundances were normalised within each sample to total peptide amount, then Log2 transformed to bring them closer to a normal distribution. Statistical significance was then determined using paired t-tests between the conditions of interest with FDR corrected p-values obtained using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
We tested the hypothesis that conserved placental mammal-specific microRNAs and their targets facilitate endometrial receptivity to implantation. Expression of miR-340-5p, -542-3p, and -671-5p was regulated by exposure of endometrial epithelial cells to progesterone (10&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/ml) for 24&#xa0;h coordinate with 1,713 of their predicted targets. Proteomic analysis of cells transfected with miRNA mimic/inhibitor (48&#xa0;h: n&#xa0;= 3) revealed 1,745 proteins altered by miR-340-5p (mimic; 1,369, inhibitor; 376) of which 171 were predicted targets and P4-regulated. MiR-542-3p altered 2,353 (mimic; 1,378, inhibitor; 975) 100 which were mirDB predicted, including 46 P4-regulated. MiR-671-5p altered 1,744 proteins (mimic; 1,252, inhibitor; 492) 95 of which were predicted targets and 46 P4-regulated. All miRNAs were detected in luteal phase endometrial biopsies, irrespective of pregnancy outcomes. miR-340-5p expression increased in biopsies from individuals suffering previous and subsequent miscarriage compared to those with subsequent live birth. Dysfunction of these miRNAs and their targets contribute to endometrial-derived recurrent pregnancy loss.

### Keywords
Human, Microrna, Proteomics, Placental mammals, Endometrium

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Associate Professor in Molecular Reproductive Biology,  Discovery and Translational Sciences Department, Leeds Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine (LICAMM), Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Leeds, UK

### Submitter
Jessica Edge

### Lab Head
Dr Niamh Forde
Associate Professor in Molecular Reproductive Biology,  Discovery and Translational Sciences Department, Leeds Institute of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Medicine (LICAMM), Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Leeds, UK


