### Accession
PXD009253

### Title
Proteomics quantifies protein expression changes in a model cnidarian colonised by a thermally tolerant but suboptimal symbiont

### Description
The acquisition of thermally tolerant algal symbionts by corals has been proposed as a natural or assisted mechanism of increasing coral reef resilience to anthropogenic climate change, but the cell-level processes determining the performance of new symbiotic associations are poorly understood. We used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to investigate the effects of an experimentally-induced symbiosis on the host proteome of the model sea anemone Exaiptasia pallida. Aposymbiotic specimens were colonised by either the homologous dinoflagellate symbiont (Breviolum minutum) or a thermally tolerant, ecologically invasive heterologous symbiont (Durusdinium trenchii). Anemones containing D. trenchii exhibited minimal expression of Niemann-Pick C2 proteins, which have predicted biochemical roles in sterol transport and cell recognition, and glutamine synthetases, which are thought to be involved in nitrogen assimilation and recycling between partners. D. trenchii-colonised anemones had higher expression of methionine-synthesizing betaine–homocysteine S-methyltransferases and proteins with predicted oxidative stress response functions. Multiple lysosome-associated proteins were less abundant in both symbiotic treatments compared with the aposymbiotic treatment. The differentially abundant proteins are predicted to represent pathways that may be involved in nutrient transport or resource allocation between partners. These results provide targets for specific experiments to elucidate the mechanisms underpinning compensatory physiology in the coral–dinoflagellate symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Five weeks after initial colonisation, anemones were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen five hours into the photoperiod and stored at −80 °C until processed. Each protein sample was drawn from a pool of 20 individual anemones. Anemones were thawed on ice, washed with water at 4 °C, mechanically homogenized and separated into host and symbiont fractions by centrifugation at 2,500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C , with the supernatant transferred as the host fraction. Protein content from a subsample of host homogenate was quantified using the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). The host fractions were frozen again at –80 °C for 1 h and lyophilized at –105 °C for 18 h. 30 mg of lyophilized host material was extracted with polar solvents for a parallel metabolite study using the methods of Matthews et al. (2017) before storage at –20 °C.  The resulting samples were brought to a final concentration of 5% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM dithiothreitol and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. The samples were then incubated for 15 min at 90 °C, followed by 15 min at 60 °C.  Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 5 min to pellet cell debris and 15 µg protein transferred to a new tube. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were then incubated in the dark, at room temperature, for 30 min and then diluted ten-fold with HPLC-grade water and digested with 1 µg trypsin at 37 °C for 18 h. After incubation, trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5%, vortexed to both stop trypsin digestion and precipitate the deoxycholate. After centrifugation for 10 min at 16,000 × g, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and concentrated to < 500 µL using an Eppendorf Concentrator 5301 set to 45 °C for approximately 1 h. The resulting peptide solutionwas desalted with C18 tips (Omix Bond Elut, Agilent Technologies), eluted with 70% acetonitrile, dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass-spectrometry in a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) using the settings described in (Oakley et al., 2016). Peptide separation was achieved using liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) with an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), while the column oven was set to 35 oC. Chromeleon Xpress software (v2.11.0.2914, Dionex) was used to conduct a 300 min nonlinear gradient from 96% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 50% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL min−1.  Peptides were ionized with an electrospray needle source at 1.9 kV spray voltage and injected into an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific), operated using Thermo Xcalibur (v2.1, Thermo Scientific) software. The Orbitrap analysed MS spectra at 30,000 resolution before collision fractionation, and the ion trap then analysed MS/MS spectra by taking the top eight MS peaks while rejecting +1 charge states. A dynamic exclusion of 180 s was used to minimize repetitious peptide analysis. Other instrument settings were based on those of Kalli and Hess (2012).

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were searched against a custom Aiptasia database of 320,798 total sequences, and were processed by MScDb software (Marx et al., 2013) to reduce peptide-level redundancy. The database was constructed from the Aiptasia genome (Baumgarten et al., 2015), all cnidarian sequences from UniProt (28/4/14 release, Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL), all open reading frames from the Aiptasia CC7 transcriptome (Lehnert et al., 2012), and a contaminant database (CRAPome v1.0) (Mellacheruvu et al., 2014). MS peaks were extracted by Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific) and analysed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and X! Tandem (The GPM, v CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Both Sequest and X! Tandem searches assumed trypsin as the digestion enzyme, with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 PPM. Both searches also included carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification. In Sequest, oxidation of methionine and carbamylation of the n-terminus were specified as variable modifications. In X! Tandem, Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and carbamylation of the n-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (v4.4.8, Proteome Software, Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they were established at > 99% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they were established at > 99% probability and contained a minimum of two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped together to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into protein clusters.  Symbiont cell densities were tested for significant differences between algal species using a t-test in SPSS (v. 20, IBM Corporation). Proteins were quantified by precursor intensity in Scaffold and statistical analyses were conducted in R v. 3.3.1 (www.r-project.org). To identify proteins with significant differences between treatments, a custom R script for multivariate analysis with post hoc identifications and protein load normalization was used, as described in Oakley et al. (2017). A generalized linear model (GLM) with treatment effects was fitted and compared against an intercept-only null model using an analysis of deviance X2 test, where α = 0.05. Protein clusters with significantly different concentrations between treatments were identified with the false discovery rate (FDR) correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995), at a q-threshold of 0.05. Proteins that were significantly different between treatments were searched against the UniProtKB database using BLAST in Geneious v.10.0.2 (Biomatters Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand). The top manually-reviewed SwissProt match for each protein with an E-value ≤ 1 x 10-5 was used to assign an annotation, and any without a match under this threshold were designated as hypothetical proteins. These annotations were also used for GO term analysis. If the only match with an E-value ≤ 1 x 10-5 was an unannotated UniprotKB Nematostella vectensis sequence, that sequence identifier is listed. Principal component analysis (PCA) and heatmap plots were generated by ClustVis (Metsalu and Vilo, 2015). Singular value decomposition with imputation was used to calculate principal components.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Coral, Exaiptasia, Symbiodinium

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington New Zealand
Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon K Davy
School of Biological Sciences Victoria University of Wellington New Zealand


