### Accession
PXD022352

### Title
Macrophage proteome in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection

### Description
This study investigates the proteomic alterations in human monocytic cell line (THP1) subsequent to infection with different strains of mycobacterium tuberculosis (H37Ra, H37Rv, BND433 and JAL2287) using the SWATH-MS strategy. THP1 proteome was analysed after 6, 18, 30 and 42 hours of infection with each strains and compared to that of uninfected cells. Our findings reveal temporal regulation of host response subsequent to Mtb infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates from infected THP1 samples were analyzed by reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) using an NanoLC-Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent; Dublin, CA) and nanoFlex cHiPLC system (Eksigent) which is directly connected to an ABSCIEX 5600 Triple-TOF (AB SCIEX; Concord, Canada) mass spectrometer, referred as Triple TOF system.

### Data Protocol
All DDA mass spectrometry files was searched in Protein Pilot software version 5.0 (AB SCIEX, Revision- 4769) with the Paragon algorithm 5.0. For Paragon searches, the following settings were used: Sample type: Identification; Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Species: None; Search effort: Thorough ID; Results Quality: 0.05. Only peptides with a confidence score of > 0.05 were considered for further analysis.For the spectral alignment and extraction of the targeted data, datasets from SWATH MS/MS acquisitions were processed using the full scan MS/MS filtering module for DIA within PeakView v.2.1 (Sciex) and Marker view v.1.2.1 (Sciex) software using both In-house and global human reference spectral library. iRT peptides were used for spectral retention time alignment between in-house library and swath data datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Temporal data on how the mycobacterium infection establishes itself inside the host cell is not available. We differentiated human THP1 cell line with PMA and infected them with different laboratory (H37Ra and H37Rv) and clinical strains (BND433 and JAL2287) of mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). Uninfected differentiated THP1 cells were used as infection control. Host proteome was investigated at four different time points to understand the dynamics of host response to mycobacterial infection with time. The investigated time points included 6&#x202f;hrs, 18&#x202f;hrs, 30&#x202f;hrs and 42&#x202f;hrs of infection with all the Mtb strains. SWATH-MS method was used to quantitate the host proteome in response to Mtb infection and the data thus obtained are available via PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD022352 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD022352).

### Keywords
Thp1, Swath, Mycobaterium tuberculosis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Non Communicable Disease Group, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad. Haryana
THSTI, Faridabad

### Submitter
Ajay Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ajay Kumar
Non Communicable Disease Group, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad. Haryana


