### Accession
PXD013124

### Title
Identification of root specific papain-like cysteine proteases in mays

### Description
Plant proteases are key regulators of plant cell processes such as seed development, immune responses, senescence and programmed cell death (PCD). Apoplastic papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) are hubs in plant-microbe interactions and play an important role during abiotic stresses. The apoplast is a crucial interface for the interaction between plant and microbes. So far, apoplastic maize PLCPs and their function have been mostly described for aerial parts. In this study, we focused on apoplastic PLCPs in the roots of maize plants. We have analyzed the phylogeny of maize PLCPs and investigated their protein abundance after salicylic acid treatment. Using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) we have identified a novel root-specific PLCP belonging to the RD21-like subfamily, as well as three salicylic acid activated PLCPs. The root specific PLCP CP1C shares sequence and structural similarities to known CP1-like proteases. Biochemical analysis of recombinant CP1C revealed different substrate specificities and inhibitor affinities compared to the related proteases. This study characterized a root-specific PLCP and identifies differences between the SA-dependent activation of PLCPs in roots and leaves.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC/MS/MS: Samples for LC-MS from proteins labelled with DCG-04 and enriched on streptavidin beads were either prepared by gel electrophoresis and subsequent in-gel digestion (IGD) or the captured proteins were directly digested on the beads (OBD). To identify and cut out gel regions containing DCG-04 targets we employed the “blind-cut”-method (van der Linde et al., 2012a). In-gel digestion (IGD) with trypsin was performed by following a published protocol (Kaschani et al., 2009). Affinity enriched protein samples that were not eluted from the capture resin were on-bead digested (OBD). Briefly, streptavidin beads were washed twice with water to remove SDS. Then bound proteins were reduced with DTT (5 mM) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 30 min at room temperature. Protein reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAM, 10 mM also in 50 mM ABC, 30 min, room temperature) and quenching of excess IAM with DTT (final concentration DTT 10 mM). Reduction and alkylation was followed by a sequential digestion of proteins with first LysC for 3h at 37°C followed by a 16h digestion with trypsin (37°C). The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. The supernatant containing the digestion products was passed through home-made glass microfiber StageTips (GE Healthcare; poresize:1.2 µM; thickness: 0.26 mm). Cleared tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were passed over a 2 disc StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid solution (10 μL).  LC/MS/MS: Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fischer scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA, (Michalski et al., 2012)) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fischer scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (inner diameter 75 μm × 35 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, Woburn, USA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm. The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation, Biberach an der Riß, Germany) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fischer scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45°C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra-high performance liquid chromatography) grade (Sigma-Aldrich, St. louis, Mississippi, USA). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 40 min (ISD) or 140 min (OBD) gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 30min (ISD) or 120 min (OBD); gradient 35% to 100% B for 5 min (ISD) or 10 min (OBD) and 100% B for 5 min (ISD) or 10 min (OBD)) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al., 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS; Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 200 ms (IGD) and 3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 10 product ion scans (3.0 × 104 ions or 150 ms (IGD) and 1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms (OBD)) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID (collision-induced dissociation) collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant: RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings (Cox and Mann, 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al., 2014). MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot Zea mays cv B73 database UP000007305_4577.fasta (99369 entries, downloaded 6/4/2018) and the in-house ACE_0229_EGB apoplastic PLCPs AS.fasta database containing Sequences of interest from Zea mays cv Early Golden Bantam (7 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum matches FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach and decoy mode “revert”). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3. (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Plant proteases are key regulators of plant cell processes such as seed development, immune responses, senescence and programmed cell death (PCD). Apoplastic papain-like cysteine proteases (PL) are hubs in plant-microbe interactions and play an important role during abiotic stresses. The apoplast is a crucial interface for the interaction between plant and microbes. So far, apoplastic maize PL and their function have been mostly described for aerial parts. In this study, we focused on apoplastic PLCPs in the roots of maize plants. We have analyzed the phylogeny of maize PLCPs and investigated their protein abundance after salicylic acid (SA) treatment. Using activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) we have identified a novel root-specific PLCP belonging to the RD21-like subfamily, as well as three SA activated PLCPs. The root specific PLCP CP1C shares sequence and structural similarities to known CP1-like proteases. Biochemical analysis of recombinant CP1C revealed different substrate specificities and inhibitor affinities compared to the related proteases. This study characterized a root-specific PLCP and identifies differences between the SA-dependent activation of PLCPs in roots and leaves.

### Keywords
Papain-like cysteine proteases, Mays root apoplast, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


