### Accession
PXD039693

### Title
RyR1 protein decrease induces ER stress and plays a major role in myopathies

### Description
It has been recently shown that RyR1 protein decrease induces in vivo most features of myopathy. However, the mechanisms underlying these disorders are not clarified. In the present study, using bioinformatics, OMICS, molecular biology and imaging system, we decipher how decreased RyR1 content in muscle cell leads to the development of muscle disease. Our results show that RyR1 depletion induces mitochondrial aggregation and dysfunction by defects in mitophagy and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondrial tethering and alters lipid homeostasis. Those alterations are associated with the ER stress.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were weighted (8.9-22mg), resuspended in 80% methanol at -20C (v/v, 150 ul / 10 mg tissue) and homogenized by agitation with ceramic beads for 2x 30s in a FastPrep FP120 homogenizer at maximum speed . Samples were then cooled on ice for two minutes. The solvent was removed and the homogenized material dried under air flow 5 min in a laminar flow hood. The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 30mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ) at  150 ul/ 10 mg of initial tissue and shaken again in the FastPrep for 3x20s, with 3 min cooling on ice in between runs.  300ul were  taken, mixed 1:1 (v/v) with lysis buffer, heated at 95C for 10 min and used for all subsequent steps.  Protein concentrations were determined by the tryptophane fluorescence method (Wisniewski et al., 2015) and adjusted to 2 mg/ml with miST buffer.   Protein extraction (C2C12 cells) :  Replicate samples (6 per condition) were extracted and digested by a modified version of the iST method (Kulak et al., 2014)(named miST method). Briefly, frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 100ul miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 100mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ) by vortexing. Resuspended samples were heated at 95°C for 5min, and 50 ug of proteins were transferred in new tubes for digestion.    Protein Digestion  Aliquots to digest were then diluted 1:1 (v:v) with water containing 4mM MgCl2 and Benzonase (Merck #70746, 100x dil of stock = 250 Units/ul) and incubated for 15 minutes at RT to digest nucleic acids. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol (25 ul) of 160 mM chloroacetamide (final 32 mM) and incubating at 25°C for 45min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 1 ug Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) for 1h at 37°C , followed by a second 1h digestion with  an identical aliquot of proteases. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two volumes of isopropanol in 1% TFA were added, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange plate (Oasis MCX ; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with excess isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 250ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia, frozen and dried by evaporation.   Peptide fractionation for library construction  Samples were redissolved in 0.05% trifluroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis. Aliquots of 5ug of all samples were mixed to create a pool, which was manually separated into 7 fractions  by off-line basic reversed-phase (bRP) using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The fractions collected were :  flow through, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5 and 50% MeCN in 0.1 % triethylamine (~pH 10). Dried bRP fractions were redissolved in 20ul buffer A and 2ul were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid Chromatography-Mass spectrometry  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer interfaced through a nanospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.250 ul/min with a 6-27% acetonitrile gradient in 92 min followed by a ramp to 45% in 15 min and to 95% in 5 min  (all solvents contained 0.1% formic acid). Identical LC gradients were used for data dependent- (DDA) and  data independent acquisition (DIA) measurements.   For creation of the spectral library, data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was carried out on the 7 bRP fractions using a standard TIMS PASEF method (Meier et al 2018) with ion accumulation for 100 ms for each the survey MS1 scan and the TIMS-coupled MS2 scans. Duty cycle was kept at 100%. Up to 10 precursors were targeted per TIMS scan. Precursor isolation was done with a 2 Th or 3 Th windows below or above m/z 800, respectively. The minimum threshold intensity for precursor selection was 2500.  If the inclusion list allowed it, precursors were targeted more than one time to reach a minimum target total intensity of 20’000. Collision energy was ramped linearly based uniquely on the 1/k0 values from 20 (at 1/k0=0.6) to 59 eV (at 1/k0=1.6). Total duration of a scan cycle including one survey and 10 MS2 TIMS scans was 1.16 s. Precursors could be targeted again in subsequent cycles if signal increased by a factor 4.0 or more.  After selection in one cycle, precursors were excluded for 60s. Mass resolution in all MS measurements was 35’000.  The diaPASEF method used the same instrument parameters as the DDA methods and was as reported previously (Meier et al 2020). Per cycle, the mass range 400-1200 m/z was covered by a total of 32 windows, each 26 Th wide (overlap  1 m/z) and a 1/k0 range of 0.3. Collision energy and resolution settings were the same as in the DDA method. Two windows were acquired per TIMS scan (100ms) so that the total cycle time was 1.7 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw Bruker MS data were processed with Spectronaut 14.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). A library was constructed from the DDA data for the fractions by searching the reference mouse proteome (RefProt, www.UNIPROT.org) database of November 5th, 2019 (55’408 sequences). For identification, peptides of 7-52 AA length were considered, cleaved with Trypsin/P specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl-Cys (fixed), Met oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were the variable modifications. Mass calibration was dynamic and based on a first database search. PSM, peptide and protein identifications were all filtered at 1% FDR against a decoy database.   Filtering for library construction excluded fragments of less than 3 AA and fragments outside the 300-1800 m/z range. Also, only fragments with a minimum base peak intensity of 5% were kept.  Precursors with less than 3 fragments were also eliminated and only the best 6 fragments were kept per precursor. For quantitation only PSM’s with maximum one missed cleavage were used. No filtering was done on the basis of charge state. Shared (non proteotypic) peptides were kept.    DIA quantitation Peptide-Centric analysis of DIA data was done with Spectronaut 14.10 using the library described above. Both MS1 and MS2 data were used for quantitation (Huang et al 2020). Run alignment was assisted by a deep learning algorithm based on sample-specific in silico prediction of retention times of identified peptides and alignment based on local nonlinear regression. Interference correction (from neighboring isotope envelopes) was performed at both the MS1 and MS2 levels using windows of 2 and 3 min, respectively.  Single hits proteins (defined as matched by one stripped sequence only) were kept in the analysis. Peptide quantitation was based on XIC area, for which a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 3 (the 3 best) precursors were considered for each peptide, from which the median value was selected.  Peptides were retained for calculation of protein group quantities if they passed the set Q-value threshold of identification (0.01) in at least 50% of the runs. For the retained peptides, any missing values were imputed with low-shifted values based on the global distribution of values in the entire experiment. Quantities for protein groups were obtained by summing all assigned peptide intensities after filtering. Global normalization of runs/samples was done based on the median of peptides.   Data processing and statistical tests (C2C12 cells) All subsequent analysis was done with the Perseus software package (Tyanova et al 2016). Intensity values were log2-transformed. After removal of contaminants, the table was filtered to retain only proteins quantitated in a minimum of 3 replicates per condition (7281 protein groups).  After assignment to groups, a Student’s t-tests was carried out among all conditions, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing (q-value threshold >0.05). The difference of means obtained from the test were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotation as described (Cox and Mann, 2012). The enrichment analysis was also FDR-filtered (Benjamini-Hochberg , q-val<0.02).    Data processing and statistical tests (muscle biopsies) All subsequent analysis was done with the Perseus software package (Tyanova et al 2016). Intensities  were log2-transformed. After removal of contaminants and  assignment to groups, a Student’s t-tests was carried out among all conditions, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing (q-value threshold >0.05). The difference of means obtained from the test were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotation as described (Cox and Mann, 2012). The enrichment analysis was also FDR-filtered (Benjamini-Hochberg , q-val<0.02).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Er stress, Ryanodine receptor, Periliplin2, Sphingolipids, Mitophagy, Myopathy

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Institute of Sports Sciences, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Nadege Zanou
Institute of Sports Sciences, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne


