### Accession
PXD005047

### Title
Regulatory T cells in hepatic circadian rhythm

### Description
Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) are important to maintain self-tolerance. In tissues, Treg cells can perform non-classical functions, for example, they are implicated in regulating metabolic processes in the adipose tissue. Their function in the liver is less well understood. We found here that Treg cells are important to secure the peripheral hepatic circadian rhythm of core-clock regulators and clock-controlled genes. Undisturbed metabolism in the liver required the presence of Treg cells and was especially important in the early postnatal phase, a distinct time period at around day 10, when the liver had not fully matured and Treg cells proliferated and accumulated in the liver-tissue. Our findings highlight a critical role for Treg cells to establish and maintain liver homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion, labeling of peptides with stable isotopes (TMT) and fractionation  Mouse liver (between 30-60mg) was dissected, washed 3 times with ice cold PBS and subsequently ground in a 1mL douncer. The slurry was washed again with ice cold PBS, after lyses the supernatant was sonicated in a Covaris S220 (430s, 17W). Extracted proteins were reduced and alkylated, and subsequentlyapprox. 10mg portions were digest with LysC according to SP3 protocol (Hughes et al, Mol Syst Biol. 2014; 10:757). Resulting peptides of replicates were pooled and labeled with 10plex TMT as described in Hughes et al, Mol Syst Biol 2014. The labels 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C and 131 were mixed 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 based on peptide ratio and fractionated with high pH reversed-phase chromatography (Sieber et al, Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016, 15(5):1584-97).  LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis  Peptides were separated using the nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm particle size, 180 µm inner diameter x 20 mm length) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm particle size, 75µm inner diameter x 200 mm length). Peptides were separated on a 120 min gradient and analyzed by ESI-MS/MS on anFusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scan spectra from m/z 300 to 1700 at resolution 30,000 FWHM (profile mode) were acquired in the Orbitrap MS. From each full-scan spectra, the 15 ions with the highest relative intensity were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. A lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  MS raw data files were processed with ProteomeDiscoverer (version 1.4.). Cysyteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, digest with LysC and quantification method with TMT 10plex, respectively. The derived peak list was searched with Mascot (version 2.2.07) against Uniprot mouse database (2014).  Bioinformatic and statistical analysis  For the protein quantification only peptides with thesum of reporter ion intensity equal to or greater than 10000 and with a value in at least two of four replicates were considered forthe adjusted p-value calculated with the limma package in R/Bioconductor.  Proteins with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed between the treatment and age of the mouse liver.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Treg cells, Circadian rhythm

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center


