### Accession
PXD006223

### Title
The proteomic landscape of patient-derived CD4+ T cells in recent-onset type 1 diabetes

### Description
The pathophysiology underlying the autoimmune disease type 1 diabetes (T1D) is poorly understood. Obtaining an accurate proteomic profile of the T helper cell population is essential for understanding the pathogenesis of T1D. Here, we performed in-depth proteomic profiling of peripheral CD4+ T cells in a pediatric cohort in order to identify cellular signatures associated with the onset of T1D. Using only 250,000 CD4+ T cells per patient, isolated from biobanked PBMC samples, we identified nearly 6,000 proteins using deep-proteome profiling with LC-MS/MS data-independent acquisition. Our analysis revealed an inflammatory signature in patients with T1D; this signature is characterized by circulating mediators of neutrophils, platelets, and the complement system. This signature likely reflects the inflammatory extracellular milieu, suggesting that activation of the innate immune system plays an important role in disease onset. Our results emphasize the potential value of using high-resolution LC-MS/MS to investigate limited quantities of biobanked samples in order to identify disease-relevant proteomic patterns. The deposited data set is the shotgun proteomic part of our two-phase study.

### Sample Protocol
The CD4+ T cells analyzed in the DDA experiment were processed for LC-MS/MS using the in-StageTip (iST) method as described previously (Grosche et al., 2016; Kulak et al., 2014) with slight modification. In brief, the cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), and 1x complete protease inhibitor, boiled briefly, and sonicated using a model T310-H water bath sonicator (Elma Transsonic). Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (ThermoFisher, #23225), and 10 µg total protein lysate was reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide. Protein lysates were diluted 1:10 in dilution buffer containing 10% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 25 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 1 µg trypsin, and 1 µg Lys-C, then digested overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the peptides were acidified in a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Prior to loading the peptides on the StageTip, SDB-RPS (3M Bioanalytical Technologies, 14-gauge plug SDB-RPS, #2241) was activated by the sequential application of 50 µl acetone, isopropanol, methanol, and water, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 1000xg. Acidified peptides were transferred to the StageTip and loaded onto the activated SDB-RPS material by centrifugation for 1-2 min at 1500xg. This loading procedure was repeated three times, followed by three washing steps with 100 µl 0.2% TFA. Peptides were eluted in three fractions by the sequential application of 60 µl of elution buffers 1-3 and centrifugation for 1-2 min at up to 1500xg (Buffer 1: 100 mM NH4HCO2, 40% ACN, and 0.5% formic acid; Buffer 2: 150 mM NH4HCO2, 60% ACN, 0.5% formic acid, and 50 mM NaOH; Buffer 3: 5% NH4OH, 80% ACN). Eluates were collected and evaporated using a SpeedVac centrifuge. The peptides were resuspended in 50 µl loading buffer (2% ACN and 0.5% TFA), sonicated briefly, and analyzed using LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS for the DDA experiment was performed in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using an LTQ Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Approximately 1 μg of each sample was loaded automatically in the HPLC system. A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation using reversed-phase chromatography (PepMap, 25 cm, 75 µm ID, 2µm/100 Å pore size, LC Packings) operated on a rapid separation LC (RSLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were eluted using the following gradient of increasing ACN concentration in 0.1% formic acid over a period of 145 minutes: 135 minutes of 6‒31% ACN, followed by 5 minutes at 31‒71% ACN, and then 5 minutes at a fixed concentration of 71% ACN. Between each gradient, the ACN (in 0.1% formic acid) concentration was was set back to starting conditions for 20 minutes. A high-resolution (60,000 full-width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with the Orbitrap using a mass range from 200 to 1500 m/z. From this high-resolution MS pre-scan, the ten most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap if they were at least double-charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra acquired from the samples in the DDA experiment were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) for label-free quantification as previously described.21 The profile data of the MS scans were transformed into peak lists with respective m/z values, intensities, abundances, and m/z width. MS/MS spectra were transformed similarly and then stored in peak lists comprised of m/z and abundance. Using one sample as a reference, the retention times of the other samples were aligned using automated alignment to a maximal overlay of 2D features. Features with one or more than seven charges were masked at this point and excluded from further analyses. After alignment and feature exclusion, the samples were allocated to their respective experimental group (T1D or control group), and the raw abundances of all features were normalized to correct for technical variations. All MS/MS spectra were exported from the Progenesis QI software as Mascot generic files (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with Mascot (Version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA) search engine nodes using the Swissprot human database (Release 2016.02, 20165 sequences, www.uniprot.org) complemented with a few spiked proteins. A percolator decoy database search was implemented in the Mascot node. The search parameters included 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance and two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamylation (N-terminal, lysine, or arginine) were set as variable modifications. Byonic and Mascot integrated database searches were set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on the peptide level when the concatenated mgf files were searched. Search engine identifications were combined in a multi-consensus result file maintaining 1% peptide FDR and exported in PepXML format for re-import into Progenesis QI. For quantification, all of the unique peptides from an identified protein group were included, and total cumulative normalized abundance was calculated by summing the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to that respective protein.

### Publication Abstract
The pathophysiology underlying the autoimmune disease type 1 diabetes (T1D) is poorly understood. Obtaining an accurate proteomic profile of the T helper cell population is essential for understanding the pathogenesis of T1D. Here, we performed in-depth proteomic profiling of peripheral CD4+ T cells in a pediatric cohort to identify cellular signatures associated with the onset of T1D. Using only 250&#x202f;000 CD4+ T cells per patient, isolated from biobanked PBMC samples, we identified nearly 6000 proteins using deep-proteome profiling with LC-MS/MS data-independent acquisition. Our analysis revealed an inflammatory signature in patients with T1D; this signature is characterized by circulating mediators of neutrophils, platelets, and the complement system. This signature likely reflects the inflammatory extracellular milieu, which suggests that activation of the innate immune system plays an important role in disease onset. Our results emphasize the potential value of using high-resolution LC-MS/MS to investigate limited quantities of biobanked samples to identify disease-relevant proteomic patterns. Proteomic profiles of 114 individuals have been deposited in a comprehensive portable repository serving as a unique resource for CD4+ T cell expression in the context of both health and T1D disease.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms dda, Cd4+ t-cells, Type 1 diabetes, Orbitrap xl, Autoimmune, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg,Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH)

### Submitter
Marlen Lepper

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg,Germany


