### Accession
PXD014929

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis following chromatin fractionation in growing and senescent cells

### Description
This project contains the raw and result files for a mass spectrometry analysis comparing the abundance of proteins following chromatin fractionation in growing cells and in senescent cells for the WI-38hTERT/GFP-RAF1-ER cell line. Two replicas were analysed for each cell condition. The data are used to support a study on using polymer modelling to investigate the roles of heterochromatin and lamina interactions on chromosome reorganisation in senescence.

### Sample Protocol
WI-38hTERT/GFP-RAF1-ER cells were used and derived from human embryonic diploid female lung fibroblasts. These cells were a generous gift from Carl Mann. They were maintained in 10% fetal bovine serum under 5% O2 and handled as described in Jeanblanc et al. (2012). Senescence was induced by 48 hrs treatment with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT). For chromatin isolation, cells were trypsinised and resuspended in 10-15 mL DMEM. Cells were counted, and the same number of cells was collected from each sample by centrifugation and resuspended in cold PBS. Supernatant was removed, and cells were resuspended in no-salt buffer A (DTT, PMSF, Digitonin) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Cells were centrifuged, and supernatant (cytosolic components) was kept for further preparation. Nuclei pellet was resuspended in no-salt buffer A and centrifuged. Supernatant was removed, and nuclei pellet was resuspended in no-salt buffer B (DTT, PMSF) and vortexed occasionally on ice before centrifuging. The nucleoplasmic supernatant fraction was kept for further analysis, and the remaining chromatin pellet was resuspended in no-salt buffer B followed by centrifugation. Supernatant was removed, and chromatin pellet was resuspended in 1× sample buffer. Suspension was vortexed and heated in boiling water for 5 min to release nuclear-bound proteins.  For chromatin fractionation, cells were harvested and centrifuged. Cell pellets were resuspended in cold lysis buffer and mixed thoroughly. Cell lysate was centrifuged, and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined (BCA Protein Assay Kit). Proteins extracted were reduced, alkylated, digested overnight and labelled as described in the TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set. Labelled samples were analysed by high-resolution Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. Labelled peptides were identified, and reporter ion relative abundance was quantified.  To prepare for TMT Labelling and mass spectrometry, desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1 mL 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) + 4% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded onto an Acquity bridged ethyl hybrid C18 UPLC column (Waters; 2.1 mm i.d. × 150 mm, 1.7 μm particle size) and profiled with a linear gradient of 5-60% acetonitrile + 20 mM ammonium formate (pH10.0) over 60 min, at a flow-rate of 0.25 mL/min. Chromatographic performance was monitored by sampling eluate with a diode array detector (Acquity UPLC, Waters) scanning between wavelengths of 200 and 400 nm. Samples were collected in one-minute increments and reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation, before being pooled into pairs (in total, 13 paired fractions were generated). Fractions were resuspended in 30 mL of 0.1% formic acid and pipetted into sample vials.  All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system and a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 mm particle size, 100 A pore size, 75 mm i.d. × 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 mm particle size, 100 A pore size, 300 mm i.d. × 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 mL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 4-40% B in 100 min (the total run time including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 min).  The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyser, set at a resolution of 70000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the quadrupole mass analyser, and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 35000. Peptide ions with charge states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot (Matrix Science) v2.2 were used to process raw mass spectrometry data files. Data were aligned with the UniProt human database, in addition to using the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP) v1.0. Protein identification allowed an MS tolerance of ±20 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of ±0.1 Da along with up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Quantification was achieved by calculating the sum of centroided reporter ions within a ±2 millimass unit (mmu) window around the expected m/z for each of the 8 TMT reporter ions.

### Publication Abstract
Lamina-associated domains (LADs) cover a large part of the human genome and are thought to play a major role in shaping the nuclear architectural landscape. Here, we perform polymer simulations, microscopy, and mass spectrometry to dissect the roles played by heterochromatin- and lamina-mediated interactions in nuclear organization. Our model explains the conventional organization of heterochromatin and euchromatin in growing cells and the pathological organization found in oncogene-induced senescence and progeria. We show that the experimentally observed changes in the locality of contacts in senescent and progeroid cells can be explained as arising due to phase transitions in the system. Within our simulations, LADs are highly stochastic, as in experiments. Our model suggests that, once established, the senescent phenotype should be metastable even if lamina-mediated interactions were reinstated. Overall, our simulations uncover a generic physical mechanism that can regulate heterochromatin segregation and LAD formation in a wide range of mammalian nuclei.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Lung fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Cancer Early Detection Advanced Research Center, Knight Cancer Institute, Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, U.S.A.

### Submitter
Michael Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Hisham Mohammed
Cancer Early Detection Advanced Research Center, Knight Cancer Institute, Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, U.S.A.


