### Accession
PXD042403

### Title
Stratifying the Cell Surface Cysteinome using Two-step Enrichment Proteomics

### Description
Cell surface cysteines represent an attractive class of residues for chemoproteomic studies due to their accessibility towards drugs and key roles they play in the structure and function of most human proteins. The redox sensitivity of cysteines also makes cell surface cysteines potential markers for cellular activities with altered redox states. However, cell surface cysteines are underrepresented in most of the cysteine proteomic dataset. While many mass spectrometry (MS) based techniques have been developed to enrich membrane proteins, current studies lack methods that can specifically inventory cysteines on cell surfaces. Here, we developed a novel dual enrichment method to achieve chemoproteomic profiling of cell Surface Cysteines - “Cys-Surf''. Combining cell surface capture (CSC) biotinylation and cysteine chemoproteomic biotinylation, this two-step biotinylation platform achieves identification of more than 1,900 cysteines with a specificity of about 50.0% in cell surface localization. In addition, Cys-Surf achieved quantitative analysis of oxidation states of cell surface cysteines, which reflect a completely different profile compared to that of the whole cysteinome. Redox sensitive cell surface cysteines were identified by applying reducing reagents and during T cell activation. Cys-Surf is also compatible with competitive small-molecule screening by isotopic tandem orthogonal activity-based protein profiling (isoTOP-ABPP) to evaluate the ligandability of cell surface cysteines. Altogether, these findings establish a platform that enables redox and ligandability analysis of the cell surface cysteinome and sheds light on future functional studies and drug discovery efforts targeting cell surface cysteines.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer. Peptides were fractionated online using a 18 cm long, 100 μM inner diameter (ID) fused silica capillary packed in-house with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (particle size, 1.9 μm; pore size, 100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The 70-minute water-acetonitrile gradient was delivered using a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-nLC™ 1200 system at different flow rates (Buffer A: water with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 80% acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). The detailed gradient includes 0 – 5 min from 3 % to 10 % at 300 nL/min, 5 – 64 min from 10 % to 50 % at 220 nL/min, and 64 – 70 min from 50 % to 95 % at 250 nL/min buffer B in buffer A (Table S7). Data was collected with charge exclusion (1, 8,>8). Data was acquired using a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) method consisting of a full MS1 scan (Resolution = 120,000) followed by sequential MS2 scans (Resolution = 15,000) to utilize the remainder of the 1 second cycle time. Precursor isolation window was set as 1.6 and normalized collision energy was set as 30%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected by LC-MS/MS were converted to mzML and searched with MSFragger (v3.3) and FragPipe (v19.0). The proteomic workflow and its collection of tools was set as default and PTMprophet was enabled. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm. Missed cleavages were allowed up to 1. Peptide length was set 7 - 50 and peptide mass range was set 500 - 5000. For Cys-Surf identification, cysteine residues were searched with differential modification C+463.2366. For Cys-Surf oxidation and ligandability quantification, MS1 labeling quant was enabled with Light set as C+463.2366 and Heavy set as C+467.2529. MS1 intensity ratio of heavy and light labeled cysteine peptides were reported with Ionquant (v1.8.9). Calibrated and deisotoped spectrum files produced by FragPipe were retained and reused for this analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma membrane proteome is a rich resource of functionally important and therapeutically relevant protein targets. Distinguished by high hydrophobicity, heavy glycosylation, disulfide-rich sequences, and low overall abundance, the cell surface proteome remains undersampled in established proteomic pipelines, including our own cysteine chemoproteomics platforms. Here, we paired cell surface glycoprotein capture with cysteine chemoproteomics to establish a two-stage enrichment method that enables chemoproteomic profiling of cell Surface Cysteinome. Our "Cys-Surf" platform captures &gt;2,800 total membrane protein cysteines in 1,046 proteins, including 1,907 residues not previously captured by bulk proteomic analysis. By pairing Cys-Surf with an isotopic chemoproteomic readout, we uncovered 821 total ligandable cysteines, including known and novel sites. Cys-Surf also robustly delineates redox-sensitive cysteines, including cysteines prone to activation-dependent changes to cysteine oxidation state and residues sensitive to addition of exogenous reductants. Exemplifying the capacity of Cys-Surf to delineate functionally important cysteines, we identified a redox sensitive cysteine in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) that impacts both the protein localization and uptake of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. Taken together, the Cys-Surf platform, distinguished by its two-stage enrichment paradigm, represents a tailored approach to delineate the functional and therapeutic potential of the plasma membrane cysteinome.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, T cell activation, Oxidation states, Cysteines, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA

### Submitter
Tianyang Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Keriann Backus
Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA


