### Accession
PXD019832

### Title
Temporal proteomic analysis unravels the hypoxic response of melanoma cells

### Description
Hypoxia is a common feature in various solid tumors including melanoma. Cancer cells in hypoxic environments are resistant to both chemotherapy and radiation. Hypoxia is also associated with immune suppression. Identification of proteins and pathways that regulate survival of cancer cells in hypoxic environments can reveal potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited to improve efficacy of anti-cancer therapy. We carried out global proteome and phosphoproteome profiling in melanoma cell lines to identify proteins and pathways that are induced by hypoxia. Here, using Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer for analysis and employing TMT-based quantitation, we report >7,000 proteins and >10,000 phosphosites. As expected, several proteins that are known targets of hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) were found to be overexpressed in the hypoxic models. In addition, several metabolic enzymes showed altered expression revealing metabolic reprogramming in hypoxic conditions. Phosphoproteomic profiling revealed kinase mediated signaling pathways that are induced in hypoxic conditions. Our data provides a comprehensive view of proteomic and phosphoproteomic alterations in hypoxia and reveals potential mechanisms that regulate cell survival in hypoxic environments. These mechanisms can be targeted to improve therapeutic outcomes in cancer treatment. Further, we identify the 20S proteasome as a putative therapeutic target in melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of protein samples from all conditions were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were precipitated using ice cold acetone and in-solution trypsin digestion of samples was carried out using 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. Trypsin digested peptides were lyophilized and labelled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) as per manufacturer’s protocol. TMT labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)-based fractionation. After concatenation, a total of 12 fractions were obtained. A small portion of these fractions was utilized for total proteome analysis and the rest was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment was carried out using TiO2. The phosphopeptide enriched samples as well as the total proteome samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from mass spectrometry analysis were searched against UniProt protein database using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. TMT at N-terminus and lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. For phosphoproteomic data, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine was also set as a dynamic modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was used to filter peptide spectrum matches (PSMs). FDR was calculated using a decoy search. A fold change threshold of 1.5 and statistical significance of ≤0.05 was used to determine differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia is a common feature in various solid tumours, including melanoma. Cancer cells in hypoxic environments are resistant to both chemotherapy and radiation. Hypoxia is also associated with immune suppression. Identification of proteins and pathways that regulate cancer cell survival in hypoxic environments can reveal potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited to improve the efficacy of anticancer therapies. We carried out temporal proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling in melanoma cell lines to identify hypoxia-induced protein expression and phosphorylation changes. By employing a TMT-based quantitative proteomics strategy, we report the identification and quantitation of &gt;7000 proteins and &gt;10,000 phosphosites in melanoma cell lines grown in hypoxia. Proteomics data show metabolic reprogramming as one of the prominent adaptive responses in hypoxia. We identify several novel hypoxia-mediated phosphorylation changes that have not been reported before. They reveal kinase signalling pathways that are potentially involved in modulating cellular response to hypoxia. In addition to known protein expression changes, we identify several novel proteomic alterations associated with adaptive response to hypoxia. We show that cancer cells require the ubiquitin-proteasome system to survive in both normoxia and hypoxia. Inhibition of proteasome activity affects cell survival and may provide a novel therapeutic avenue to target cancer cells in hypoxia. Our study can serve as a valuable resource to pursue novel candidates to target hypoxia in cancers and improve the efficacy of anticancer therapies.

### Keywords
Kinome, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute


