### Accession
PXD034432

### Title
Tracking prostate carcinogenesis over time through urine proteome profiling in an animal model: an exploratory approach

### Description
The urgent need for new tools for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer (PCa) has prompted us to investigate the proteomic profile of urine during the course of prostate carcinogenesis. Using an established animal model of prostate adenocarcinoma, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the proteomic profile of urine from healthy animals and animals with adenocarcinoma at two time points. At the second time point of prostate carcinogenesis, the incidence of pre-neoplastic and neoplastic lesions was 100%. GeLC-MS/MS and subsequent bioinformatic analysis revealed several proteins involved in prostate carcinogenesis. Increased levels of retinol-binding protein 4 and decreased levels of cadherin-2 appear to be characteristic of early stages of the disease, whereas increased levels of enolase-1 and T-kininogen 2 and decreased levels of isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 describe more advanced stages. With increasing age, urinary levels of clusterin and corticosteroid-binding globulin increase and neprilysin levels decrease, all of which appear to play a role in prostatic hyperplasia or carcinogenesis. The present exploratory analysis could be considered an important starting point for studies targeting specific human urinary proteins for the early detection of age-related maladaptive changes in the prostate that may lead to cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Animal protocol The following protocol was approved by the responsible body for animal welfare of the College of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro and by the Portuguese Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation (Direção Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária, license number 021326). Forty-two male Wistar Unilever rats, four weeks of age, were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (France). They were randomly housed in 5-6 cages for two weeks with ad libitum access to food and water. Room temperature and relative humidity were controlled at 18 ± 2 °C and 55 ± 5%, respectively, on a 12-h light-dark cycle. In brief, 24 rats (PCa groups) were treated with a subcutaneous injection of 20 mg/kg flutamide (prepared in 10% propylene glycol and 5% ethanol) for twenty-one consecutive days. After two days, these animals were subcutaneously injected with 100 mg/kg testosterone propionate (dissolved in starch oil). After two days, the rats were injected intraperitoneally with 30 mg/kg of the carcinogen N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU; prepared in 0.1 M citrate buffer, pH 4.8). Fifteen days later, under anesthesia (75 mg/kg ketamine and xylazine), subcutaneous implants containing crystalline testosterone were inserted into the rats through a small incision and subsequent suture in the interscapular region. The implants were prepared with medical grade silicone tubing, 4 cm of which was filled with testosterone, and the extremities were closed with medical grade adhesive (G.E. RTV-108). Animals were killed at two different time points (from carcinogenesis): i) at week twenty-seven, eight animals from the control group (Cont1) and ten animals from the PCa group (PCa1); and ii) at week fifty-four, the remaining ten animals from the control group (Cont2) and fourteen animals from the PCa group (PCa2). They were killed by an overdose of ketamine and xylazine, followed by cardiac puncture and exsanguination. The prostates were removed and processed for light microscopy using a routine histological procedure. The gastrocnemius muscle and adipose tissue (retroperitoneal and mesenteric) were also harvested and weighed. LC-MS/MS analysis Protein bands were manually excised from the gel and transferred to a microtube. Tryptic digestion was performed using an adapted method according to [1]. Gel pieces were washed once with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, three times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile (VWR Chemicals), and once with acetonitrile. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Gel pieces were washed again as described above, dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant), and rehydrated in digestion buffer containing modified porcine trypsin (Pierce Thermo Scientific) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:30 (w/w) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After 30 min of incubation on ice, the supernatant was removed, 50 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were extracted by adding 5% formic acid (Fluka) once, followed by 5% formic acid twice and 50% ACN. The tryptic peptides were lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant) and resuspended in a 1% formic acid solution. Samples were analyzed using a QExactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) via the EASY -spray nano ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) HPLC system. The trap column (100 μm I.D. x 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 5 μm 100 Å) and the EASY -spray analytical (75 μm I.D. x 15 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm 100 Å) columns were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were trapped at 30 μL/min in 96% solvent A (deionized water containing 0.1% formic acid). Elution was performed with solvent B (formic acid/acetonitrile, 0.1:80 (V/V)) at 300 nL/min. The 92-min gradient was as follows: 0-3 min, 96% solvent A; 3-70 min, 4-25% solvent B; 70-90 min, 25-40% solvent B; 90-92 min, 90% solvent B; 90-100 min, 90% solvent B; 101-120 min, 96% solvent A. The mass spectrometer was operated at 1.8 kV in data-dependent acquisition mode. An MS2 method was used with a FT survey scan from 400 to 1600 m/z (resolution 70,000; AGC target 1E6). The ten most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation (resolution 17 500; AGC target 5E4, NCE 28%, max injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion 35 s).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software packages (version 1.6.5.0) were used for both peptide identification and label-free quantification. In the MaxQuant analysis, MS /MS spectra were searched using the Uniprot (Swiss-Prot) protein sequence database under Rattus norvegicus (December 2018 version) with Andromeda. The database search parameters were as follows: Methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm for MaxQuant and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.15 Da. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids, and a maximum of 2 failed cleavages were allowed for both software programmes. The FDR for identification was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most lethal diseases in men, which justifies the search for new diagnostic tools. The aim of the present study was to gain new insights into the progression of prostate carcinogenesis by analyzing the urine proteome. To this end, urine from healthy animals and animals with prostate adenocarcinoma was analyzed at two time points: 27 and 54 weeks. After 54 weeks, the incidence of pre-neoplastic and neoplastic lesions in the PCa animals was 100%. GeLC-MS/MS and subsequent bioinformatics analyses revealed several proteins involved in prostate carcinogenesis. Increased levels of retinol-binding protein 4 and decreased levels of cadherin-2 appear to be characteristic of early stages of the disease, whereas increased levels of enolase-1 and T-kininogen 2 and decreased levels of isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 describe more advanced stages. With increasing age, urinary levels of clusterin and corticosteroid-binding globulin increased and neprilysin levels decreased, all of which appear to play a role in prostate hyperplasia or carcinogenesis. The present exploratory analysis can be considered as a starting point for studies targeting specific human urine proteins for early detection of age-related maladaptive changes in the prostate that may lead to cancer.

### Keywords
Gelc-ms/ms, Aging, Retinol-binding protein 4, Cadherin-2, Prostate adenocarcinoma, Urinary proteomics, Enolase-1

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Sciences iBiMED University of Aveiro
Universidade de Aveiro

### Submitter
Rui Vitorino

### Lab Head
Dr Rui Vitorino
Department of Medical Sciences iBiMED University of Aveiro


