### Accession
PXD027583

### Title
Comparative proteomics of APBD and heathy control cells treated or not with 144DG11 under different conditions

### Description
This project employs Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease (APBD) models to explore the efficacy and mechanism of action of the polyglucosan-reducing compound 144DG11. APBD is a glycogen storage disorder (GSD) caused by glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) deficiency causing accumulation of poorly branched glycogen inclusions called polyglucosans. 144DG11 improved survival and motor parameters in a GBE knockin (Gbeys/ys) APBD mouse model. 144DG11 reduced polyglucosan and glycogen in brain, liver, heart, and peripheral nerve. Indirect calorimetry experiments revealed that 144DG11 increases carbohydrate burn at the expense of fat burn, suggesting metabolic mobilization of pathogenic polyglucosan. At the cellular level, 144DG11 increased glycolytic, mitochondrial, and total ATP production. The molecular target of 144DG11 is the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP1, whose interaction with the compound, similar to LAMP1 knockdown, enhanced autolysosomal degradation of glycogen and lysosomal acidification. 144DG11 also enhanced mitochondrial activity and modulated lysosomal features as revealed by bioenergetic, image-based phenotyping and proteomics analyses. The results submitted to Pride are the raw LC-MS proteomics data of skin fibroblasts derived from APBD and healthy control subjects treated or not with 144DG11 under starvation or glycogen burden (starvation followed by glucose supplementation) conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS analysis.  Cell lysates in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitors were clarified by centrifugation and 40 μg of protein was used for protein precipitation by the chloroform/methanol method (Wessel and Flügge 1984). The precipitated proteins were solubilized in 100 μl of 8M urea, 10 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and incubated for 30 min at 22°C. Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added and samples were incubated for 30 min (22°C, in the dark), followed by addition of DTT (10 mM). Fifty μl of the samples was transferred into a new tube, diluted by the addition of 7 volumes of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) was added (0.35 μg/ sample) followed by incubation overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation. The samples were acidified by addition of 0.2% formic acid and desalted on C18 home-made Stage tips. Peptide concentration was determined by Absorbance at 280 nm and 0.75 μg of peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer.   nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument, Ultimate 3000 Dionex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). Peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid were separated without a trap column over a 120 min acetonitrile gradient run at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min on a reverse phase 25-cm-long C18 column (75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo PepMapRSLC). The instrument settings were as described in (Scheltema et al. 2014). Survey scans (300–1,650 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection time 20 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD)-based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 27). A resolution of 60,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions, with “peptide preferable” profile were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (target value 1E5 charges, maximum ion injection times 25 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 20 sec. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). To avoid a carryover, the column was washed with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 25 min between samples.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis.  Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.6.14.0. Peak lists were searched against the Uniprot human FASTA sequence database from May 19, 2020 containing 49,974 entries. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and allowed up to two miscleavages.  The match-between-runs option was used. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino-acids were considered  and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al. 2014). Statistical analysis (n=4-7) was performed using the Perseus statistical package (Tyanova et al. 2016). Only those proteins for which at least 3 valid LFQ values were obtained in at least one sample group were accepted for statistical analysis by t-test (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
This work employs adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD) models to explore the efficacy and mechanism of action of the polyglucosan-reducing compound 144DG11. APBD is a glycogen storage disorder (GSD) caused by glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) deficiency causing accumulation of poorly branched glycogen inclusions called polyglucosans. 144DG11 improved survival and motor parameters in a GBE knockin (Gbe<sup>ys/ys</sup> ) APBD mouse model. 144DG11 reduced polyglucosan and glycogen in brain, liver, heart, and peripheral nerve. Indirect calorimetry experiments revealed that 144DG11 increases carbohydrate burn at the expense of fat burn, suggesting metabolic mobilization of pathogenic polyglucosan. At the cellular level, 144DG11 increased glycolytic, mitochondrial, and total ATP production. The molecular target of 144DG11 is the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP1, whose interaction with the compound, similar to LAMP1 knockdown, enhanced autolysosomal degradation of glycogen and lysosomal acidification. 144DG11 also enhanced mitochondrial activity and modulated lysosomal features as revealed by bioenergetic, image-based phenotyping and proteomics analyses. As an effective lysosomal targeting therapy in a GSD model, 144DG11 could be developed into a safe and efficacious glycogen and lysosomal storage disease therapy.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human skin fibroblasts, 144dg11, Apbd

### Affiliations
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center
Dept. of Neurology Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center Ein Kerem Jerusalem 91120 Israel

### Submitter
Or Kakhlon

### Lab Head
Dr Or Kakhlon
Dept. of Neurology Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center Ein Kerem Jerusalem 91120 Israel


