### Accession
PXD040151

### Title
Deletion of genes linked to the C1-fixing gene cluster affects growth, by-products, and proteome of Clostridium autoethanogenum

### Description
Gas fermentation has emerged as a sustainable route to produce fuels and chemicals by recycling inexpensive one-carbon (C1) feedstocks from gaseous and solid waste using gas-fermenting microbes. Currently, acetogens that utilise the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway to convert carbon oxides (CO and CO2) into valuable products are the most advanced biocatalysts for gas fermentation. However, our understanding of the functionalities of the genes involved in the C1-fixing gene cluster and its closely-linked genes is incomplete. Here, we investigate the role of two genes with unclear functions – hypothetical protein (hp; LABRINI_07945) and CooT nickel binding protein (nbp; LABRINI_07950) – directly adjacent and expressed at similar levels to the C1-fixing gene cluster in the gas-fermenting model-acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum. Targeted deletion of either the hp or nbp gene using CRISPR/nCas9, and phenotypic characterisation in heterotrophic and autotrophic batch and autotrophic bioreactor continuous cultures revealed significant growth defects and altered by-product profiles for both ∆hp and ∆nbp strains. Variable effects of gene deletion on autotrophic batch growth on rich or minimal media suggest that both genes affect the utilisation of complex nutrients. Autotrophic chemostat cultures showed lower acetate and ethanol production rates and higher carbon flux to CO2 and biomass for both deletion strains. Additionally, proteome analysis revealed that disruption of either gene affects the expression of proteins of the C1-fixing gene cluster and ethanol synthesis pathways. Our work contributes to a better understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships in acetogens and offers engineering targets to improve carbon fixation efficiency in gas fermentation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Proteome analysis was carried out for four biological replicate cultures for each of the three strains: LAbrini, Δhp, and Δnbp. C. autoethanogenum chemostat cultures were sampled for proteomics by immediately pelleting 2 mL of the culture by centrifugation (25,000 × g for 1 min at 4°C) and stored at ‒80°C until analysis. Cell pellets were suspended with 10 volumes (relative to pellet volume) of chaotrope-based lysis buffer (6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM dithiothreitol), heated at 95oC for 10 min and sonicated with the Bioruptor sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 cycles (30 s ON, 60 s OFF; “High” setting) at 4oC. Next, 0.5 volumes (relative to lysate volume) of Silibeads TypZY-s 0.4‒0.6 mm (Sigmund Lindner) beads were added to the lysate and bead beating was carried out with the FastPrep24 device (MP Biomedicals) by 2 x 40 s at 6 m/s. Next, samples were centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was separated from the beads and transferred to a new tube. A small aliquot of the lysate was then precipitated with trichloroacetic acid-deoxycholate (TCA-DOC) precipitation and the protein concentration was determined with the Micro BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Next, 20 µg of lysate protein was alkylated with 100 mM chloroacetamide by incubating for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then processed, and proteins were digested to peptides by the SP3 protocol as described elsewhere (Hughes et al., 2018).  LC-MS/MS analysis Sample order for LC-MS/MS analysis was randomised to avoid batch effects and blanks were flanked to minimise carry-over. 1 µg of peptides for each sample was injected to an Ultimate 3500 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a 0.3 × 5 mm trap-column (5 µm C18 particles, Dionex) and an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm x 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective). Columns were operated at 45oC. Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with an 8-45% B 90 min gradient (buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, buffer A: 0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (MS) using a nano-electrospray source (spray voltage of 2.5 kV in positive mode). The MS was operated using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach (Gillet et al., 2012) with variable isolation windows over a range of 400‒1,100 m/z. Briefly, one full range 400‒1,100 m/z MS1 scan was collected at a resolution setting of 60,000 (max ion injection time of 60 ms, max of 3e6 ions), followed by 25 overlappings (overlap of 1 m/z) DIA isolation windows as follows (start‒end m/z, isolation width): 399‒472,  25; 471‒510,  20; 509‒608,  15; 607‒703,  20; 702‒790,  30; 789‒868,  40; 867‒966,  50; and 965‒1101,  136. Each DIA scan was collected at a resolution setting of 30,000 (max ion injection time of 41 ms, max of 3e6 ions), the default charge state was set to +3 and normalised collision energy to 27. The overall method cycle time was approximately 2.3 s.

### Data Protocol
DIA MS data was analysed using version 1.8 of the software suite DIA-NN (Demichev et al., 2019) with default settings. The spectral library was generated in silico using smart profiling from the protein sequence database of C. autoethanogenum LAbrini (NCBI Genbank CP110420) (Ingelman et al., 2023) with a precursor of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) filter. The following settings were used for analysis: full trypsin specificity with 1 missed cleavage allowed for peptides with a length of 7–30 AAs; fixed modifications of cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine N-terminal excision; precursor charge range 1–4 and m/z range 400–1,100; fragment m/z range 200–1,800; double-pass mode for neural network classifier; Robust LC (high precision) for quantification strategy; and RT-dependent cross-run normalization. Label-free protein quantification and normalisation were performed within the DIA-NN workflow using the MaxLFQ method (Cox et al., 2014). We confidently quantitated 28,752 peptides and 2,127 proteins across all samples, and 27,358 peptides and 2,107 proteins on average within each sample after the removal of shared peptides from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Gas fermentation has emerged as a sustainable route to produce fuels and chemicals by recycling inexpensive one-carbon (C<sub>1</sub>) feedstocks from gaseous and solid waste using gas-fermenting microbes. Currently, acetogens that utilise the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway to convert carbon oxides (CO and CO<sub>2</sub>) into valuable products are the most advanced biocatalysts for gas fermentation. However, our understanding of the functionalities of the genes involved in the C<sub>1</sub>-fixing gene cluster and its closely-linked genes is incomplete. Here, we investigate the role of two genes with unclear functions-hypothetical protein (<i>hp;</i> LABRINI_07945) and CooT nickel binding protein (<i>nbp;</i> LABRINI_07950)-directly adjacent and expressed at similar levels to the C<sub>1</sub>-fixing gene cluster in the gas-fermenting model-acetogen <i>Clostridium autoethanogenum.</i> Targeted deletion of either the <i>hp</i> or <i>nbp</i> gene using CRISPR/nCas9, and phenotypic characterisation in heterotrophic and autotrophic batch and autotrophic bioreactor continuous cultures revealed significant growth defects and altered by-product profiles for both &#x2206;<i>hp</i> and &#x2206;<i>nbp</i> strains. Variable effects of gene deletion on autotrophic batch growth on rich or minimal media suggest that both genes affect the utilisation of complex nutrients. Autotrophic chemostat cultures showed lower acetate and ethanol production rates and higher carbon flux to CO<sub>2</sub> and biomass for both deletion strains. Additionally, proteome analysis revealed that disruption of either gene affects the expression of proteins of the C<sub>1</sub>-fixing gene cluster and ethanol synthesis pathways. Our work contributes to a better understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships in acetogens and offers engineering targets to improve carbon fixation efficiency in gas fermentation.

### Keywords
Gas fermentation; acetogen; crispr/ncas9; genetic engineering; metabolomics; proteomics; chemostat; continuous cultivation; syngas

### Affiliations
ERA Chair in Gas Fermentation Technologies, Institute of Technology, University of Tartu

### Submitter
Kaspar Valgepea

### Lab Head
Dr Kaspar Valgepea
ERA Chair in Gas Fermentation Technologies, Institute of Technology, University of Tartu


