### Accession
PXD023435

### Title
CDK4/6 inhibitors induce repication stress to cause long-term cell cycle withdrawal

### Description
CDK4/6 inhibitors arrest the cell cycle in G1-phase. They are licenced to treat breast cancer and are also undergoing clinical trials against a range of other tumour types. To facilitate these efforts, it is important to understand why a temporary cell cycle arrest in G1 causes long-lasting effects on tumour growth. Here we demonstrate that a prolonged G1-arrest following CDK4/6 inhibition downregulates replisome components and impairs origin licencing. This causes a failure in DNA replication after release from that arrest, resulting in a p53-dependent withdrawal from the cell cycle. If p53 is absent, then cells bypass the G2-checkpoint and undergo a catastrophic mitosis resulting in excessive DNA damage. These data therefore link CDK4/6 inhibition to genotoxic stress; a phenotype that is shared by most other broad-spectrum anti-cancer drugs. This provides a rationale to predict responsive tumour types and effective combination therapies, as demonstrated by the fact that chemotherapeutics that cause replication stress also induce sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in cell extraction buffer containing 2% SDS, 1X PhosStop (Roche) and 1x cOMPLETE protease inhibitor (Roche) and scraped into ml tubes. An aliquot of extract containing 100 µg protein was then digested by benzonase (Merck) and precipitated by acetone. The protein pellet was resuspended in digest buffer (0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, Sigma-Aldrich, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling using a 6-plex TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted. Peptides were then separated using high pH reverse phase chromatography (Waters BEH 4.6 mm×150 mm C18 column; A, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.0; B, 80% acetonitrile plus 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.0) into 16 fractions (Hiraga et al., 2017). Fractions were then dried under vacuum and resuspended in 5% formic acid for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.  LC-MS/MS  LC-MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and ionized using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at a constant temperature of 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min, then to 95% in 11 min. The percentage of mobile phase B remained constant for 10 min and returned to 2% until the end of the run (160 min).  MS1 survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350–1500 m/z) with an ion target of 2.0×105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For MS2, precursors selected using a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2 Th with an AGC target of 1E5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Product ions from HCD fragmentation (32% normalised collision energy were then scanned using the Orbitrap with 30k resolution. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008), which incorporates the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The spectra were searched against a human FASTA database (accessed June 2018) containing all reviewed entries in the reference UniProt Human Proteome. The processed output was then analyzed using R or RStudio software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk4/6 cancer replication stress cell cycle senescence

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Tony Ly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK


