### Accession
PXD028047

### Title
The periplasmic oxidoreductase DsbA is required for virulence of the phytopathogen Dickeya solani

### Description
The DsbA oxidoreductase is a crucial factor responsible for introduction of disulfide bonds to the extracytoplasmic proteins in bacteria. A lack of the proper disulfides frequently leads to instability and/or loss of protein function. In pathogens, numerous envelope and extracellular proteins play important roles in pathogenesis; therefore, their improper disulfide bonding may lead to avirulent phenotypes. The importance of the DsbA function in phytopathogens has not been extensively studied yet. Dickeya solani is a bacterium from the Soft Rot Pectobacteriaceae group which is responsible for very high economic losses mainly on potato. In recent years, D. solani became the most abundant potato pathogen among Dickeya species in Europe. In this work, using the D. solani dsbA mutant, we demonstrated that a lack of the DsbA function caused loss of virulence. Mutant bacteria were deficient in most secreted virulence determinants and were not able to develop disease symptoms in the natural host, the potato plant. The SWATH-MS-based proteomic analysis revealed that the dbsA mutation led to multifaceted effects in the D. solani cells. First of all, the levels of the majority of plant cell wall degrading enzymes and proteins related to motility and chemotaxis were severely reduced. Furthermore, the protein profiles suggested induction of the envelope and cytoplasm stress responses in the mutant cells. Finally, the outer membrane barrier seemed to be disturbed by the mutation. Our results clearly demonstrate that the function played by the DsbA oxidoreductase is indispensable for D. solani virulence and a lack of DsbA significantly disturbs cellular physiology. A thorough analysis of proteomic research suggests that a lack of virulence may result from both, abnormalities of the disulfide deprived virulence determinants and the envelope stress-dependent repression of the virulence genes in the dsbA mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Five independently inoculated cultures of each D. solani strain (wt or dsbA) were grown overnight in the minimal medium M63Y at 30 °C with aeration. Then, the OD of the cultures was normalized to 0.7 and the bacterial suspensions were inoculated 1:50 into fresh medium. Bacteria were further grown with shaking (180 rpm) for 16 hours under microaerobic conditions. To induce oxidative stress, hydrogen peroxide was added to a final concentration of 0.25 mM and the cultures were incubated for 30 min. For the whole cell proteome analysis, 14 ml of each culture was centrifuged (5000 g, 10 min), the cells were suspended in the lysis solution (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and incubated 9 min in 96-98 °C. Solutions were cooled on ice for 10 minutes and stored at -80 °C.  To isolate secreted protein (secretome) fractions, 45 ml portions of each bacterial culture were centrifuged (5000 g, 10 min). The supernatant, containing secreted proteins, was collected and filtered by syringe filters (PVDF membrane, 0.22 µm, Bionovo, Poland) to remove the remaining bacterial cells. Then EDTA was added to a final concentration of 1.0 mM and incubated for 5 min on ice. Then, the supernatant volumes were reduced to 2 ml by centrifugation (6000 g, 4 °C) using VIVASPIN 20 concentrators (Membrane 3000 MWCO, Sartorius, UK). The secretome fractions were supplemented with the protease inhibitors (Roche) and were further concentrated to a volume of 1 ml. The concentrated protein solutions (approx. 1 ml) were mixed with 9 ml of 99% cold ethanol and centrifuged (30882 g, 4 °C, 30 min). The precipitates were washed in 2 ml of ethanol, centrifuged (30882 g, 4 °C, 10 min) and dried at -20 °C overnight. Next, the secretome precipitates were dissolved in the lysis solution and stored as described above. Proteins were digested by trypsin in a standard FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) procedure. Briefly, 100 µg of protein was placed in a Microcon with a 10 kDa cutoff membrane (Merck-Millipore) and washed multiple times with the urea containing buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) by centrifugation at 10 000 g. Next, the cysteine residues were alkylated using the 55 mM iodoacetamide solution in the urea buffer by a 20-minute incubation in darkness at room temperature. The excess of iodoacetamide was washed away with subsequent centrifugations with the urea buffer followed by the digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Filters were placed in new tubes and samples were incubated with trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-substrate weight ratio) overnight at 37 °C. After incubation, proteolytic peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 10 000 g. Samples were then desalted in a STAGE Tips procedure on in-house prepared tips containing Empore C18 resin (3M). Tips were prepared by subsequent centrifugations with methanol, 60% acetonitrile and 1% acetic acid in water, and 1% acetic acid in water. 10 µg of peptides was placed in each tip, and tips were washed with 1% acetic acid in water before final elution with 60% acetonitrile and 1% acetic acid in water to new tubes. Samples were concentrated to 40 µl in a SpeedVac before mass spectrometry measurements. LC-MS/MS measurements were conducted in a positive ion mode on a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX) coupled with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent). The instrument was operated by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software (SCIEX). LC separations were carried out on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm, Eksigent) in 60-minute gradients of 3.5-20% buffer B or 7-35% buffer B for proteome and secretome analysis, respectively (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS runs of whole proteome samples in data-dependent analysis (DDA) mode consisted of a TOF scan in the m/z range of 400-1200 Da in 50 ms and Product ion scan in the m/z range of 100-1800 m/z in 40 ms resulting in a cycle time of 0.9 s. DDA analysis of secretome samples consisted of a TOF scan in the m/z range of 400-1200 Da in 100 ms and Product ion scan in the m/z range of 100-1800 m/z in 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 1.15 s. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID). All samples were analysed once for the purpose of spectral library generation. MS analysis in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode was conducted with the SWATH-MS method focused on high sensitivity. MS methods were adjusted separately for the whole proteome and secretome samples. In both cases, the m/z range of 400-1200 Da was covered by 25 overlapping windows of variable width constructed in the SWATHTuner software with the focus on equalized ion frequency. All SWATH-MS measurements comprised a TOF survey scan in the m/z range of 400-1200 Da in 50 ms and Product Ion scans in the m/z range of 100-1800 Da in 40 ms, resulting in cycle time of 1.1 s. All samples were measured in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis steps were performed separately for the whole proteome and secretome samples. Database search was conducted in ProteinPilot 5.0.2 software (SCIEX) against the UniprotKB D. solani D s0432-1 database (version from 19.10.2020) with an automated false discovery rate analysis. Only proteins identified at 1% FDR were considered valid identifications. Database search results were imported to the PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX) to construct spectral libraries with the exclusion of shared peptides. SWATH-MS measurement files were uploaded into software and analyzed using relevant libraries. Results were exported to MarkerView software (SCIEX) and normalized using Total Area Sums (TAS) approach. T-tests between studied groups were performed and the protein concentration changes were considered to be statistically significant if the p-value was lower than 0.05, and the fold change was lower than 0.5 or greater than 2.

### Publication Abstract
In bacteria, the DsbA oxidoreductase is a crucial factor responsible for the introduction of disulfide bonds to extracytoplasmic proteins, which include important virulence factors. A lack of proper disulfide bonds frequently leads to instability and/or loss of protein function; therefore, improper disulfide bonding may lead to avirulent phenotypes. The importance of the DsbA function in phytopathogens has not been extensively studied yet. <i>Dickeya solani</i> is a bacterium from the Soft Rot <i>Pectobacteriaceae</i> family which is responsible for very high economic losses mainly in potato. In this work, we constructed a <i>D. solani dsbA</i> mutant and demonstrated that a lack of DsbA caused a loss of virulence. The mutant bacteria showed lower activities of secreted virulence determinants and were unable to develop disease symptoms in a potato plant. The SWATH-MS-based proteomic analysis revealed that the <i>dsbA</i> mutation led to multifaceted effects in the <i>D. solani</i> cells, including not only lower levels of secreted virulence factors, but also the induction of stress responses. Finally, the outer membrane barrier seemed to be disturbed by the mutation. Our results clearly demonstrate that the function played by the DsbA oxidoreductase is crucial for <i>D. solani</i> virulence, and a lack of DsbA significantly disturbs cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Dickeya solani, Lc-ms/ms, Swath-ms, Dsba

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


