### Accession
PXD017059

### Title
Correlation of Prevotella abundancy with a particular carbohydrate-active CAZy enzyme profile in healthy gut microbiota

### Description
Gut microbiota participates in diverse metabolic and homeostatic functions related to health and well-being. Individual variation in its composition depends on many factors including dietary factors. We profiled enzymatic activity of fecal microbiota in 63 healthy adult individuals using metaproteomics, and identified Bacteroides and Prevotella –derived microbial CAZy (carbohydrate-active) enzymes involved in glycan foraging. One particular profile with many Bacteroides-derived CAZy was identified in one-third of subjects (n=20), and it associated with high abundancy of Bacteroides in most subjects. In other subjects (n=8) with dietary parameters similar to former, microbiota showed intense expression of Prevotella-derived CAZy including exo−beta−(1,4)−xylanase, xylan-1,4−beta−xylosidase, alpha−L−arabinofuranosidase and several other CAZy belonging to glycosyl hydrolase families involved in digestion of complex plant-derived polysaccharides. This associated invariably with robust representation of Prevotella in gut microbiota, while subjects with intermediate representation of Prevotella showed no CAZy profile. Identification of Bacteroides- and Prevotella-derived CAZy in microbiota proteome and their association with robust differences in microbiota composition, the latter with exceptionally high Prevotella abundancy in the gut, are in evidence of individual variation in metabolic adaptation of gut microbiota with an impact on colonizing competence.

### Sample Protocol
Samples and study subjects Study subjects were overweight but otherwise healthy women in their early pregnancy, and their stool samples were originally collected for an intervention trial published earlier (28). For this study, we used parallel stool samples collected at study entry before any intervention. Samples were put at + 4 °C immediately after their collection and an aliquot of the sample was stored at -80 °C within hours. Dietary intake was calculated from three-day-food diaries recorded within a week prior to collection of stool sample. Mean daily intakes of nutrients were calculated using computerized software described earlier. Sample preparation for bacterial proteome analyses Thawed fecal material was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at +4 °C including protease inhibitor (aprotinin) and allowed to dissolve with gentle agitation. Bulk material was removed by spinning the samples at low G force, and supernatant containing bacteria was collected. Bacteria content in the supernatant was determined by in situ labelling of a 16S-RNA consensus sequence to cover the detection of all eubacteria. Bacteria were counted by flow cytometry using a bacterial staining kit (Thermo Fisher) allowing exclusion of dead cells. Following flow cytometry, an aliquot of supernatant containing 108 bacteria was used to prepare each sample. Bacteria were pelleted down and stored as pellets at -80⁰C until protein isolation. Proteins were extracted from pelleted bacteria using NoviPure Microbial Protein kit (MO BIO Laboratories Inc.) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protease inhibitors (Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets, Thermo Scientific) were added to lysis buffer. Mechanical cell lysis was performed by bead-beating using TissueLyser-device (Qiagen) and two 5 min cycles at 50 Hz. Between cycles samples were placed on ice for 5 min. Protein concentrations were determined by DC Lowry (BioRad) method. Fifty microgram proteins were digested by trypsin using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method (37). Peptides were desalted by SepPac C18 96-well plate (Waters), evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid. Peptide concentrations were checked with NanoDrop device (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and iRT peptides (Biognosys AG) required for retention time calibration were added to all samples according to manufacturer’s instructions before mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Mass spectrometry Proteins were identified and quantitated using data independent acquisition (DIA) based MS method. A spectral library was created by analyzing seven pooled samples six times with data dependent acquisition method (DDA). All MS analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source and connected to a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For DDA analysis 2 µg peptides and for DIA analysis 1 µg peptides were loaded on a C18 column (75 μm x 40 cm, ReproSil-Pur 1.9 μm 120 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) with flow rate 200µl/min. The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A 75 min gradient from 7% to 25% B, followed by 15 min from 25% to 35% B was used to elute peptides. MS data were acquired automatically by Thermo Xcalibur 3.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The DDA method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 380-1200 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation of 20 most intense peptide ions. The DIA MS method covered a mass range from 400 to 1000 m/z through 40 consecutive windows with isolation width of 15 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Diatools software: https://github.com/elolab/diatools

### Publication Abstract
Gut microbiota participates in diverse metabolic and homeostatic functions related to health and well-being. Its composition varies between individuals, and depends on factors related to host and microbial communities, which need to adapt to utilize various nutrients present in gut environment. We profiled fecal microbiota in 63 healthy adult individuals using metaproteomics, and focused on microbial CAZy (carbohydrate-active) enzymes involved in glycan foraging. We identified two distinct CAZy profiles, one with many Bacteroides-derived CAZy in more than one-third of subjects (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25), and it associated with high abundance of Bacteroides in most subjects. In a smaller subset of donors (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) with dietary parameters similar to others, microbiota showed intense expression of Prevotella-derived CAZy including exo-beta-(1,4)-xylanase, xylan-1,4-beta-xylosidase, alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase and several other CAZy belonging to glycosyl hydrolase families involved in digestion of complex plant-derived polysaccharides. This associated invariably with high abundance of Prevotella in gut microbiota, while in subjects with lower abundance of Prevotella, microbiota showed no Prevotella-derived CAZy. Identification of Bacteroides- and Prevotella-derived CAZy in microbiota proteome and their association with differences in microbiota composition are in evidence of individual variation in metabolic specialization of gut microbes affecting their colonizing competence.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Finland TYKS Microbiology, Turku University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Sami Pietila

### Lab Head
Dr Arno Hänninen
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Finland TYKS Microbiology, Turku University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland


