### Accession
PXD024426

### Title
Extracellular vimentin mimics VEGF and is a target for anti-angiogenic immunotherapy

### Description
Anti-angiogenic anticancer therapies possess immune-stimulatory properties by counteracting pro-angiogenic molecular mechanisms. We report that tumor endothelial cells ubiquitously overexpress and secrete the intermediate filament protein vimentin through type III unconventional mechanisms. Extracellular vimentin is pro-angiogenic and functionally mimics VEGF action, while concomitantly acting as inhibitor of leukocyte-endothelial interactions. Targeting of extracellular vimentin presents a promising anti-angiogenic immunotherapy strategy against cancer.  Here we describe profiling of the HUVEC (Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cell) proteome, with special emphasis on vimentin (variants) in the different fractions. We have evidence that vimentin is externalized and deposited in the matrix of cultured cells and is as such available for targeted antiangiogenic therapeutics. The aim of the experiment is to determine the protein variants of vimentin in the cell, the secretome, and in the matrix deposited by the cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Lysate, secretome and deposits of HUVECs (human umbilical vein endothelial cells) were separated on NuPAGE 4–12% precast gradient Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) Gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA), washed in MilliQ water, and stored at 4°C until processed by in-gel digestion. For in-gel digestion, each lane on the gel was cut into five gel slices. The gel slices were then washed and dehydrated once in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and twice in 50 mM ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN). Gel slices were incubated in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC at 56°C during one hour to break cysteine bonds. Afterwards, alkylation was performed by incubation in 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC at room temperature for 45 minutes in the dark. Gel slices were subsequently washed with ABC and ABC/50% ACN. Each slice was cut into 1mm3  cubes and washed in ABC/ACN. Cubes were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Incubation overnight was performed with 6.25 ng/mL trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega cat# V5111) covered with ABC to allow digestion at 23°C. Extraction of peptides was performed once in 1% formic acid and twice in 5% formic acid/50% ACN. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the volume was reduced to 50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2 × 105 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (downloaded Januarry 2014, 42104 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Proteins were quantified by LFQ and by spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Vimentin, Angiogenesis, Anti-angiogenic therapy, Vegf, Cancer

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


