### Accession
PXD031869

### Title
PT-modified B12 probe and Non-PT-modified B34 probe pull-down with Salmonella enterica serovar Cerro 87 cell lysate

### Description
To capture proteins that exhibit differential binding with PT- and non-PT-modified DNA in vivo, we performed pull-down assays using biotinylated DNA probes and the cell lysate of S. enterica serovar Cerro 87 that contains the dndBCDE-dndFGH module. For these experiments, we used two 30 bp DNA probes, B12 and B34, which share the same DNA sequences but possess PT-modified 5’-GPSAAC-3’/5’-GPSTTC-3’ and non-PT-modified 5’-GAAC-3’/5’-GTTC-3’ motifs, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
The Cerro 87 strain was inoculated in LB medium and cultured at 28 °C overnight, and the next day, it was diluted 1:50 with 300 mL of fresh LB medium and grown to an optical density measured at 600 nm (OD600) of ~1.0. Then, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 15 min. The cell pellet was washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer three times and then resuspended in 12 mL of suspension buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 30 mM NaCl, 60 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM PMSF, pH 7.2), the resuspended cells were lysed by sonication on ice and then centrifuged at 17000 × g, 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was then transferred to a new tube, and the protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method(65). It was then diluted with suspension buffer to final concentration of 4 mg/mL. DNA substrates B12 and B34 were prepared by annealing oligonucleotides B1 and B2 and B3 and B4, respectively. Fifty microliters of streptavidin magnetic beads (which can bind 100 pmol DNA) was used in each sample. First, the beads were washed with oligonucleotide binding buffer (0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) three times and resuspended in 500 μL of oligonucleotide binding buffer. Then, 250 pmol DNA substrate (5 μL) was added and incubated with the beads on a rotator for 1 h at room temperature to ensure that the beads were completely bound to the DNA substrate. Then, the beads were washed three times with oligonucleotide binding buffer on a magnetic separator to remove unbound DNA substrate. Then, 500 μL of cell lysate was added to the beads and incubated on a rotator at 4 °C for 4 h to allow the protein in the cell lysate to bind to the DNA substrate on the beads. The beads were then washed with suspension buffer 5 times on a magnetic separator to remove nonspecifically bound proteins. The bound proteins were then released by adding SDS–PAGE protein loading buffer and incubated at 95 °C for 10 min and then centrifuged at 15000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant was later used for protein identification and quantification. The pulled-down proteins were separated by 10% SDS–PAGE, and electrophoresis was stopped when the bromophenol blue band reached ~1 cm below the stacking gel. The in-gel trypsin digestion of protein and peptide extraction were carried out as described by Hu et al. The digested peptides were desalted using a Strata X column (Phenomenex), vacuum-dried and then resuspended in 200 μL of buffer A (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA)). After centrifugation at 20000 × g for 10 min, 10 μL of supernatant (containing approximately 5 μg of protein) was loaded with an autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column of an LC-20AD nano-HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The peptides were then eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter of 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, and then, a 44 min gradient was run with 2 to 35% B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min, followed by 2 min with a linear gradient to 80% B, maintained with 80% B for 4 min and finally return to 2% B in 1 min. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by MS/MS with a Q Exactive spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 27.0; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans was applied for the 15 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20000 in the MS survey scan with a following Dynamic Exclusion duration of 15 s. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to optimize the spectra generated by the orbitrap. The AGC target for full MS was 3e6 and 1e5 for MS2. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2000. For MS2 scans, the m/z scan range was 100-1800.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2,Thermo),[5600 msconverter] and the MGF file were searched. Proteins identification were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK;version 2.3.02) against database containing 4511 sequences. For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 20ppm was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.1Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavages in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M),Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. And each confident protein identification involve at least one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella，q exactive, Phosphorothioation modification

### Affiliations
Wuhan University

### Submitter
You Tang

### Lab Head
Dr You Tang
Wuhan University


