### Accession
PXD018692

### Title
Salivary proteome in canine pyometra

### Description
The aims were to explore whether saliva composition could reflect the physiopathological changes occurring in canine pyometra and to identify potential biomarkers of the disease using a high-throughput quantitative proteomic analysis. Saliva samples from six healthy (H) and six bitches with pyometra (P) were analysed using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) - based approach.

### Sample Protocol
For sample collection, at least 0.5 mL of total saliva was collected from each patient by introducing a small piece of sponge in the mouth, as described elsewhere (21). When the sponges were thoroughly moistened, they were placed into collection devices (Salivette saliva collection tube / V-Bottom, Sarstedt, Aktiengesellschaft & Co, Nümbrecht, Germany), centrifuged (3000 x g for 10 min, 4 °C), and the supernatant was stored at −80 °C until analysis. From each sample, 35 µg of protein were subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and labelling using 6-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific) as described (Horvatić et all., J Proteomics (2019) 192:64–77). Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow system (Dionex, Camberley, UK) and Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for the LC−MS/MS, as described elsewhere (Horvatić et all., J Proteomics (2019) 192:64–77).

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST algorithm, Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., Thermo Fisher Scientific), was used for peptide identification and relative quantification. NCBI database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded 04/04/2019; 172083 sequences) was performed considering two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow was used to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification, which was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The present study evaluated for the first time changes in the saliva proteome in bitches with pyometra through a high-throughput quantitative proteomic analysis. The aims were to explore whether saliva composition could reflect the physiopathological changes occurring in canine pyometra and to identify potential biomarkers of the disease. Saliva samples from six healthy (H) and six bitches with pyometra (P) were analyzed using tandem mass tags-based approach. Additionally, 15 samples were used for the validation of changes in haptoglobin (Hp) concentration in saliva of dogs with pyometra. Proteomic analysis quantified 707 proteins in saliva. Comparison of the two groups revealed 16 unique proteins significantly modulated in saliva, with S100A calcium-binding protein 12 (S100A12), vimentin, and Hp the most up-regulated in canine pyometra. According to PANTHER (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships) classification tool, these proteins are mainly related to proinflammatory mediators, acute-phase proteins, and sepsis. In conclusion, it can be stated that there are changes in various proteins in saliva in canine pyometra reflecting different physiopathological changes occurring in this disease. These proteins could be a source of potential non-invasive biomarkers for this disease that should be confirmed in future studies.

### Keywords
Tmt, Saliva, Dog, Canine pyometra

### Affiliations
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


