### Accession
PXD025285

### Title
Endolysosomal processing of N-glycans on acid alpha-glucosidase is critical to attain the most active enzyme for hydrolyzing glycogen

### Description
Acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) is a lysosomal glycogen-catabolizing enzyme, a deficiency in which leads to Pompe disease. Pompe disease can be treated with systemic recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), but the current standard of care has poor uptake in skeletal muscles, limiting clinical efficacy. Further, it is unclear how the specific cellular processing steps of GAA post-delivery to lysosomes impact efficacy. GAA undergoes both proteolytic cleavage and glycan trimming within the endolysosomal pathway, yielding a more active enzyme for hydrolyzing its natural substrate glycogen. The relative contributions for each of these processing steps for increasing rhGAA glycogen hydrolytic activity are unclear. Here, we developed a tool kit of modified rhGAAs that allowed us to dissect the individual contributions of glycan trimming and proteolysis on maturation-associated increases in hydrolytic activity on glycogen. Chemical modifications of terminal sialic acids on N-glycans blocked sialidase activity in vitro and in cellulo, thereby preventing downstream glycan trimming without affecting proteolysis. This sialidase-resistant rhGAA displayed only partial activation following endolysosomal processing, as evidenced by lower catalytic efficiency on glycogen. We also generated enzymatically deglycosylated rhGAA that was shown to be partially activated despite not undergoing proteolytic processing. Taken together, these data suggest that an optimal rhGAA ERT would require both N-glycan and proteolytic processing to attain the most efficient enzyme kinetics for glycogen hydrolysis.

### Sample Protocol
17.5-25 μg of unmodified and modified rhGAA were denatured with urea, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin and Lys-C in a 1:10 ratio of protease to protein. The released glycopeptides were desalted by solid phase extraction (SPE) on a micro-spin C18 column, dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted with 0.2% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water. ~5 μg of the purified glycopeptides were loaded on a Waters Acquity 1X50 mm CSH C18 UPLC analytical column for liquid chromatographic (LC) separation and High-Resolution Tandem Mass Spectrometry analysis. The LC apparatus consisted of a NanoLC system operated at a flowrate of 35 μL/min. The eluent was composed of Mobile Phase A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water), and Mobile Phase B (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile). Mobile Phase B was used in a gradient profile of 1% to 50% for 90 minutes to separate the glycopeptides, then up to 95% Mobile Phase B for 15 minutes to elute other highly retentive peptides off the column. Finally, the column was re-equilibrated with 99% of Mobile Phase A and 1% of Mobile Phase B for the next injection. The MS analysis was carried out by positive Electrospray Ionization (ESI+) mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid operated at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z = 120. For the MS1 level data generation, mass isolation was performed in the quadrupole in the scan range of 300-2000 m/z. The Automatic Gain Control (AGC) Target was set at 2.0E5 with a Maximum Injection Time of 50 ms. At the MS2 level, data were acquired by data dependent MS2 OT HCD at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z = 120. MS raw data were acquired using Xcalibur.

### Data Protocol
The parameters used in the raw data searches are defined as follows: The raw spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens (Human) GAA protein sequence (UniProtKB # P10253). The final glycopeptide data were reported based on zero missed cleavages. The Full MS precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 peptide fragment mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm. Fixed Modifications included: Carbamidomethyl (Cys). Variable Modifications included: Modified glycans (Asn), Oxidation (Met), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Gln). A total of three Fixed or Variable Modifications were allowed per peptide. Allowed N-Linked Glycan modifications (modified at Asn residues in sequons consisting of Asn-X-Ser/Thr, where X is any amino acid except proline) were included in a User-Defined library that consisted of Oligomannose, Hybrid, and Biantennery Complex Type N-glycans that were previously reported for human GAA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosome, Enzyme processing, Mannose-6-phosphate, Glycogen storage disease, Lysosomal storage disease, Lysosomal glycoprotein

### Affiliations
Amicus Therapeutics

### Submitter
M. Osman Sheikh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. M. Osman Sheikh
Amicus Therapeutics


