### Accession
PXD008152

### Title
Effects of lipid diets on the metaproteome of mouse colon mucosa

### Description
Eight mice colon samples were submitted for iTRAQ labeling, high pH reversed phase fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were determined using a Bicinchonic acid (BCA) protein assay. Samples were precipitated overnight in acetone followed by resolubilzation in Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Proteins were reduced with Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Proteins were then in-solution digested with trypsin and labeled with the appropriate iTRAQ label. iTRAQ labeled peptides were then combined, eluted speed vacuum centrifuged to reduce volume before separation by high pH reversed phase HPLC. Fractions were collected every minute for 96 minutes. The HPLC fractions were then reduced in volume by lyophilization and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.and were concatenated into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fraction (e.g fractions 1, 25, 49, and 73 were combined).  C18 StageTip concentrated samples were analyzed by reversed phase nanoflow HPLC with nano-electrospray ionization using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a was 2 hours reverse phase gradient per HPLC fraction.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software suite (Thermo Scientific).   Spectrum Selection was used to generate peak lists of the HCD spectra (parameters:  activation type: HCD; s/n cut-off: 1.5; total intensity threshold: 0; minimum peak count: 1; precursor mass: 350-5000 Da). The peak lists were submitted to an in-house database search using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science), and were searched against the following database; Uniprot-Mouse (43,908 sequences; 19,909,825 residues). For bacterial proteome analysis, mascot was set up to search Bacteroidetes (unknown version, 11363 entries) (only "20160330_REC-1563_Fr_1_24 Bacteroidetes") assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and Firmicutes (unknown version, 17039 entries) (only "20160330_REC-1563_Fr_1_24 Firmicutes") also assuming trypsin. Search parameters were:  precursor tolerance 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 15mmu (for FT MS/MS HCD data); enzyme Trypsin; 1 missed cleavage; instrument type FT-ICR ESI; fixed modification: Methylthio (C), iTRAQ8plex (K), and iTRAQ8plex (N-term); variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ), iTRAQ8plex (Y).  The HCD Percolator settings were:  Max delta Cn 0.05; Target FDR (false discovery rate) strict 0.01, Target FDR relaxed 0.05 with validation based on q-Value.Proteome Discoverer result files were then analyzed using Scaffold for statistical validation of protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The dynamics of the tripartite relationship between the host, gut bacteria and diet in the gut is relatively unknown. An imbalance between harmful and protective gut bacteria, termed dysbiosis, has been linked to many diseases and has most often been attributed to high-fat dietary intake. However, we recently clarified that the type of fat, not calories, were important in the development of murine colitis. To further understand the host-microbe dynamic in response to dietary lipids, we fed mice isocaloric high-fat diets containing either milk fat, corn oil or olive oil and performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the colon microbiome and mass spectrometry-based relative quantification of the colonic metaproteome. The corn oil diet, rich in omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids, increased the potential for pathobiont survival and invasion in an inflamed, oxidized and damaged gut while saturated fatty acids promoted compensatory inflammatory responses involved in tissue healing. We conclude that various lipids uniquely alter the host-microbe interaction in the gut. While high-fat consumption has a distinct impact on the gut microbiota, the type of fatty acids alters the relative microbial abundances and predicted functions. These results support that the type of fat are key to understanding the biological effects of high-fat diets on gut health.

### Keywords
Lipid diet, Mouse, Colon mucosa, Metaproteome, Itraq, Fatty acids

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia Okanagan
IDEAS Laboratory:Center for Microbiome & Inflammatory Research UBC Okanagan

### Submitter
Nijiati Abulizi

### Lab Head
Dr Deanna Gibson
IDEAS Laboratory:Center for Microbiome & Inflammatory Research UBC Okanagan


