### Accession
PXD035578

### Title
Histone chaperone ASF1 mediates H3.3-H4 deposition in Arabidopsis

### Description
Histone chaperones and chromatin remodelers control nucleosome dynamics, essential for transcription, replication, and DNA repair. The histone chaperone Anti-Silencing Factor 1 (ASF1) plays a central role in facilitating CAF-1-mediated replication-dependent H3.1 deposition and HIRA-mediated replication-independent H3.3 deposition in yeast and metazoans. Whether ASF1 function is evolutionarily conserved in plants is unknown. Here, we show that Arabidopsis ASF1 proteins display an exclusive preference for the H3.3-depositing HIRA complex. Simultaneous mutation of both Arabidopsis ASF1 genes caused a decrease in chromatin density and ectopic H3.1 occupancy at loci typically enriched with H3.3. Genetic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data indicate that ASF1 proteins strongly prefer the HIRA complex over CAF-1. asf1 mutants also displayed an increase in spurious Pol II transcriptional initiation, and showed defects in the maintenance of gene body CG DNA methylation and in the distribution of histone modifications. Furthermore, ectopic targeting of ASF1 caused excessive histone deposition, less accessible chromatin, and gene silencing. These findings reveal the importance of ASF1-mediated H3.3-H4 deposition via the HIRA pathway for proper epigenetic regulation of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Dried protein samples were resuspended in 50 μl digestion buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Protein disulfide bonds were subjected to reduction using 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 min, free cysteine residues were alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min. Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8 to reach a urea concentration of less than 2 M then digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio for 4 and 12 hours, respectively. The digestion reaction was terminated by the addition of formic acid to 5% (vol/vol) with centrifugation. Finally, samples were desalted using C18 tips (Thermo Scientific, 87784) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Tryptic peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused-silica capillary, packed in-house with bulk 1.9 μM ReproSil-Pur beads with 120 Å pores as described previously1. Peptides were analyzed using a 140 min water-acetonitrile gradient delivered by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated initially at 400 nL/min flow rate with 1% buffer B (acetonitrile solution with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid) and 99% buffer A (water solution with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). Buffer B was increased to 6% over 5 min at which time the flow rate was reduced to 200 nl/min. A linear gradient from 6-28% B was applied to the column over the course of 123 min. The linear gradient of buffer B was then further increased to 28-35% for 8 min followed by a rapid ramp-up to 85% for column washing. Eluted peptides were ionized via a Nimbus electrospray ionization source (Phoenix S&T) by application of a distal voltage of 2.2 kV.

### Data Protocol
All label-free mass spectrometry data were collected using data dependent acquisition on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an MS1 resolution of 120,000 followed by sequential MS2 scans at a resolution of 15,000. Database searching was performed with the ProLuCID algorithm against Arabidopsis proteome database to generate peptide and protein identifications followed by filtering by DTASelect using a decoy database-estimated false discovery rate of < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteomics, Lcms

### Affiliations
UCLA

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenhui Zhong
UCLA


