### Accession
PXD011696

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomic Analysis Reveals ARMC10 as an AMPK Substrate that Regulates Mitochondrial Dynamics

### Description
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key regulator of cellular energy homeostasis. Although AMPK has been studied extensively in cellular processes, understanding of its substrates and downstream functional network, and their contributions to cell fate and disease development, remains incomplete. To elucidate the AMPK-dependent signaling pathways, we performed global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using wild-type and AMPK1/2-double knockout cells and discovered 160 AMPK-dependent phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
AMPK1/2-DKO HEK293A and parental HEK293A cells were labeled via passaging for up to eight cell divisions in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium containing L-arginine (Arg 0) and L-lysine (Lys 0) (“light”) or L-arginine-U-13C615N4 (Arg 10) and L-lysine-U-13C615N2 (Lys 8) (“heavy”). Cells in light or heavy medium were treated or not treated with 100 M A769662 for 24 hours. Cells were collected and mixed immediately. Cells were solubilized in GdmCl lysis buffer (6 M GdmCl, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 10 mM dithiothreitol). Supernatants were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 56°C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Volumes (4) of -20°C acetone were added to precipitate the protein overnight. Precipitated protein was collected via centrifugation for 20 minutes at 2000  g at 4°C. Pellets were resuspended and digested in trypsin (1:100) for 18 hours at 37°C (1000 rpm).  The phosphopeptides were enriched by TiO2 beads and the enriched phosphopeptide samples were fractionated. Then the peptides were loaded onto a 10-cm column with a 150-M inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9 M C18, and subjected to nano-high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem MS analysis by using a nano-LC 1000 coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were separated with a 75-minute discontinuous gradient of 2-24%, 4-24%, or 8-26% ACN/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 800 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode, the precursor MS spectrum was scanned at 375-1300 m/z with 240k resolution at 400 m/z (2x106 AGC target), and the 25 strongest ions were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation with 35 normalized collision energy and 1 m/z isolation width and detected by using an ion trap with 30 seconds of dynamic exclusion time, 1x104 AGC target, and 100 ms of maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software program (version 1.5.2.8; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsreid, Germany) with a false-discovery rate less than 0.01 at the protein, peptide and modification level using default settings with the following minor changes: multiplicity was set to 2 with light and heavy labeling; oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-term, and Phospho (STY) were selected as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl(C) was selected as a fixed modification; and the minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Proteins and peptides were identified by using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database. The Human UniProt FASTA database (October 2015) containing 70,097 entries was searched. Peptides and proteins were quantified by using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key regulator of cellular energy homeostasis. Although AMPK has been studied extensively in cellular processes, understanding of its substrates and downstream functional network, and their contributions to cell fate and disease development, remains incomplete. To elucidate the AMPK-dependent signaling pathways, we performed global quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using wild-type and AMPK&#x3b1;1/&#x3b1;2-double knockout cells and discovered 160 AMPK-dependent phosphorylation sites. Further analysis using an AMPK consensus phosphorylation motif indicated that 32 of these sites are likely direct AMPK phosphorylation sites. We validated one uncharacterized protein, ARMC10, and demonstrated that the S45 site of ARMC10 can be phosphorylated by AMPK both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, ARMC10 overexpression was sufficient to promote mitochondrial fission, whereas ARMC10 knockout prevented AMPK-mediated mitochondrial fission. These results demonstrate that ARMC10 is an effector of AMPK that participates in dynamic regulation of mitochondrial fission and fusion.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Ampk, Lc-ms/ms, Silac

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


