### Accession
PXD047581

### Title
Shotgun proteomics analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial from human coronary artery endothelial cells fraction treated with calcioprotein particles

### Description
Calciprotein particles (CPPs) are indispensable scavengers of excessive Ca2+ and PO43- ions in the blood, being internalized and recycled by liver and spleen macrophages, monocytes, and endothelial cells (ECs). Despite the fact, that CPPs are associated with many cardiovascular diseases and are known to trigger endothelial dysfunction, the exact mechanisms of its recycling by ECs are still poorly studied. Particularly, because of the low resolution of the standard proteomics approach. We assume that CPPs internalization would cause oxidative stress and strong rearrangements in the transcription. Therefore, we performed a shotgun proteomics analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial fraction of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAEC) treated with primary (amorphous) or secondary (crystalline) CPPs (CPP-P and CPPs, respectively).  Contact: Dr Anton G. Kutikhin, Laboratory of Molecular, Translational and Digital Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russia (lab head).

### Sample Protocol
To synthesize CPP-P and CPP-S, stock solutions of CaCl2 (21115, Sigma-Aldrich) and Na2HPO4 (94046, Sigma-Aldrich) were diluted to equal concentrations of 3 (CPP-P) or 7.5 (CPP-S) mmol/L in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, 31330038) supplemented with 10% (CPP-P) or 1% fetal bovine serum (CPP-S). The reagents were added into DMEM in the following order: (1) FBS; (2) CaCl2; (3) Na2HPO4, with a vortexing between the added reagents. Following incubation for 24 hours in cell culture conditions, the medium was centrifuged at 200,000 × g for 1 hour, and the particle sediment was resuspended in the sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH = 7.4). HCAEC were cultured in T-150 flasks to ≈ 90% confluence (≈ 7.5 × 106 cells per flask) and were then exposed to 1500 µL CPP-P, CPP-S (0.6 × 105 particles per mL or 25 µg/mL calcium) or PBS in a serum-free medium for 24 hours. Cell cultures were washed with ice-cold (4°C) PBS (pH = 7.4), and cells were trypsinised, collected, fractionated into cytosolic, mitochondrial, and nuclear compartments, and then lysed using the respective cell fractionation kit (ab109719, Abcam) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Quantification of total protein was conducted using BCA Protein Assay Kit and Multiskan Sky microplate spectrophotometer in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. To prepare the samples for the tryptic digestion, we removed RIPA buffer or fractionation lysis buffers by acetone precipitation and resuspended protein pellet in 8 mol/L urea diluted in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured by Qubit 4 fluorometer with QuDye Protein Quanti-fication Kit, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein samples (15 µg) were then incubated in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 37°C with the subsequent incubation in 15 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Next, the samples were diluted with 7 volumes of 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C with 200 ng of trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein ratio; VA9000, Promega). The peptides were then frozen at −80°C for 1 hour and desalted with stage tips, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Desalted peptides were dried in a centrifuge concentrator for 3 hours and finally dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid for further shotgun proteomics analysis. Shotgun proteomics analysis was performed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer with nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics) using ≈ 500 ng of peptides. UHPLC was performed in the one-column separation mode with Aurora Series separation column with nanoZero technology (C18, 25 cm × 75 μm ID, 1.6 μm C18; IonOpticks, Australia) in a gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 55°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The gradient was from 2% to 37% phase B for 50 min with subsequent washing with 85% phase B for 10 min. Before each sample, the separation columns was equilibrated with 4 column volumes. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 L/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with 1.1 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.60 to 1.60 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in FragPipe software (v. 18.0) using MSFragger (v. 3.5) and Philosopher (v. 4.4.0) in Windows 10 OS with Java v. 11.0.9.1. The search was performed according to default LFQ-MBR DDA-PASEF workflow us-ing human reference proteome UP000005640 (uploaded 05.04.2022).  The search parameters were as follows: parent and fragment mass error tolerance 20 and 10 ppm respectively, protein and peptide FDR less than 1%, protease rule-trypsin (cleave after KR), and 2 possible missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbami-domethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Calciprotein particles (CPPs) are indispensable scavengers of excessive Ca<sup>2+</sup> and PO<sub>4</sub><sup>3-</sup> ions in blood, being internalised and recycled by liver and spleen macrophages, monocytes, and endothelial cells (ECs). Here, we performed a pathway enrichment analysis of cellular compartment-specific proteomes in primary human coronary artery ECs (HCAEC) and human internal thoracic artery ECs (HITAEC) treated with primary (amorphous) or secondary (crystalline) CPPs (CPP-P and CPPs, respectively). Exposure to CPP-P and CPP-S induced notable upregulation of: (1) cytokine- and chemokine-mediated signaling, Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent events, and apoptosis in cytosolic and nuclear proteomes; (2) H<sup>+</sup> and Ca<sup>2+</sup> transmembrane transport, generation of reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilisation, and intrinsic apoptosis in the mitochondrial proteome; (3) oxidative, calcium, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, unfolded protein binding, and apoptosis in the ER proteome. In contrast, transcription, post-transcriptional regulation, translation, cell cycle, and cell-cell adhesion pathways were underrepresented in cytosol and nuclear compartments, whilst biosynthesis of amino acids, mitochondrial translation, fatty acid oxidation, pyruvate dehydrogenase activity, and energy generation were downregulated in the mitochondrial proteome of CPP-treated ECs. Differentially expressed organelle-specific pathways were coherent in HCAEC and HITAEC and between ECs treated with CPP-P or CPP-S. Proteomic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear lysates from CPP-treated ECs confirmed bioinformatic filtration findings.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Mitochondria, Subcellular fractionation, Calciprotein particles, Timstof pro, Dda-pasef, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular, Translational and Digital Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russia
Saint-Petersburg State University

### Submitter
Egor Repkin

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Anton G. Kutikhin
Laboratory of Molecular, Translational and Digital Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russia


