### Accession
PXD002066

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Illuminates A Functional Interaction Between Mouse Homolog Of Diaphanous 2 (mDia2) And The Proteasome

### Description
Formin mDia2 is a cytoskeleton-regulatory protein that switches reversibly between a closed, auto-inhibited and an open, active conformation. Although the open conformation of mDia2 induces actin assembly thereby controlling many cellular processes, mDia2 possesses also actin-independent and conformation-insensitive scaffolding roles related to microtubules and p53, respectively. Thus, we hypothesise that mDia2 may have other unappreciated functions and regulatory modes. Here we identify and validate proteasome and Ubiquitin as genuine mDia2-interacting partners using quantitative proteomics and a multi-disciplinary approach, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
After immunoprecipitation of SILAC-labeled wild-type and mutant mDia2 expressing cells, interactors of mDia2 were identified using MaxQuant and Perseus. Findings were further complemented by/corroborated with biochemical experiments. SILAC samples were run on Thermo.

### Data Protocol
For immunoprecipitation of WT and MA mDia2-transfected cells, SILAC light (no label) and heavy (Arg10/Lys8) labels were used. SDS-PAGE separation, follwed by in-gel digestion: trypsin gold (Promega) o/n.Data were run on an LTQ Orbitrap connected to an Agilent 1200 LC system, on a 20 mm 100 µm i.d. Reprosil C18 trap column and a 400 mm 50 µm i.d. Reprosil C18 analytical column, split-flow to 100nL/min. Data were processed in MaxQuant 1.5.0.30 and Perseus. M(ox) and SILAC H/L as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Formin mDia2 is a cytoskeleton-regulatory protein that switches reversibly between a closed, autoinhibited and an open, active conformation. Although the open conformation of mDia2 induces actin assembly thereby controlling many cellular processes, mDia2 possesses also actin-independent and conformation-insensitive scaffolding roles related to microtubules and p53, respectively. Thus, we hypothesize that mDia2 may have other unappreciated functions and regulatory modes. Here we identify and validate proteasome and Ubiquitin as mDia2-interacting partners using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture-based quantitative proteomics and biochemistry, respectively. Although mDia2 is ubiquitinated, binds ubiquitinated proteins and free Ubiquitin, it is not a proteasome substrate. Surprisingly, knockdown of mDia2 increases the activity of the proteasome in vitro, whereas mDia2 overexpression has opposite effects only when it adopts the open conformation and cannot induce actin assembly. Consistently, a combination of candidate and unbiased proteome-wide analyses indicates that mDia2 regulates the cellular levels of proteasome substrate &#x3b2;-catenin and a number of ubiquitinated actin-regulatory proteins. Hence, these findings add more complexity to the mDia2 activity cycle by showing that the open conformation may control actin dynamics also through actin-independent regulation of the proteasome.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ubiquitin, Mdia2, Proteasome

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
The Netherlands Cancer Institute Proteomics Facility

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr A.F. Maarten Altelaar
The Netherlands Cancer Institute Proteomics Facility


