### Accession
PXD023233

### Title
Bacteria in biogas digestates for reduced climate forcing

### Description
Mitigation of N2O-emissions from soils is needed to reduce climate forcing by food production. Inoculating soils with N2O-reducing bacteria would be effective, but costly and impractical as a standalone operation. Here we demonstrate that digestates obtained after biogas production may provide a low-cost and widely applicable solution. Firstly, we show that indigenous N2O-reducing bacteria in digestates grow to high levels during anaerobic enrichment under N2O. Gas kinetics and meta-omic analysis show that the N2O respiring organisms, recovered as metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) grow by harvesting fermentation intermediates of the methanogenic consortium. Three digestate-derived denitrifying bacteria were obtained through isolation, one of which matched the recovered MAG of a dominant Dechloromonas-affiliated N2O reducer. While the identified N2O-reducers encoded genes required for a full denitrification pathway and could thus both produce and sequester N2O, their regulatory traits predicted that they act as N2O-sinks in the current system. Secondly, moving towards practical application, we show that these isolates grow by aerobic respiration in digestates, and that fertilization with these enriched digestates reduces N2O emissions. This shows that the ongoing implementation of biogas production in agriculture opens a new avenue for cheap and effective reduction of N2O emissions from food production.

### Sample Protocol
Digestate from a mesophilic anaerobic digester (wastewater treatment plant) was incubated at 20°C with addition of N2O. Dilution series of dispersed N2O enriched digestate were prepared and spread on agar plates (50 µL diluted suspension per plate) on all media (SS, D and AB). In order to select for N2O reducing strains the agar plates were incubated anoxically in 8.6 L anaerobe boxes which were first sparged with N2, then injecting ~8 vol % N2O. To secure anoxic conditions anaerobic boxes were equipped with two oxygen scavenger bags (3.5 L AnaeroGen™, OXOID). The plates were inspected after ~2 weeks, and a selection of visible colonies were picked and re-streaked on daughter plates with corresponding media and incubated anaerobically with N2O as described. Growing colonies were picked and re-streaked on corresponding plates and incubated under aerobic conditions. This resulted in growing colonies related to Azonexus sp. AN. To determine the relative expression of Nos and Nap in the strain AN in response to the transition to anoxia, single vials where periodically subjected to destructive sampling and proteomic analysis throughout a standard incubation with 2 mM NO3 and 1 mL O2 vial-1. The vials destined for destructive sampling were removed from the incubation system and immediately cooled down, stirred, in ice water. The cell suspensions were transferred to a 50 mL sterile centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 10 000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was gently poured of and the cell pellet stored at -80 °C before analysis.  The frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 0.1 % v/v Triton X-100, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 4% SDS) and treated with 3 × 45 s bead beating with glass beads (particle size ≤106 μm Sigma) at maximum power and cooling on ice between the cycles (MP Biomedicals™ FastPrep- 24TM, Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc). Cell debris were removed by centrifugation (10 000 × g; 5 min) and the supernatant, containing water soluble proteins, was used for proteomic NanoLC- Orbitrap-MS as described before (Conthe et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in MaxQuant 1.6.2.3 (Cox and Mann 2008). The raw data was matched against the proteome of the type strain Azonexus hydrophilus 418702 (Uniprot, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000187526) and additional sequences obtained from the genome sequence of Azonexus sp. AN.

### Publication Abstract
Inoculating agricultural soils with nitrous oxide respiring bacteria (NRB) can reduce N<sub>2</sub>O-emission, but would be impractical as a standalone operation. Here we demonstrate that digestates obtained after biogas production are suitable substrates and vectors for NRB. We show that indigenous NRB in digestates grew to high abundance during anaerobic enrichment under N<sub>2</sub>O. Gas-kinetics and meta-omic analyses showed that these NRB's, recovered as metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), grew by harvesting fermentation intermediates of the methanogenic consortium. Three NRB's were isolated, one of which matched the recovered MAG of a Dechloromonas, deemed by proteomics to be the dominant producer of N<sub>2</sub>O-reductase in the enrichment. While the isolates harbored genes required for a full denitrification pathway and could thus both produce and sequester N<sub>2</sub>O, their regulatory traits predicted that they act as N<sub>2</sub>O sinks in soil, which was confirmed experimentally. The isolates were grown by aerobic respiration in digestates, and fertilization with these NRB-enriched digestates reduced N<sub>2</sub>O emissions from soil. Our use of digestates for low-cost and large-scale inoculation with NRB in soil can be taken as a blueprint for future applications of this powerful instrument to engineer the soil microbiome, be it for enhancing plant growth, bioremediation, or any other desirable function.

### Keywords
N2o-reduction, Denitrification, Isolate, Dechloromonas sp, Azonexus sp., Lc-msms., Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Food Science, NMBU - Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway
Faculty of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway

### Submitter
Live Hagen

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Bakken
Faculty of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Food Science, NMBU - Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway


