### Accession
PXD011854

### Title
A specific lipid metabolic profile is associated with the epithelial mesenchymal transition program

### Description
Several studies have identified a specific metabolic program that is associated with the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Whereas much is known about the association between glucose metabolism and EMT, the contribution of lipid metabolism is not still completely understood. Here, we studied epithelial and mesenchymal breast cancer cells by proteomic and lipidomic approaches and identified significant differences that characterised these models concerning specific metabolic enzymes and metabolites including fatty acids and phospholipids. Higher levels of monounsaturated fatty acids together with increased expression of enzymes of de novo fatty acid synthesis is the distinct signature of epithelial with respect to mesenchymal cells that, on the contrary, show reduced lipogenesis, higher polyunsaturated fatty acids level and increased expression of genes involved in the triglyceride (TAG) synthesis and lipid droplets formation. In the mesenchymal model, the diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT)-1 appears to be the major enzyme involved in TAG synthesis and inhibition of DGAT1, but not DGAT2, drastically reduces the incorporation of labeled palmitate into TAG. Moreover, knockdown of β-catenin demonstrated that this metabolic phenotype in under the control of a network of transcriptional factors and that β-catenin has a specific role in the regulation of lipid metabolism in mesenchymal cells.

### Sample Protocol
Whole protein extraction was carried out with the Illustra TriplePrep kit (GE Healthcare) and processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP II) protocol. To globally define proteomic differences between the two models, whole proteins were trypsin digested by FASP and peptides analyzed by a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive) followed by data analysis in MaxQuant and Perseus. Briefly, approximately 20 μg of protein extract were diluted tenfold in 8M urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5, loaded into the Microcon Ultracel YM-30 filtration devices (Millipore), and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15min. The concentrates were then diluted in 8M urea and centrifuged again. After centrifugation, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 30min, and then alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 20min. After 4 washes (2 in 8M urea and 2 in 50mM NH4HCO3), trypsin solution was added to the filter (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:100 w/w), and samples were incubated at 37◦C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation followed by an additional wash with 50mM NaCl. Finally, the peptide mixture was acidified by trifluoroacetic acid, desalted-concentrated on C18 ZipTip (Millipore), dried under vacuum and then resuspended in 20 μL of ACN/H2O (FA 0.1%) (2:98, v/v). Separation was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 75 μm × 2 cm pre-column with nanoViper fittings (Acclaim pepMap 100, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) and a 50 μm ID × 150mm analytical column with nanoViper fittings (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a 2h gradient of ACN starting from 5 to 30% over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) was set to acquire top 10 MS2 with a spray voltage of 1.6 kV. The survey scans were taken at 70,000 FWHM (at m/z 400) resolving power in positive ion mode and using a target of 3E6 and default charge state of +2. Unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20 s. The scan range was set to 300–1,600 m/z. For the MS2, 1 microscan was obtained at 17,500 FWHM and isolation window of 4.0m/z, using a first mass at m/z 140.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from nanoLC-MS were processed using the MaxQuant proteomic software (version 1.5.2.8). Q-Exactive spectra were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database (release November 2014, 88876 entries) using the Andromeda algorithm. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as a fixed modification. We allowed up to two missed cleavages. For the MS spectra, an initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was set to 0.01. Label-free quantification of the proteins was conducted using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Statistical analysis was performed with the software Perseus software (version 1.5.2.4). Hierarchical clustering on Z-scored values was based on Euclidean distance and average linkage clustering.Functional annotation and characterization of the identified proteins were performed using STRING version 10.5 (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Several studies have identified a specific metabolic program that is associated with the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Whereas much is known about the association between glucose metabolism and EMT, the contribution of lipid metabolism is not still completely understood. Here, we studied epithelial and mesenchymal breast cancer cells by proteomic and lipidomic approaches and identified significant differences that characterised these models concerning specific metabolic enzymes and metabolites including fatty acids and phospholipids. Higher levels of monounsaturated fatty acids together with increased expression of enzymes of de novo fatty acid synthesis is the distinct signature of epithelial with respect to mesenchymal cells that, on the contrary, show reduced lipogenesis, higher polyunsaturated fatty acids level and increased expression of genes involved in the triacylglycerol (TAG) synthesis and lipid droplets formation. In the mesenchymal model, the diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT)-1 appears to be the major enzyme involved in TAG synthesis and inhibition of DGAT1, but not DGAT2, drastically reduces the incorporation of labeled palmitate into TAG. Moreover, knockdown of &#x3b2;-catenin demonstrated that this metabolic phenotype in under the control of a network of transcriptional factors and that &#x3b2;-catenin has a specific role in the regulation of lipid metabolism in mesenchymal cells.

### Keywords
Β-catenin, Lipids, Epithelial mesenchymal transition, Metabolism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Salento
PRISM-INSERM U1192

### Submitter
Julien Franck

### Lab Head
Dr daniele vergara
University of Salento


