### Accession
PXD029200

### Title
Label-free proteomic analysis of hepatocyte spheroids fed physiologically relevant levels of palmitic acid and oleic acid to mimic non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

### Description
We have grown hepatocyte spheroids for 21 days following an established protocol. We have carried out proteomic analysis of the difference between control and treated (Fatty acids) spheroids during seven days (5 timepoints at day 0, 1, 2, 4 and 7). Samples were digesting using filter aided sample preparation-based digestion and subsequently analysed using label free LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Flat cell culture: HEPG2/C3A, the immortal human hepatocyte cell line, was thawed and cultured as described (PMID:22454432).  Metabolic overloading: HepG2/C3A cells were sub-cultured, seeded in AggreWells to form aggregates and cultured in rotary bioreactors as previously described (PMID:22454432). Spheroids were treated with fatty acid supplemented media at low levels (no fatty acids added) or high levels (45 µM oleic acid (OA), 65 µM palmitic acid (PA), conjugated to BSA) from day 21 and until day 28. Spheroids were sampled in triplicates at day 0, 1, 2, 4 and 7 of fatty acid exposure and washed trice before all liquid was removed followed by snap freezing of samples.   Filter aided sample preparation: Cells were lysed in “one-pot” buffer (50 mM TEAB, 1 % SDC, 10 mM TCEP 40 mM chloroacetamide) (PMID:19377485). Sample preparation of the lysates was carried out using FASP-based digestion as previously described (PMID: 30159003).  LC-MS/MS: Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN / 0.1% TFA and an aliquot was taken for amino acid analysis quantification (PMID:26424264). 1 µg of peptide was taken for proteomic analysis. Peptides were captured on a commercial µ-precolumn (5µm, 5mm x 300 µm, 100 Å pore size, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) before being separated using an in house-packed column (1.9µm, 50cm x 100 µm, 120 Å pore size) of ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) heated to 50°C, at an 8-35% solution B (99.99% ACN, 0.01% FA) gradient for 160 mins, at 550nL/min with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides separated online by reversed phase LC were analysed by MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as follows. A full MS scan across the mass range 350-1800 m/z was performed within the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms, a dynamic exclusion window of 40 s and using Advanced Peak Detection (PMID:29272103). This was followed by fragmentation of selected ions with charge states of +2-6 by HCD within the ion trap. MS/MS scans were performed at a rapid ion trap scan rate, with a collision energy of 32%, a maximum injection time of 35 ms and an AGC target of 5 x 104. An isolation window of 1 m/z was used, with an isolation offset of 0.2 m/z, the total cycle time for the method was set to 2 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics quantification: Data was acquired and processed using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The data was analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.8.0) (PMID: 19029910), with database search performed using the in-built Andromeda search engine (PMID: 21254760) against the human UniProt Reference Proteome database (containing Swiss-Prot proteins including isoforms) (downloaded 9th of September 2020, containing 20,359 entries). Data was searched with the following conditions; trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) and deamidation (NQ). Label-free quantitation was performed and the parameters “match between runs” was enabled and “second peptide search” were disabled. All other parameters remained as default.  Filtering was performed using Perseus (PMID: 27348712), where the following filtering was performed. Proteins only identified by site, potential contaminants and proteins matched in decoy database was removed from dataset. Data was log-transformed. Proteins were included if they were present in two replicas in at least one condition and identified by two unique peptides or more. Statistical analysis was performed using PolyS test (PMID: 32424025), comparing control and treated conditions of each timepoint. FDR equal or less than 0.05 was deemed statistical significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rotary bioreactor, Nafld, Hepatocyte, Liver, 3-dimensional cell culture, Lc-ms/ms, Hepg2/c3a, Label-free, Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, Spheroids

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
University of southern Denmark Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Protein Research group Denmark

### Submitter
Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska

### Lab Head
Dr Adelina Rogowska-Wrzesinska
University of southern Denmark Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Protein Research group Denmark


