### Accession
PXD024624

### Title
Protein expression and oxidation in the hippocampus of neuronal nucleoredoxin knockout (Nestin-NXN-/-) versus floxed control mice (NXN-flfl)

### Description
Nucleoredoxin (NXN) is a thioredoxin-like member of the large group of redoxins which maintain redox balances in the cell. Its primary localization is the cytoplasm, and it is highly expressed in neurons. It has been described as a redox regulator of WNT signaling via maintenance of the redox balance of Disheveled (Dvl). Previous proteomic analyses in NXN-knockdown SH-SY5Y cells found a high fraction of reduced proteins involved in development and cell differentiation. The results suggested NXN mainly acted as oxidase under the culture conditions. The functions in vivo are not known, but full deletion of NXN is embryonically lethal owing to cranial deformities.  We have generated mice with a pan-neuronal Nestin-Cre driven deletion of NXN (Nestin-NXN-/-) to study its functions in neurons. Nestin-NXN-/- develop normally and are healthy up to old age. They show a loss of exploratory and playful behavior but have no deficits of cognitive functions, social behavior or readouts of anxiety. Using a Yeast-2-Hybrid screen, calcium calmodulin kinase 2a was identified as interaction partner. Camk2a is crucial for long-term potentiation and thereby learning and memory but is also associated with psychiatric diseases, and it is regulated via redox modification of cysteines that impact on the autophosphorylation status of a critical threonine. Camk2a colocalized and co-precipitated with NXN and its activity depended on the presence of NXN.  To further study the functions of NXN in neurons we performed a proteomic screen of the hippocampal proteome and the redox proteome using the BIAM switch method.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sampling and protein extraction  Each eight NXN-flfl and Nestin-NXN-/- mice were killed by neck luxation, the barin was rapidly removed and tissue pieces of the hippocampus were snap frozen on dry ice and stored in liquid nitrogen pending protein extraction. Samples were homogenized in 20% TCA. For the BIAM switch assay the TCA-aliquot was thawed on ice, centrifuged for 30 min with 16000 x g and washed with 10 % TCA and 5 % TCA, respectively. Pellets were resuspended in 200 μl NEM-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 50x molar excess NEM) and incubated at 850 rpm for 1 hour at 22°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by ice-cold acetone, collected by centrifugation, washed, resuspended in 150 μl DTT-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 3 mM DTT) and incubated at 850 rpm for 5 minutes at 22°C in the dark followed by addition of 150 μl BIAM-DAB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 50x molar excess BIAM) and incubated at 850 rpm for 1 hour at 22°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone overnight at -20°C, collected by centrifugation, washed and resuspended in 200 μl lysis buffer (5 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.5, 1% Triton-X-100, 1% SDS).  200 µg of proteins were affinity purified using agarose streptavidin beads overnight at 4°C on a wheel. Supernatant of the affinity purification was digested for further analysis of overoxidized proteins. After washing beads were resuspended in 50 µl 6M GdmCl, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5  and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing 3 C18 disc and 3 SCX disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Kulak and Mann (2014). Peptides  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.   Mass spectrometry  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min followed by a second gradient to 60 % B for 10 min  with a flow rate 300 nl/min (Full proteome) and a gradient from mobile phase A to 50 % mobile phase B  for 30 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min (BIAM samples). MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation.  Lock mass option (Olsen et al., 2005) was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy between multiple runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30s following fragmentation event. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnology), was used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99), N-ethylameimide on cysteines (+125.05) and biotinylated iodoacetamide (+414.19)  were selected as variable modifications. The mouse reference proteome set (Uniprot, 2/ 2018, 52538 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleoredoxin is a thioredoxin-like redoxin that has been recognized as redox modulator of WNT signaling. Using a Yeast-2-Hybrid screen, we identified calcium calmodulin kinase 2a, Camk2a, as a prominent prey in a brain library. Camk2a is crucial for nitric oxide dependent processes of neuronal plasticity of learning and memory. Therefore, the present study assessed functions of NXN in neuronal Nestin-NXN<sup>-/-</sup> deficient mice. The NXN-Camk2a interaction was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation, and by colocalization in neuropil and dendritic spines. Functionally, Camk2a activity was reduced in NXN deficient neurons and restored with recombinant NXN. Proteomics revealed reduced oxidation in the hippocampus of Nestin-NXN<sup>-/-</sup> deficient mice, including Camk2a, further synaptic and mitochondrial proteins, and was associated with a reduction of mitochondrial respiration. Nestin-NXN<sup>-/-</sup> mice were healthy and behaved normally in behavioral tests of anxiety, activity and sociability. They had no cognitive deficits in touchscreen based learning &amp; memory tasks, but omitted more trials showing a lower interest in the reward. They also engaged less in rewarding voluntary wheel running, and in exploratory behavior in IntelliCages. Accuracy was enhanced owing to the loss of exploration. The data suggested that NXN maintained the oxidative state of Camk2a and thereby its activity. In addition, it supported oxidation of other synaptic and mitochondrial proteins, and mitochondrial respiration. The loss of NXN-dependent pro-oxidative functions manifested in a loss of exploratory drive and reduced interest in reward in behaving mice.

### Keywords
Redoxin, Oxidoreductase, Nucleoredoxin, Lc-ms/ms, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Irmgard Tegeder
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


