### Accession
PXD024637

### Title
Shotgun LC-MS analysis of aorta and liver tissues from WT and Gal-1 KO mice to study the role of Galectin-1 in vascular remodeling in atherosclerosis and abdominal aortic aneurysm

### Description
Pathological vascular remodeling is the underlying cause of main cardiovascular diseases (CVD) including atherosclerosis and abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). We analyzed the potential role of galectin-1 (Gal-1) in atherosclerosis and AAA. Atherosclerosis was induced in mice lacking Gal-1 (Lgals1-/-) and wild-type (WT) by pAAV/D377Y-mPCSK9 adenovirus injection (1011 vector genome copies) followed by western diet during 16 weeks. In a second model, atherosclerostic WT mice were treated with recombinant Gal-1 protein (rGal-1, 100 µg 3 days/week) or vehicle during 16 weeks. Moreover, the same therapeutic approach was performed in elastase-induced AAA in mice treated for 2 weeks. Finally, Gal-1 expression was assessed in human atherosclerotic plaques and AAA lesions.  Gal-1 deletion led to higher atherosclerotic burden along the aorta and larger atherosclerotic plaques in the aortic root. This deleterious effect was associated to higher circulating and lesional lipid levels and lower alpha- smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) staining in the plaques. Proteomic analysis of aorta homogenates showed an upregulation of Fibronectin and VCAM-1 in Lgals1-/- mice as compared to WT aortic tissues. In vitro experiments in VSMCs from Lgals1-/- mice or transfected with Gal-1 siRNA showed increased Fibronectin, VCAM-1 and KLF4 mRNA expression along with a decrease in α-SMA mRNA expression. Treatment with rGal-1 decreased atherosclerotic plaques (size and burden) and elastase-induced aortic dilatation, associated to higher content of α-SMA staining, in both experimental models. Gal-1 protein and mRNA tissue levels were decreased in human atherosclerotic plaques and AAA as compared to control aortic tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts (250 µg) were subjected to filter-aided digestion (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane-30K, PALL) according to manufacter’s instructions. Briefly, cysteine residues were blocked with 50 mM IOA buffer and proteins were digested with trypsin (1:40-trypsin:protein, Promega) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 O/N at 37˚C. The resulting peptides were desalted with Oasis cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions, dried with a Speed-vac and stored at -20˚C. Peptides were subjected to 10-plex multiplexed isobaric labeling using TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and following manufacter’s instructions. In each TMT experiment one-channel was reserved for a reference internal standard sample created by pooling control samples. Labeled peptides were desalted with Oasis cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), vacuum-dried and stored at -20˚C for further MS analysis. Labeled peptide samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). C18-based reverse phase separation was used with a PepMap 100 C18 5UM 0.3x5MM as trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 50-cm analytical column (EASY column, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% of formic acid in water (v/v)) and eluted with a 338 min linear gradient of buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) at 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top-15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a mass range of 400-1500 m/z and 70000 resolution. HCD fragmentation was performed at 30 of normalized collision energy and MS/MS spectra were analyzed at 60000 resolution in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification MS/MS spectra were searched with the SEQUEST HT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) against a Uniprot database comprised mouse protein sequences (July 2020), using trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, using as fixed modifications Cys carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) and TMT labeling at N-terminal end and Lys (229.162932 Da); and Met oxidation (15.994915) as dynamic modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 800 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.03 Da; precursor charge range was set to 2-4. Results were analyzed using the probability ratio method18 and the false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated based on the search of results against the corresponding decoy database using the refined method with an additional filter for precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm. 1% FDR was used as criterion for peptide identification.  Protein quantification and statistical analysis were performed using the models previously developed in our laboratory with the SanXoT software package.

### Publication Abstract
Pathological vascular remodeling is the underlying cause of atherosclerosis and abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Here, we analyzed the role of galectin-1 (Gal-1), a &#x3b2;-galactoside-binding protein, as a therapeutic target for atherosclerosis and AAA. Mice lacking Gal-1 (<i>Lgals1<sup>-/-</sup></i>) developed severe atherosclerosis induced by pAAV/D377Y-mPCSK9 adenovirus and displayed higher lipid levels and lower expression of contractile markers of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in plaques than wild-type mice. Proteomic analysis of <i>Lgals1<sup>-/-</sup></i> aortas showed changes in markers of VSMC phenotypic switch and altered composition of mitochondrial proteins. Mechanistically, Gal-1 silencing resulted in increased foam cell formation and mitochondrial dysfunction in VSMCs, while treatment with recombinant Gal-1 (rGal-1) prevented these effects. Furthermore, rGal-1 treatment attenuated atherosclerosis and elastase-induced AAA, leading to higher contractile VSMCs in aortic tissues. Gal-1 expression decreased in human atheroma and AAA compared to control tissue. Thus, Gal-1-driven circuits emerge as potential therapeutic strategies in atherosclerosis and AAA.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Liver, Aorta

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Proteómica Cardiovascular,Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid,Spain
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares

### Submitter
Estefanía Núñez

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez
Laboratorio de Proteómica Cardiovascular,Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid,Spain


