### Accession
PXD007625

### Title
Lysine acetylation of chloroplast proteins

### Description
In photosynthesis, light is absorbed by the thylakoid embedded light harvesting pigment protein complexes (LHCs) that surround the photosynthetic reaction centers, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI). The distribution of light energy between the photosystems is balanced through state transitions1,2, which refer to the phosphorylation-dependent association of the loosely bound (L) LHCII antenna trimer either to PSII or PSI 3,4. Apart from phosphorylation, other mechanisms regulating state transitions have not been reported this far. In this study we demonstrate that lysine (Lys) acetylation of chloroplast proteins is a prerequisite for state transitions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Knock-out mutants lacking a chloroplast acetyltransferase NSI (At1g32070; AtNSI, SNAT) show selective decreases in the Lys acetylation status of several photosynthetic proteins including PSI, PSII and LHCII subunits. Fluorescence measurements revealed that changes in the wavelength of illumination do not cause state transitions in the nsi mutants even though their LHCII phosphorylation status is not defected. Furthermore, biochemical analyses of thylakoid proteins and protein complexes showed that nsi plants are not able to accumulate the phosphorylation dependent PSI-LHCII megacomplex. Our results manifest that Lys acetylation by NSI has an integral role in the regulation of state transitions in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, peptide dimethyl labeling and Lys-acetylated peptide enrichment:  Frozen leaf material was ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen and extracted using a modified filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol36. To summarize, frozen material was transferred to hot extraction buffer (4 % SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) and incubated in a water-bath for 5 min at 95°C under repeated mixing. The extract was transferred to 2 mL reaction tubes and centrifuged twice for 30 min, 18 000 g to remove cell debris. After 8 × dilution with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 the sample was transferred to 15 mL 30k MWCO centrifugal filter devices (Amicon Ultra 15, Millipore). The subsequent washes with urea buffer, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were performed as in37. After washing steps proteins were digested with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100 for 18 h at 37°C. Digested peptides were dimethyl labeled on C18 Sep-Pak plus short columns (Waters) as previously described38. Equal amounts of light and medium labeled peptides were pooled for each replicate and the solvent evaporated in a vacuum-centrifuge. The dried peptides were dissolved in 1 mL TBS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6) and pH was checked and adjusted where required. 15 µg of peptide mixture was stored for whole proteome analysis. Lys-acetylated peptide enrichment was performed as previously described39 with 8 mg peptide per combined sample (1 mg peptide/25 µL antibody slurry). After enrichment the eluted peptides were desalted and fractionated in three steps using SDB Stagetips40 and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS data acquisition:  Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 17 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. Following parameters were used for whole proteome analysis, and parameters for acetylome analysis are stated in brackets; if not stated separately parameters are identical. Peptides were eluted for 115 (68) min using a segmented linear gradient of 0 % to 98 % solvent B (solvent A 0 % ACN, 0.5 % FA; solvent B 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA) at a flow-rate of 300 (250) nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a Top15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1759 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (120,000) FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a target value of 3 × 106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 (1.2) m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 (5 × 104) ions at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 (150) ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, and dynamic exclusion for 30 s prevented repeated selection of precursors. Samples: MKO17-20 = 4 replicates nsi-2 vs WT MKO21-24 = 4 replicates nsi-1 vs WT i = input (total proteome) K = lysine acetylation enriched samples 1-3 = fractions from SDB-RPS

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (http://www.maxquant.org/)41, 42. MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 database (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/). Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two (proteome) or four missed cleavages (acetylome) were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Acetylation of lysines was set as variable modification only for the antibody enriched samples. Light and medium dimethylation of lysines and peptide N-termini were set as labels. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%, modified peptides were additionally filtered for a score ≥ 35 and a delta score of ≥ 6 to remove low quality identifications. Match between runs and requantify options were enabled. Downstream data analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.5.342. For proteome and acetylome, reverse hits and contaminants were removed, the site ratios log2 transformed, and flip-label ratios inverted. Plotting of the raw and the normalized site ratios confirmed that the automatic normalization procedure of MaxQuant worked reliably and normalized site ratios were used for all further analyses. For quantitative Lys acetylome analyses, sites were filtered for a localization probability of ≥ 0.75. The “expand site table” feature of Perseus was used to allow separate analysis of site ratios for multiply acetylated peptides occurring in different acetylation states. Technical replicates were averaged and sites as well as protein groups displaying less than two out of four ratios were removed. The resulting matrices for proteome and acetylome, respectively, were exported and significantly differential abundant protein groups and Lys acetylation sites were determined using the LIMMA package43 in R 3.3.1 (R core team, 2016). Volcano plots were generated with R base graphics, plotting the non-adjusted P-values vs. the log2 fold-change and marking data points below 5% FDR (i.e. adjusted P-values) when present.

### Publication Abstract
The amount of light energy received by the photosynthetic reaction centers photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI) is balanced through state transitions. Reversible phosphorylation of a light-harvesting antenna trimer (L-LHCII) orchestrates the association between L-LHCII and the photosystems, thus adjusting the amount of excitation energy received by the reaction centers. In this study, we identified the enzyme NUCLEAR SHUTTLE INTERACTING (NSI; AT1G32070) as an active lysine acetyltransferase in the chloroplasts of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> Intriguingly, <i>nsi</i> knockout mutant plants were defective in state transitions, even though they had a similar LHCII phosphorylation pattern as the wild type. Accordingly, <i>nsi</i> plants were not able to accumulate the PSI-LHCII state transition complex, even though the LHCII docking site of PSI and the overall amounts of photosynthetic protein complexes remained unchanged. Instead, the <i>nsi</i> mutants showed a decreased Lys acetylation status of specific photosynthetic proteins including PSI, PSII, and LHCII subunits. Our work demonstrates that the chloroplast acetyltransferase NSI is needed for the dynamic reorganization of thylakoid protein complexes during photosynthetic state transitions.

### Keywords
Lysine, Arabidopsis, Acetylation, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
WWU - Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Pflanzenphysiologie - AG Finkemeier Schlossplatz 7 48149 Münster
WWU Münster

### Submitter
Ines Lassowskat

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Finkemeier
WWU - Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Pflanzenphysiologie - AG Finkemeier Schlossplatz 7 48149 Münster


