### Accession
PXD013823

### Title
Intact Transition Epitope Mapping-Targeted High-Energy Rupture of Extracted Epitopes (ITEM-THREE)

### Description
ITEM-THREE is a novel mass spectrometry-based epitope mapping method. To perform ITEM-THREE, antibody-epitope peptide immune-complexes are first generated in  electrospray-compatible solutions in which the antibodies maintain their in-solution functionality, by adding an antibody of interest to a mixture of peptides/ digest  of antigen from which at least one of the peptides holds the antibody's epitope.  This mixture is directly nano-electrosprayed without purification.  Identification of the epitope peptide is executed within a mass spectrometer which provides an ion mobility cell sandwiched in-between two collision cells and where  this ion manipulation setup is flanked by a quadrupole mass analyzer on one side and a time-of-flight mass analyzer on the other side. In a step-wise fashion,  immune-complex ions are separated from unbound peptide ions and dissociated to release epitope peptide ions. Immune complex-released peptide ions are separated from  antibody ions and fragmented by collision induced dissociation. Epitope containing peptide fragment ions are recorded and mass lists are submitted to unsupervised data base  search thereby retrieving both, the amino acid sequence of the epitope peptide and the originating antigen.

### Sample Protocol
A peptide mixture or tryptic digest (solution 1) is mixed with antibody solution (solution 2) to obtain a solution containing the immune complexes (Solution 3). A final concentration of ca. 0.2 µg/µl of each antibody-containing solution (solution 2) is prepared by diluting the antibody solutions obtained after performing buffer exchange with 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.1. Solutions 3 are binary mixtures of one Solution 1 with one Solution 2 to obtain the molar ratios of approximately 2.2 : 1 (epitope peptide : antibody). Immune complex-containing mixtures (Solutions 3) are incubated at room temperature for at least 1 h before electrospraying them.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the MS/MS spectra are de-convoluted and de-isotoped and then converted into peak lists using the MaxEnt3 algorithm on the Masslynx version 4.1 software (Waters MS-Technologies, Manchester, United Kingdom). The peak lists are then saved as SEQUEST files (*.DTA) which are then uploaded onto the Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) search engine, utilizing the UniProt database (release 2018_06 which contained 557713 sequences) and an “amended UniProt” database which was generated to contain the amino acid sequences of the recombinant antigens in addition to all the amino acid sequence entries of the UniProt database (release 2018_06). The search parameters are set as follows: taxonomy, all entries; enzyme, none or trypsin (where tryptic digests were used) and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage is allowed. Fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications, dicarbamidomethylation of lysine, are selected where necessary. Peptide mass tolerance and MS/MS ion mass tolerance are both set to 0.3 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Epitope mapping, which is the identification of antigenic determinants, is essential for the design of novel antibody-based therapeutics and diagnostic tools. ITEM-THREE is a mass spectrometry-based epitope mapping method that can identify epitopes on antigens upon generating an immune complex in electrospray-compatible solutions by adding an antibody of interest to a mixture of peptides from which at least one holds the antibody's epitope. This mixture is nano-electrosprayed without purification. Identification of the epitope peptide is performed within a mass spectrometer that provides an ion mobility cell sandwiched in-between two collision cells and where this ion manipulation setup is flanked by a quadrupole mass analyzer on one side and a time-of-flight mass analyzer on the other side. In a stepwise fashion, immune-complex ions are separated from unbound peptide ions and dissociated to release epitope peptide ions. Immune complex-released peptide ions are separated from antibody ions and fragmented by collision induced dissociation. Epitope-containing peptide fragment ions are recorded, and mass lists are submitted to unsupervised data base search thereby retrieving both, the amino acid sequence of the epitope peptide and the originating antigen. ITEM-THREE was developed with antiTRIM21 and antiRA33 antibodies for which the epitopes were known, subjecting them to mixtures of synthetic peptides of which one contained the respective epitope. ITEM-THREE was then successfully tested with an enzymatic digest of His-tagged recombinant human &#x3b2;-actin and an antiHis-tag antibody, as well as with an enzymatic digest of recombinant human TNF&#x3b1; and an antiTNF&#x3b1; antibody whose epitope was previously unknown.

### Keywords
Human, Ion mobility separation, Molecular recognition, Nanoesi, Epitope antibody complexes, Item-three, Collision induced dissociation, Recombinant proteins

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Rostock
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany


