### Accession
PXD044975

### Title
Relative quantification of proteins in wild-type vs NDUFS4 -/- in mouse kidney mitochondrial membranes

### Description
Respiratory complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is essential for cellular energy production and NAD+ homeostasis. Complex I mutations cause neuromuscular, mitochondrial diseases, such as Leigh Syndrome, but their molecular-level consequences remain poorly understood. Here, we use a popular complex I-linked mitochondrial disease model, the ndufs4-/- mouse, to define the structural, biochemical and functional consequences of the absence of subunit NDUFS4. Cryo-EM analyses of mouse-heart ndufs4-/- complex I revealed a loose association of the NADH-dehydrogenase module, and discrete classes containing either assembly factor NDUFAF2 or subunit NDUFS6. Subunit NDUFA12 (that replaces its paralogue NDUFAF2 in mature complex I) is absent from all classes, compounding the deletion of NDUFS4 and preventing maturation of an NDUFS4-free but otherwise complete enzyme. We propose NDUFAF2 as the major recruiter of the NADH-dehydrogenase module during assembly of the complex. Our results provide new molecular-level understanding of the ndufs4-/- mouse model and complex I-linked mitochondrial disease.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests were produced from 20 µg samples of mouse kidney mitochondrial membranes.  Proteolysis was maximized by the presence of 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and three additions of trypsin (1:100 w/w) over an incubation period of 48 h at 37 °C. Deoxycholate was removed from the digest mixture by phase extraction with acidified ethyl acetate. Portions of the digests were fractionated on an Acclaim PepMap nanoViper C18 reverse-phase column (Thermo Scientific) (75 μm × 150 mm), with a gradient of 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL min− 1 over 84 min, then peptides were analyzed by a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with fragmentation performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using nitrogen. The mass range was 400 to 1600 m/z for the precursor ions; the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Data were compared with the UNIPROT database comprising 17,107 mouse sequences as described above. The comparisons were performed with MASCOT (v2.4) using mass tolerances of 5 ppm and 0.01 Da for peptide masses and fragment ion masses, respectively, an allowance of two missed tryptic cleavages and the potential for methionine oxidation. Proteome Discoverer counted the abundances for all the confidently identified peptides observed in all the samples, and its standard aggregation algorithm was employed as a measure of relative protein abundance for each protein for each gel slice; up to the three highest intensity peptides for each protein were selected and averaged. Common peptides amongst the replicates from ndufs4-/- and wild-type samples were identified for each protein of interest (complexes I, II, III, IV, ACAD9 and ACAD-VL) and the VDAC1, VDAC2 and VDAC3 proteins used for normalization. The sum of the peptide areas for these common peptides were used to produce an abundance value for each protein or protein complex. The values were internally normalized for each technical replicate to the sum of common VDAC1+VDAC2+VDAC3 peptides and the average and standard deviation of the ndufs4-/- and wild-type samples were calculated for each protein or protein complex of interest. Relative abundance of proteins in the ndufs4-/- sample were calculated and expressed as a fraction of the wild-type value, with appropriate error propagation.

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is essential for cellular energy production and NAD<sup>+</sup> homeostasis. Complex I mutations cause neuromuscular, mitochondrial diseases, such as Leigh Syndrome, but their molecular-level consequences remain poorly understood. Here, we use a popular complex I-linked mitochondrial disease model, the ndufs4<sup>-/-</sup> mouse, to define the structural, biochemical, and functional consequences of the absence of subunit NDUFS4. Cryo-EM analyses of the complex I from ndufs4<sup>-/-</sup> mouse hearts revealed a loose association of the NADH-dehydrogenase module, and discrete classes containing either assembly factor NDUFAF2 or subunit NDUFS6. Subunit NDUFA12, which replaces its paralogue NDUFAF2 in mature complex I, is absent from all classes, compounding the deletion of NDUFS4 and preventing maturation of an NDUFS4-free enzyme. We propose that NDUFAF2 recruits the NADH-dehydrogenase module during assembly of the complex. Taken together, the findings provide new molecular-level understanding of the ndufs4<sup>-/-</sup> mouse model and complex I-linked mitochondrial disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Ndufs4 knockout, Ndufs4, Kidney

### Affiliations
Mitochondrial Biology Unit
MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Hannah Bridges

### Lab Head
Dr Judy Hirst
MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge


