### Accession
PXD013143

### Title
CCT3 acts as upstream of YAP and  TFCP2 to be a potential target and tumor biomarker in liver cancer

### Description
Recently, we've reported that pro-tumorigenic roles of YAP in liver cancer are indispensable of TFCP2 act as upstream to simultaneously control YAP.The aim of this study is to uncover such proteins and evaluate whether the candidates are potential YAP-associated therapeutic target and diagnostic marker Via mass spectrometry, CCT3 was identified to co-interact with YAP and TFCP2, and importantly.

### Sample Protocol
First, the overexpression plasmid of YAP and TFCP2 was used to infect hepatocarcinoma cells. After 24 hours, the protein was collected, washed for 30 min on ice, centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 min, protein A / G was used for immunoprecipitation, 4 ℃ shaker overnight, Liquid wash 4 times, multiplate the sample buffer 100 degrees cook 10min, with 1.0 glue run western blot, when the gel ran to half, cut, stained with Coomassie dyeing, and then bleaching, the gel should be cut into small pieces. Desalted dehydration and then air-dried, adding protein precipitation before add to column analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC system (Nano Pump, Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Thermofisher) coupled with an ESI-Q-TOFmass spectrometer (maXis, Impact, Bruker Daltonik,Germany).The proteins that were precipitated by YAP and TFCP2 were analyzed by matching software, and the scores were compared. The common proteins were found from the three replicates and the proteins in the blank samples were removed. That is, the rest of the available protein, access to literature, find out transcription factor proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Although Yes-associated protein (YAP) is very important to liver cancer, its nuclear localisation prevents consideration as a promising therapeutic target and a diagnostic biomarker. Recently, we reported that the protumourigenic roles of YAP in liver cancer are indispensable for transcription factor CP2 (TFCP2) in a Hippo-independent manner; however, proteins that act upstream to simultaneously control YAP and TFCP2 remain unclear. The aim of this study was to uncover such proteins and evaluate whether they are potential YAP-associated therapeutic targets and diagnostic biomarkers. Mass spectrometry revealed that chaperonin containing TCP1 subunit 3 (CCT3) co-interact with YAP and TFCP2, and notably, CCT3 is a non-nuclear protein. CCT3 was elevated in liver cancer, and its higher expression was associated with poorer overall survival. Inhibiting CCT3 resulted in a suppressed transformative phenotype in liver cancer cells, suggesting that CCT3 might be a potential therapeutic target. CCT3 prolonged half-life of YAP and TFCP2 by blocking their ubiquitination caused by poly(rC) binding protein 2 (PCBP2) in a beta-transducin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (&#x3b2;TrCP)-independent manner. Interestingly, PCBP2 directly interacted with YAP via a WB motif-WW domain interaction, whereas indirectly interacted with TFCP2 via the aid of YAP. Furthermore, CCT3 was capable of separating PCBP2-YAP interactions, thereby preventing YAP and TFCP2 from PCBP2-induced ubiquitination. Moreover, YAP and TFCP2 were downstream of CCT3 to positively control tumourigenesis, yet such effects were inhibited by PCBP2. Clinically, CCT3 was positively correlated with YAP and TFCP2, and elevated levels of the CCT3-YAP-TFCP2 axis might be critical for liver malignancy. In addition, seral-CCT3 was proven to be a potential biomarker, and its diagnostic capacity was better than that of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) to a certain extent. Together, CCT3 acts as a trigger of YAP and TFCP2 to affect tumourigenesis and serves as a potential therapeutic target and biomarker in liver cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Liver

### Affiliations
+8618817567010
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China

### Submitter
YA LIU

### Lab Head
Dr Fenyong Sun
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, 200072, China


