### Accession
PXD012922

### Title
Upregulation of CD73 Confers Acquired Radioresistance and Is Required for Maintaining EMT in the Pancreatic Cancer Cells that Survive Fractionated Irradiation

### Description
The molecular mechanisms underlying exceptional radioresistance in pancreatic cancer remain elusive. In the present study, we established a stable radioresistant pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2-R by exposing the parental MIA PaCa-2 cells to fractionated ionizing radiation (IR). Systematic proteomics and bioinformatics comparison of protein expression in MIA PaCa-2 and MIA PaCa-2-R cells revealed that several growth factor- and cytokine-mediated pathways, including the OSM/STAT3, PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK pathways, were activated in the radioresistant cells, leading to enhanced cell migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and inhibition of apoptosis. We focused functional analysis on one of the most upregulated proteins in the radioresistant cells, CD73, which is a cell surface protein that is overexpressed in a variety types of cancer. Ectopic overexpression of CD73 in the parent cells resulted in radioresistance and conferred resistance to IR-induced apoptosis. Knockdown of CD73 resensitized the radioresistant cells to IR and IR-induced apoptosis. The effect of CD73 on radioresistance and apoptosis is independent of the enzymatic activity of CD73. Further studies suggest that CD73 confers acquired radioresistance in pancreatic cancer cells at least in part through inactivating proapoptotic protein BAD via phosphorylation of BAD at Ser-136. Furthermore, we found that knockdown of CD73 in the radioresistant cells alone reverted the gene expression and phenotype of the radioresistant cells from those of mesenchymal-like cells to the ones of epithelial cells, demonstrating that CD73 upregulation is required for maintaining EMT in the radioresistant cells. Our results support the notion that the enhanced growth factor/cytokine signaling that promotes epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity, and acquisition of cancer stem-like cell properties contributes to acquired radioresistance in the residual surviving cells after fractionated irradiation, and that CD73 is a novel downstream factor of those enhanced signaling and acts to confers acquired radioresistance and maintains EMT in the radioresistant pancreatic cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
The radioresistant MIA PaCa-2-R cells were cultured in unlabeled DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS (light medium), and the parental MIA PaCa-2 cells were cultured in labeled DMEM medium containing arginine-13C6 and lysine-13C615N2 (heavy medium) with 10% dialyzed FBS. After isotopic labeling of the proteome, the cells were lysed in a hypotonic buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors) by douncing with a glass dounce homogenizer on ice. The lysate was then centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was saved, and the pellet was sonicated in the hypotonic buffer on ice with a microtip at 12% power (Branson Digital Sonifier 450; 10 × 0.5 s pulses in each cycle for 3 cycles). The sonicated extract was combined with the supernatant obtained in the previous step, and the mixture was centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 90 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was designated as soluble proteins. The pellet was dissolved in a modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitors), and the supernatant after a centrifugation was designated as membrane proteins. Equal amounts of soluble proteins and equal amounts of membrane proteins from the two cell populations were mixed, respectively, and fractionated by a 12% SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad Mini gel; 7.2 cm x 8.6 cm) for LC-MS/MS analysis. The entire lane of the coomassie brilliant blue-stained gel was cut into 10 slices, followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS analysis were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) with the built-in search engine Andromeda and searched against a target-decoy  human SwissProt protein database (November 2018; 20,408 entries) retrieved from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). The false discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide and protein identification were both set to 1%.  The MS error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and the MS/MS error tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed.  The variable modifications of acetylation at peptide N-terminus and oxidation on methionine, and the fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation were included. SILAC ratios (radioresistant/parental protein expression ratios; light/heavy ratios) were calculated using unique and razor peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2.  The proteins that matched to the reverse database, identified only by site, and common contaminants were removed. The proteins that were identified by single peptide were also discarded. The remaining proteins were analyzed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.2), and the Significance B was obtained for the quantified proteins. The Significance B is a significance score for protein SILAC ratios and identifies outliers based on the standard deviation of the protein SILAC ratios of the main distribution and signal intensity. A protein was considered to be a differentially expressed protein if i) its ratio was significant by the Significance B with p < 0.05, and ii) a log2 fold change was larger than 1.5 (representing an actual fold change of 2.82). The significantly changed soluble proteins and membrane proteins were combined and analyzed by the “Core Analysis” module of the software IPA (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis; Ingenuity® Systems, Redwood City, CA), a bioinformatics tool based on information from published literature. For the proteins that were identified in both soluble and membrane fractions (the shared proteins), an average of the soluble and membrane SILAC ratios was used for each protein in the IPA analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanisms underlying exceptional radioresistance in pancreatic cancer remain elusive. In the present study, we established a stable radioresistant pancreatic cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2-R by exposing the parental MIA PaCa-2 cells to fractionated ionizing radiation (IR). Systematic proteomics and bioinformatics analysis of protein expression in MIA PaCa-2 and MIA PaCa-2-R cells revealed that several growth factor-/cytokine-mediated pathways, including the OSM/STAT3, PI3K/AKT, and MAPK/ERK pathways, were activated in the radioresistant cells, leading to inhibition of apoptosis and increased epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity. In addition, the radioresistant cells exhibited enhanced capabilities of DNA repair and antioxidant defense compared with the parental cells. We focused functional analysis on one of the most up-regulated proteins in the radioresistant cells, ecto-5'-nucleotidase (CD73), which is a cell surface protein that is overexpressed in different types of cancer. Ectopic overexpression of CD73 in the parental cells resulted in radioresistance and conferred resistance to IR-induced apoptosis. Knockdown of CD73 re-sensitized the radioresistant cells to IR and IR-induced apoptosis. The effect of CD73 on radioresistance and apoptosis is independent of the enzymatic activity of CD73. Further studies demonstrate that CD73 up-regulation promotes Ser-136 phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein BAD and is required for maintaining the radioresistant cells in a mesenchymal state. Our findings suggest that expression alterations in the IR-selected pancreatic cancer cells result in hyperactivation of the growth factor/cytokine signaling that promotes epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity and enhancement of DNA repair. Our results also suggest that CD73, potentially a novel downstream factor of the enhanced growth factor/cytokine signaling, confers acquired radioresistance by inactivating proapoptotic protein BAD via phosphorylation of BAD at Ser-136 and by maintaining the radioresistant pancreatic cancer cells in a mesenchymal state.

### Keywords
Cd73, Pancreatic cancer, Radioresistance, Emt, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas

### Submitter
Yuchun Du

### Lab Head
Dr Yuchun Du
University of Arkansas


