### Accession
PXD005890

### Title
Improving Mass Spectrometer Acquisition when using Tandem MS/MS/MS Scanning with Isobaric Tags

### Description
n this work we utilize a standard, high-complexity Human cell line tryptic digest combined with a synthetic peptide library to systematically evaluate the properties of a variety of MS operation modes and detector configurations for the optimal examination of isobaric-tagged peptide mixtures. We demonstrate that despite the ability of the IT to yield more rapid MS3 scanning, the benefit in peptide and protein identifications when examining complex mixtures is minor while the negative impact on quantification precision is significant.

### Sample Protocol
To test a wide variety of scan and parameter settings, a standard mixture of cell lines and synthetic peptides was prepared. The standard is a complex tryptic digest of a combined pool of 13 individual cell lines labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents (1:1:1:1:1:1, TMT126 – TMT131). To this mixture, a set of 550 synthetic peptides labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents (3:3:3:1:1:1, TMT126 – TMT131) was added.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and R.

### Publication Abstract
Methods for isobaric-tagged peptide analysis (e.g., TMT, iTRAQ), such as the synchronous precursor selection (SPS) tandem MS/MS/MS (MS<sup>3</sup>) approach, enable maintenance of reporter ion accuracy and precision by reducing the ratio compression caused by coisolated precursor ions. However, the decreased throughput of the MS<sup>3</sup> approach necessitates careful optimization of acquisition strategies and methods to ensure maximal proteome coverage. We present a systematic analysis of acquisition parameters used to analyze isobaric-tagged peptide samples on current generation Orbitrap mass spectrometer (MS) hardware. In contrast with previously reported works, we demonstrate the limited utility of acquiring reporter ion data in the ion trap analyzer; ion trap acquisition had only a minimal increase in identification depth and reduced quantification precision. We establish that despite the significantly increased scan rate afforded through the use of higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in MS<sup>3</sup>-based ion trap isobaric tag analyses, the reduced quantification precision and reporter ion yields negate the potential benefits in proteome coverage. Lastly, using optimized parameter sets, we further demonstrate the limited utility of the ion trap detector versus the Orbitrap for reporter ion detection in an in-depth analysis of a complex proteome sample. Together, these data will serve as a valuable resource to researchers undertaking analysis on current generation Orbitrap instrumentation with isobaric tags.

### Keywords
Tmt, Ms3, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
BC Cancer Agency
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Head of Proteomics


