### Accession
PXD019126

### Title
Multiple myeloma microenvironment proteomics LC-MS/MS

### Description
Although the "seed and soil" hypothesis was proposed by Stephen Paget at the end of the 19th century, where he said that tumor cells (seeds) need a propitious medium (soil) to be able to establish metastases, only recently the tumor microenvironment started to be more studied in the field of Oncology. Multiple myeloma (MM), a malignancy of plasma cells, can be considered one of the types of cancers where there is more evidence in the literature of the central role that the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment plays, contributing to proliferation, survival, migration and drug resistance of tumor cells. Despite all advances in the therapeutic arsenal for MM treatment in the last years, the disease remains incurable. Thus, studies aiming a better understanding of the pathophysiology of the disease, as well as searching for new therapeutic targets are necessary and welcome. Therefore, the present study aimed to evaluate the protein expression profiling of mononuclear cells derived from BM of MM patients in comparison with these same cell types derived from healthy individuals, in order to fill this gap in MM treatment. Proteomic analysis was performed using the mass spectrometry technique and further analyses were done using bioinformatics tools, to identify dysregulated biological pathways and/or processes in the BM microenvironment of patients with MM as a result of the disease. Among the pathways identified in this study, we can highlight an upregulation of proteins related to protein biosynthesis, especially chaperone proteins, in patients with MM. Additionally, we also found an upregulation of several proteins involved in energy metabolism, which is one of the cancer hallmarks. Finally, with regard to the downregulated proteins, we can highlight mainly those involved in different pathways of the immune response, corroborating the data that has demonstrated that the immune system of MM is impaired and, therefore, the immunotherapies that have been studied recently for the treatment of the disease are extremely necessary in the search for a control and a cure for these patients who live with the disease.

### Sample Protocol
We pooled the samples from each group in order to obtain the required amount of protein to perform the mass spectrometry experiment. Therefore, we obtained 1) a pool from Mononuclear cells^CD138-CD105- (n=8) and 2) a pool from Mesenchymal stem cells (n=4), all derived from bone marrow of multiple myeloma patients; and 3) a pool from Mononuclear cells^CD138-CD105- (n=6) and 4) a pool from Mesenchymal stem cells (n=4), all from bone marrow of healthy donors. Protein extraction and quantification were performed using the Pierce Surface Protein Isolation kit and the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay, respectively (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins (30 μg) were reduced (5 mM dithiotreitol, 25 min at 56°C), alkylated (14 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark), and digested with trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were submitted to desalting using C-18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Sep-Pak® Vac tC18 cartridge 3cc/100mg, Waters). The resulting peptides were ressuspended in dissolution buffer of iTRAQ 4-plex kit. The samples were labeled following the manufacturer’s instructions: After preparing the isobaric tags (114, 115, 116 and 117), each technical replicate belonging to the same sample was marked with a separate isobaric tag. For example: two samples A (tumor) and B (normal) were divided into two technical replicates, that is, A1 / A2 and B1 / B2. Each replicate was tagged with an isobaric tag: A1-114, A2-115, B1-115 and B2-114. The resulting peptide mixture (5 μg) was analyzed on an ETD enabled LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with LC-MS/MS by an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 180 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.1 kV and the source temperature was 275°C. All instrument methods for the LTQ Velos Orbitrap were set up in the data dependent acquisition mode of HCD fragmentation. The resolution in the Orbitrap system was set to r= 60,000 and the 5 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 50,000 and fragmented in HCD with normalized collision energy of 40% with the resolution in the Orbitrap system was set to r= 7,500 for MS/MS. The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 80,000 counts and activation time of 0.1 ms was used. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with exclusion size list of 400 and exclusion duration of 60 s, and repeat count of 2.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (msf) were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest search engine and searched against NCBI database IPI Human v3.86 (IPI Human: 91,522 sequences; 36,630,302 residues, release July 2011) with carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), peptide N-terminus and lysine side chains with iTRAQ as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and tyrosine residues with iTRAQ as variable modifications, one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. To ensure that only one PSM per spectrum is used for protein grouping it was applied strict maximum parsimony principle to protein grouping. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least one identified peptide. The peptides were filtered using xcorr cutoffs to obtain a false discovery rate less than 1%. For reporter ion identification, it was chosen the most confident centroid, which is almost always the largest peak inside the integration window because of the small inclination of the Gaussian curve in the 1-sigma interval. For reporter ion quantification, the validation step ensures that only peptides that have one of the specified reporter labels as a modification are considered for protein quantification and the protein ratios are calculate by the median of the peptide ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Although the "seed and soil" hypothesis was proposed by Stephen Paget at the end of the 19th century, where he postulated that tumor cells (seeds) need a propitious medium (soil) to be able to establish metastases, only recently the tumor microenvironment started to be more studied in the field of Oncology. Multiple myeloma (MM), a malignancy of plasma cells, can be considered one of the types of cancers where there is more evidence in the literature of the central role that the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment plays, contributing to proliferation, survival, migration, and drug resistance of tumor cells. Despite all advances in the therapeutic arsenal for MM treatment in the last years, the disease remains incurable. Thus, studies aiming a better understanding of the pathophysiology of the disease, as well as searching for new therapeutic targets are necessary and welcome. Therefore, the present study aimed to evaluate the protein expression profiling of mononuclear cells derived from BM of MM patients in comparison with these same cell types derived from healthy individuals, in order to fill this gap in MM treatment. Proteomic analysis was performed using the mass spectrometry technique and further analyses were done using bioinformatics tools, to identify dysregulated biological pathways and/or processes in the BM microenvironment of patients with MM as a result of the disease. Among the pathways identified in this study, we can highlight an upregulation of proteins related to protein biosynthesis, especially chaperone proteins, in patients with MM. Additionally, we also found an upregulation of several proteins involved in energy metabolism, which is one of the cancer hallmarks. Finally, with regard to the downregulated proteins, we can highlight mainly those involved in different pathways of the immune response, corroborating the data that has demonstrated that the immune system of MM is impaired and, therefore, the immunotherapies that have been studied recently for the treatment of the disease are extremely necessary in the search for a control and a cure for these patients who live with the disease.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Proteomics, Multiple myeloma, Proteome

### Affiliations
Federal University of São Paulo 
Full professor, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Rodrigo Carlini Fernando 

### Lab Head
Dr Gisele Wally Braga Colleoni
Full professor, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil.


