### Accession
PXD031219

### Title
Identification of early biomarkers in saliva in genetically engineered mouse model C(3)1-TAg of breast cancer

### Description
Breast cancer is one of leading causes of death worldwide in the female population. Deaths from breast cancer could be reduced significantly through earlier and more efficient detection of the disease. Saliva, an oral fluid that contains an abundance of protein biomarkers, has been recognized as a promising diagnostic biofluid that is easy to isolate through non-invasive techniques. Assays on saliva can be performed rapidly and are cost-effective. Therefore, our work aimed to identify salivary biomarkers present in the initial stages of breast cancer, where cell alterations are not yet detectable by histopathological analysis. Using state-of-the-art techniques, we employed a transgenic mouse model of mammary cancer to identify molecular changes in precancerous stage breast cancer through protein analysis in saliva. Through corroborative molecular approaches, we established that proteins related to metabolic changes, inflammatory process and cell matrix degradation are detected in saliva at the onset of tumor development. Our work demonstrated that salivary protein profiles can be used to identify cellular changes associated with precancerous stage breast cancer through non-invasive means even prior to biopsy-evident disease.

### Sample Protocol
1. Animals C3(1)-TAg female mice on the C57BL/6J genetic background were obtained from the Tissue Microenvironment Laboratory of the Federal University of Minas Gerais and C57BL/6J wild-type mice were obtained from the Central Animal Housing of the Federal University of Minas Gerais. All mice were housed in a pathogen-free facility of the Animal Research Program at the Federal University of Minas Gerais under a controlled light cycle (12:12-h light/dark cycle) and fed ad libitum. All procedures were performed under the guidelines and with the approval of the Animal Use Ethics Commission of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (CEUA/UFMG) (Protocol 204/2017).  2. Experimental Design In order to perform the analysis of protein expression on saliva and the histological analysis C3(1)-TAg females in the C57BL/6J background were used as the experimental group and age-matched C57BL/6J wild-type mice as controls. First, the saliva was collected in animals at 4-weeks old (n=3), for not yet present any cellular alterations on histopathology, and 28-weeks (n=3) for presenting invasive carcinoma. After that, the same animals were euthanized and the mammary tissue collected.   3. Saliva Collection  The animals were anesthetized with a mixture of 114 mg/kg ketamine and 17 mg/kg xylazine. After the animals were anesthetized, salivation was induced peritoneally by administering 10 mg/kg of pilocarpine (Sigma-Aldrich) in phosphate buffered saline. Saliva was collected with a pipette for a maximum period of 10 min and transferred to a 1.5 ml microtube. The samples were kept on ice during the collection procedure, and immediately after collection, the microtubes containing saliva were centrifuged at 14000xg for 15 min at 4°C (Eppendorf, centrifuge 5427R). The supernatant resulting from this process was stored in a freezer -80°C until mass spectrometry was performed.  4. Proteomic Analysis Guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) 8M was added to the saliva samples to a final GuHCl concentration of 4M. Samples were treated with 10mM DTT in 50mM Hepes, pH 8.0, at 65°C for one hour to denature proteins and reduce disulfide bonds, followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide in 50mM Hepes in the dark at room temperature for one hour. The samples were submitted to digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma) at a 1:50 ratio of trypsin:protein sample for sixteen hours at 37°C. Digestion was halted using 5ul of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Digested samples were desalted using C18 ziptips (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer's protocol and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed in an EASY II-nanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto an in house packed C18 (Jupiter 10 μm beads, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA) pre-column (100μm ID x 360μm OD) and separated on an in house packed C18 (ACQUA, 3μm beads, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA) analytical column (75μm ID x 360μm OD) on which were separated over a 120 min gradient using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The gradient consisted in a constant flow of 200nL/min with an initial gradient of 5% to 30% B from 0 to 85 min, 30% to 90% B from 85 to 95 min, 90% B from 95 to 105 min, 90% to 5% B from 105 to 107 min, 5% B until 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in full scan mode where the top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected in a data-dependent acquisition mode and nanospray voltage at 2.3kV. The MS1 were acquired in FTMS from 300 to 2000m/z at a resolution of 30.000, and the spectra of the product ions with the MS2 resolution of 7.500. The MS2 was performed in ITMS with CID method at a normalized collision energy of 35.0, isolation width of 2,0 m/x, default charge state of 2, activation Q of 0.250, and activation time of 10.000, and charge states equal to 1 and unassigned states were rejected

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Mass spectrometer Raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) against the Mus musculus database downloaded from Uniprot. The quantification was performed using the Label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm from MaxQuant from which the normalized intensities were used. The software was set as the first search peptide mass tolerance in 20ppm, the main search peptide mass tolerance in 4.5ppm. The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was set as variable modifications. The data output from MaxQuant was analyzed using Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5).    All acquired proteome data was analyzed in order to classify the functional enrichment of protein profiles based on biological processes, molecular function, cellular components, and cellular pathway using the online platforms GO (Gene Ontology, geneontology,org) and PantherDB (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships) classification system.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is one of leading causes of death worldwide in the female population. Deaths from breast cancer could be reduced significantly through earlier and more efficient detection of the disease. Saliva, an oral fluid that contains an abundance of protein biomarkers, has been recognized as a promising diagnostic biofluid that is easy to isolate through non-invasive techniques. Assays on saliva can be performed rapidly and are cost-effective. Therefore, our work aimed to identify salivary biomarkers present in the initial stages of breast cancer, where cell alterations are not yet detectable by histopathological analysis. Using state-of-the-art techniques, we employed a transgenic mouse model of mammary cancer to identify molecular changes in precancerous stage breast cancer through protein analysis in saliva. Through corroborative molecular approaches, we established that proteins related to metabolic changes, inflammatory process and cell matrix degradation are detected in saliva at the onset of tumor development. Our work demonstrated that salivary protein profiles can be used to identify cellular changes associated with precancerous stage breast cancer through non-invasive means even prior to biopsy-evident disease.

### Keywords
Proteins, Biomarker, Breast cancer, Mammary tumor, Saliva

### Affiliations
Post Graduate Program in Dentistry, Cruzeiro do Sul University, SãoPaulo, Brazil;  Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil;  Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, The University of Buffalo, State University of New 17 York, Buffalo, NY, USA
UFMG

### Submitter
Isadora Sena

### Lab Head
Dr Débora Heller
Post Graduate Program in Dentistry, Cruzeiro do Sul University, SãoPaulo, Brazil;  Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil;  Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, The University of Buffalo, State University of New 17 York, Buffalo, NY, USA


