### Accession
PXD037252

### Title
Proteomic analysis of FBXL6 Knockdown cells proteome

### Description
FBXL6 is E3 ubiquitin ligase that we suspected to be involved in mitochondrial functions. We have investigated how deletion of this E3s by CRSIPR/Cas in Hela cells affects the cellular proteome. We compared this proteome to cells treated with CRISPR Non-Targeting Control (control cells).

### Sample Protocol
Three independent biological replicates on total extracts from wild-type and KD-FBXL6 cell line have been performed. 10 µg of proteins were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunken in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunken in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid for a final concentration of 0.05 µg/µL. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES803A rev.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 57 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used in batch mode by searching against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (79 071 entries, Reference Proteome, release date: January, 2022) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of lysine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Proteins identification was accepted only with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank=1 and with a protein FDR value less than 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with parameters indicated previously : Henriet E et al. Hepatology. 2017. The normalization was carried out on median of ratios. The inference of missing values was applied with 5% of the background noise

### Publication Abstract
In mammals, about 99% of mitochondrial proteins are synthesized in the cytosol as precursors that are subsequently imported into the organelle. The mitochondrial health and functions rely on an accurate quality control of these imported proteins. Here, we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase F box/leucine-rich-repeat protein 6 (FBXL6) regulates the quality of cytosolically translated mitochondrial proteins. Indeed, we found that FBXL6 substrates are newly synthesized mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. This E3 binds to chaperones involved in the folding and trafficking of newly synthesized peptide and to ribosomal-associated quality control proteins. Deletion of these interacting partners is sufficient to hamper interactions between FBXL6 and its substrate. Furthermore, we show that cells lacking FBXL6 fail to degrade specifically mistranslated mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. Finally, showing the role of FBXL6-dependent mechanism, FBXL6-knockout (KO) cells display mitochondrial ribosomal protein aggregations, altered mitochondrial metabolism, and inhibited cell cycle in oxidative conditions.

### Keywords
Human cell line, Quantitative proteome

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux
Laboratoire Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme- INSERM U1211, 33000 Bordeaux, France

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Benard
Laboratoire Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme- INSERM U1211, 33000 Bordeaux, France


