### Accession
PXD013637

### Title
Gene modification by fast-track recombineering for cellular localization and isolation of components of plant protein complexes

### Description
Genes encoding Arabidopsis subunit homologs of TFIIH kinase module were labelled with coding sequences of GFP and mCherry (green and red fluorescent proteins) using fast-track recombineering. To illustrate the applicability of recombineering for accelerating the isolation and identification of plant protein complexes, proteins associated with CDKD;2-GFP, CYCLIN-H-mCherry and DNA replication-dependent HISTONE H3.1-mCherry complexes were purified on GFP-Trap and RFP-TRAP and analysed by LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry. The results confirmed association of know TFIIH subunit homologs with CDKD;2 and CYCLIN H, and identified subunits of CAF1 (CHROMATIN ASSEMBLY FACTOR 1) and ASF1A/B histone chaperon in complex with HISTONE H3.1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins eluted from GFP-Trap resins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with chloroacetamide(CAA), and digested with trypsin. Next, the samples were desalted using StageTips with C18 Empore disk membranes (3 M; Rappsilber et al. 2003), dried in a vacuum evaporator, and dissolved in 2% ACN (acetonitrile), 0.1% TFA (trifloroacetic acid). The RFP-Trap-bound proteins associated with CYCH:mCherry and HISTONE H3.1:mCherry were subjected to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were resuspended in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris.HCl (pH 7.5), 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 µg/µL trypsin), incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm, and then pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris.HCl (pH 7.5), 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added. After mixing the beads were pelleted and the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated overnight at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm by protecting the samples from light. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA followed by desalting the samples with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 10 µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl, or measured without dilution in case of on-bead digested samples. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min: 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.4, http://www.maxquant.org/, Coxand Mann, 2008,) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al., 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/).

### Publication Abstract
To accelerate the isolation of plant protein complexes and study cellular localization and interaction of their components, an improved recombineering protocol is described for simple and fast site-directed modification of plant genes in bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs). Coding sequences of fluorescent and affinity tags were inserted into genes and transferred together with flanking genomic sequences of desired size by recombination into Agrobacterium plant transformation vectors using three steps of E.&#xa0;coli transformation with PCR-amplified DNA fragments. Application of fast-track recombineering is illustrated by the simultaneous labelling of CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE D (CDKD) and CYCLIN H (CYCH) subunits of kinase module of TFIIH general transcription factor and the CDKD-activating CDKF;1 kinase with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and mCherry (green and red fluorescent protein) tags, and a PIPL (His<sub>18</sub> -StrepII-HA) epitope. Functionality of modified CDKF;1 gene constructs is verified by complementation of corresponding T-DNA insertion mutation. Interaction of CYCH with all three known CDKD homologues is confirmed by their co-localization and co-immunoprecipitation. Affinity purification and mass spectrometry analyses of CDKD;2, CYCH, and DNA-replication-coupled HISTONE H3.1 validate their association with conserved TFIIH subunits and components of CHROMATIN ASSEMBLY FACTOR 1, respectively. The results document that simple modification of plant gene products with suitable tags by fast-track recombineering is well suited to promote a wide range of protein interaction and proteomics studies.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ip-ms, Fast-track recombineering

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


