### Accession
PXD022545

### Title
Proteomic analysis of ARPE-19 cells exposed to chronic H2O2 treatment

### Description
We performed a proteomic analysis of a retinal pigment epithelium cell line (ARPE-19) exposed to long-term sublethal levels of H2O2 to mimic low-level pro-oxidative insult in age-related macular degeneration (AMD). using a wide range of biochemical analyses and cell culture techniques, we highlighted changes in energy metabolism, extracellular matrix organization and inflammation-related processes, which may help in understanding the molecular pathogenesis of AMD.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, 100 µg of protein lysates from Ctrl and H2O2-treated ARPE-19 cells were precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone (1:4 v/v). The sample preparation for mass spectrometry was carried out using a commercially available in-StageTip (iST) kit including all reagents for lysis, digestion and peptide purification (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). The protein pellet obtained from acetone precipitation was solubilised with the lysis buffer of the iST kit, protein digestion and purification of the peptides were performed according to manufacturer instructions.  Extracted peptides (~ 1 µg) were separated on a reverse phase PicoFrit column (75 um ID, 8 Um tip, 250 mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR C18-AQ, 1.9 um particle size, 120 Å pore size, New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System (ThermoFisher Scientific). Total run time for each sample was 120 min., peptides were separated using a 100 min. gradient (4-40% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min). Eluting peptides were measured on-line with a Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode (Top20). Peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kV, intact peptide ions were detected at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) and fragment ions at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200); AGC Target settings for MS were 3E6 charges and for MS/MS 1E5 charges. Peptides were selected for Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Th, peptides were fragmented at a normalized collision energy of 30. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from MS analysis were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.6.10.43 22. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (release 2020_2, 20,375 sequences including isoforms) with initial precursor and fragment mass tolerance set to 7 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and lysine C and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetylation of proteins (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) and oxidized methionine (Met, +15.994915 Da) were searched as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related retinal degenerations, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD), are caused by the loss of retinal pigmented epithelial (RPE) cells and photoreceptors. The pathogenesis of AMD, deeply linked to the aging process, also involves oxidative stress and inflammatory responses. However, the molecular mechanisms contributing to the shift from healthy aging to AMD are still poorly understood. Since RPE cells in the retina are chronically exposed to a pro-oxidant microenvironment throughout life, we simulated in vivo conditions by growing ARPE-19 cells in the presence of 10 &#x3bc;M H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> for several passages. This long-term oxidative insult induced senescence in ARPE-19 cells without affecting cell proliferation. Global proteomic analysis revealed a dysregulated expression in proteins involved in antioxidant response, mitochondrial homeostasis, and extracellular matrix organization. The analyses of mitochondrial functionality showed increased mitochondrial biogenesis and ATP generation and improved response to oxidative stress. The latter, however, was linked to nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) rather than nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) activation. NF-&#x3ba;B hyperactivation also resulted in increased pro-inflammatory cytokines expression and inflammasome activation. Moreover, in response to additional pro-inflammatory insults, senescent ARPE-19 cells underwent an exaggerated inflammatory reaction. Our results indicate senescence as an important link between chronic oxidative insult and detrimental chronic inflammation, with possible future repercussions for therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Macular degeneration, Oxidative stress, Arpe-19, Retinal pigment epithelium

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, section of Physiology and Biochemistry, University of Perugia
Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Physiology and Biochemistry

### Submitter
Davide Chiasserini

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Chiasserini
Department of Medicine, section of Physiology and Biochemistry, University of Perugia


