### Accession
PXD021861

### Title
The velvet protein Vel1 controls initial plant root colonization and conidia formation for xylem distribution in Verticillium wilt

### Description
Velvet domain proteins coordinate developmental processes and secondary metabolism in fungi. In this study, we characterized the role of all four velvet proteins in the life cycle of the plant pathogenic fungus Verticillium dahliae. From other fungi, the formation of different homo-and heterodimers as well as complexes with non-velvet proteins is known. We could show that V. dahliae Vel1 is important for initial plant root colonization. In planta, Vel1 together with Vel3 is involved in fungal distribution by conidia. Disease symptom induction in tomato plants also depends on Vel1. In the senescent plant formation of microsclerotia as resting structure ex planta is controlled by Vel1, Vel2 and Vel3. In vitro protein pull-downs were conducted to identify interaction partners of velvet proteins in V. dahliae. In this study, we were able to identify interactions between Vel1 and Vel2, Vel2 and Vos1, and Vel3 and Vos1 during vegetative hyphae growth, respectively. Similar interactions are known for A. nidulans. Further interacting candidates were identified for the velvet proteins except for Vel3, for which only interaction with Vos1 was found during the tested conditions. Velvet-interacting candidate proteins included redox-regulating proteins and metabolic enzymes, but also proteins involved in energy metabolism and transport.

### Sample Protocol
5x10^7 freshly harvested spores of strains VGB39 (wild type), VGB45 (free GFP), VGB447 (Vel1-GFP), VGB450 (Vel2-GFP), VGB451 (Vel3-GFP), and VGB453 (Vos1-GFP) were inoculated in 500 ml PDM and grown for 72 hours during constant agitation in light. Proteins were extracted as previously described (Harting et al., 2013). The buffer was supplemented with 2 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluorid and 10 μl/ml cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, stock: one tablet solved in 500 μl dH2O). VGB45 and VGB39 were mixed before protein extraction (1/3 VGB45, 2/3 VGB39) due to the higher amount of free GFP in VGB45 in comparison to the above mentioned velvet strains, which was observed with Western blot experiments using a GFP-specific antibody. Protein concentrations were measured according to Bradford (Bradford, 1976). Prior to protein loading, 10 μl GFP TrapA beads (Chromotek) were equilibrated through washing with the afore mentioned extraction buffer in a polyprep column (Bio-Rad). For each sample, 12 mg of protein were applied to the equilibrated beads. The final volume was adjusted to the same amount with extraction buffer. Beads were incubated with constant rotation for 2 h at 4 °C. Afterwards, the beads were washed twice with W300 buffer (300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.5). To elute proteins, 150 μl glycine pH 2.5 were given onto the column and mixed with 15 μl 1 M Tris pH 10.4. The elution step was repeated twice leading to elution fractions E1-E3. Proteins were precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction (Wessel & Flügge, 1984) and resuspended in RapiGestSF Surfactant as indicated by the manufacturer (Waters). At this step, the three elution fractions of each sample were pooled. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Serva, final dilution 1:20) overnight. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the digested peptides as recommended by the manufacturer (Waters). Peptides were purified using StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003, 2007).  Subsequently LC/MS analysis was conducted. A volume of 2 µl of each sample was applied to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For this purpose, the peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. On an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical separation of peptides was done with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Composition of the solvent was gradually changed within 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 min, to 30 % solvent B within the next 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the following 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the last 12 min of the gradient. Used solvents and acids had Optima grade for LC/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). By nano-electrospray (nESI) the eluting peptides were on-line ionized with the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z full scans were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). The XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for LC/MS method programming and data acquisition.  References: Bradford MM. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Analytical Biochemistry 72: 248–254. Harting R, Bayram Ö, Laubinger K, Valerius O, Braus GH. 2013. Interplay of the fungal sumoylation network for control of multicellular development. Molecular Microbiology 90: 1125–1145. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. 2003. Stop And Go Extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Analytical Chemistry 75: 663–670. Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. 2007. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nature Protocols 2: 1896–1906. Wessel D, Flügge UI. 1984. A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Analytical Biochemistry 138: 141–143.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS data was analysed by MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (Cox & Mann, 2008) and Perseus 1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016). MaxQuant was used with default parameters and label free quantification (LFQ) to analyse the raw data. The protein database from EnsemblFungi (Kersey et al., 2018) was used in MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 but the entry of VDAG_JR2_Chr31209a-00001 was altered. Obtained data was evaluated with Perseus 1.6.0.7.  References: Cox J, Mann M. 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology 26: 1367–1372. Kersey PJ, Allen JE, Allot A, Barba M, Boddu S, Bolt BJ, Carvalho-Silva D, Christensen M, Davis P, Grabmueller C, et al. 2018. Ensembl Genomes 2018: An integrated omics infrastructure for non-vertebrate species. Nucleic Acids Research 46: D802-D808. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. 2016. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods 13: 731–740.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved fungal velvet family regulatory proteins link development and secondary metabolite production. The velvet domain for DNA binding and dimerization is similar to the structure of the Rel homology domain of the mammalian NF-&#x3ba;B transcription factor. A comprehensive study addressed the functions of all four homologs of velvet domain encoding genes in the fungal life cycle of the soil-borne plant pathogenic fungus Verticillium dahliae. Genetic, cell biological, proteomic and metabolomic analyses of Vel1, Vel2, Vel3 and Vos1 were combined with plant pathogenicity experiments. Different phases of fungal growth, development and pathogenicity require V. dahliae velvet proteins, including Vel1-Vel2, Vel2-Vos1 and Vel3-Vos1 heterodimers, which are already present during vegetative hyphal growth. The major novel finding of this study is that Vel1 is necessary for initial plant root colonization and together with Vel3 for propagation in planta by conidiation. Vel1 is needed for disease symptom induction in tomato. Vel1, Vel2, and Vel3 control the formation of microsclerotia in senescent plants. Vel1 is the most important among all four V. dahliae velvet proteins with a wide variety of functions during all phases of the fungal life cycle in as well as ex planta.

### Keywords
Verticillium dahliae, Plant pathogen, Velvet proteins, Velvet domain

### Affiliations
University of Göttingen, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Gerhard H. Braus
University of Göttingen, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics


