### Accession
PXD012825

### Title
Salmonella mediated intracellular niche control by SCV size regulation

### Description
Salmonella is a human and animal pathogen causing gastro-enteric diseases worldwide. The  key feature of Salmonella infection is its entry into intestinal epithelial cells within a Salmonella-Containing Vacuole (SCV). This original compartment is distinct from empty  macropinosomes formed around the infection site. A few minutes after its formation, the SCV increases in size through fusions with the surrounding macropinosomes. On the opposite,  Salmonella induces the formation of elongated tubules leading to SCV membrane and volume  loss. Later, the SCV can mature into a vacuolar pathogen niche, or be ruptured releasing  Salmonella in the host cytosol where the bacteria hyper-replicates. Here, we describe how  size control of the early SCV is the main contributor to its stability and consequently  determines the Salmonella intracellular niche and growth. We identify the SNAREs required  for increasing the SCV size through fusions. We show that this fusion promotes the  maintenance of the SCV integrity and the establishment of a vacuolar niche

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion:  Protein samples were solubilized in urea 8 M, Tris 100 mM pH 7.5, then Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 20 min at 23°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, LysC  (Promega) was added for the first digestion step (protein to Lys-C ratio = 80:1) for 3 h at 30°C. Then the sample was diluted to 1 M urea with 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, and Sequencing  Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to the sample at a ratio of  50:1 for 16 h at 37°C. A second incubation (1 h at 37°C) with the same amount of trypsin  was performed to ensure a complete digestion. Proteolysis was stopped by adding 1% formic  acid. Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak SPE cartridge (Waters) according to  manufactures instructions.  Mass spectrometry analysis:  Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). Samples were  loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin  (3 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH,  Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % formic acid)  and 2 % solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 2 to 22 % gradient of solvent B during 150 min, then a 22 to 45 % gradient of solvent B during 60  min and finally a 45 to 80% gradient of solvent B during 10 min all at 250 nL/min flow  rate. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in the data dependent  acquisition mode. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70 000), the 10 most  intense precursor ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)  fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 28. Charge state screening was  enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were  excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Analysis: All data were searched using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) with the MaxQuant software  version 1.5.3.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) against Uniprot proteome database of Human (v20150113, 89706 entries) and S-typhimurium 99287 (4533 entries). Usual known  mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences were also searched. Andromeda  searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two  missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed),  oxidation (Met, variable) and N-terminal acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS  was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search  and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were  required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was used between  condition with a maximal retention time window of 1 min. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of  1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. The MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free  quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across  samples (Cox et al., 2011). Data were filtered by requiring a minimum peptide ratio count  of 2 in MaxLFQ.  Statistical Analysis of the Proteomics: Three biological replicates were acquired per condition. To highlight significantly  differentially abundant proteins between two conditions, differential analyses have been  conducted through the following data analysis pipeline: (1) deleting the reverse and  potential contaminant proteins; (2) keeping only proteins with at least two quantified  values in one of the two compared fractions to limit misidentifications and ensure a  minimum of replicability; (3) log2-transformation of the remaining LFQ intensities of  proteins; (4) normalizing the LFQ intensities by median centering within conditions thanks to the normalized function of the R package DAPAR (Wieczoreck et al., 2017), (5) putting  aside proteins without any LFQ value in one of both compared fractions: as they are  quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another, they are considered as  differentially abundant proteins; (6) imputing the missing values of the remaining proteins using the impute.slsa function of the R package imp4p (Giai Gianetto, 2018); and (7)  performing statistical differential analysis on them using a LIMMA t-test  (Smyth, 2005; Ritchie et al., 2015) combined with an adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg correction of the p-values. A False Discovery Rate (FDR) level of 1% was applied to select the  significantly differentially abundant proteins thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p (Giai Gianetto et al., 2016). The gene ontology analysis was performed using PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) tools (Mi et al., 2017)  (http://www.pantherdb.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Salmonella is a human and animal pathogen that causes gastro-enteric diseases. The key to Salmonella infection is its entry into intestinal epithelial cells, where the bacterium resides within a Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV). Salmonella entry also induces the formation of empty macropinosomes, distinct from the SCV, in the vicinity of the entering bacteria. A few minutes after its formation, the SCV increases in size through fusions with the surrounding macropinosomes. Salmonella also induces membrane tubules that emanate from the SCV and lead to SCV shrinkage. Here, we show that these antipodal events are utilized by Salmonella to either establish a vacuolar niche or to be released into the cytosol by SCV rupture. We identify the molecular machinery underlying dynamic SCV growth and shrinkage. In particular, the SNARE proteins SNAP25 and STX4 participate in SCV inflation by fusion with macropinosomes. Thus, host compartment size control emerges as a pathogen strategy for intracellular niche regulation.

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, Membrane fusion, Svat, Membrane trafficking, Membrane rupture, Macropinosome, Salmonella containing vacuole, Tubule formation, Snare, Magnetic extraction

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Institut Pasteur Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions 25, rue du Dr. Roux 75724 Paris CEDEX 15 France

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Jost Enninga
Institut Pasteur Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions 25, rue du Dr. Roux 75724 Paris CEDEX 15 France


