### Accession
PXD032916

### Title
In vitro pilot study of polydopamine nanoparticles as protective antioxidant agents on fibroblasts cells derived from ARSACS patients

### Description
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are active molecules involved in several biological functions. When the production of ROS is not counterbalanced by the action of protective antioxidant mechanisms present in living organisms, a condition of oxidative stress can arise with consequent damage to biological structures. The brain is one of the main ROS-generating organs in the human body, with the consequence that most neurological disorders are associated with the overproduction of ROS. Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a neurodegenerative disease associated with mutations in the sacsin gene (SACS). At a cellular level, ARSACS is characterized by mitochondrial impairments, a reduction of bioenergetic processes, and by both an over-production of and an over sensitivity to ROS. Several antioxidant molecules have been proposed as a potential treatment for ARSACS, such as idebenone and resveratrol. Polydopamine nanoparticles (PDNPs) gained significant attention in recent years owing to their peculiar physic-chemical properties, and especially because of their antioxidant activity. PDNPs have shown a great ROS scavenging capacity that, combined with their completely organic nature that grants them the ability to be degraded and excreted by living organisms, make them a promising candidate in the treatment of oxidative stress-related disorders. In this work we assessed the effect of PDNPs upon human fibroblasts; in particular, we investigated the effects of PDNPs on populations of fibroblasts derived from healthy subjects and of fibroblasts derived from ARSACS patients, in terms of antioxidant properties and protein expression. PDNPs interaction with fibroblasts was analyzed in terms of biocompatibility, internalization and uptake pathway, reduction of ROS levels, prevention of ROS-induced apoptosis/necrosis, and protective action upon ROS-induced mitochondrial dysfunctions. Moreover, a complete proteomic analysis of the cells was performed to assess differences in terms of protein expression upon different treatments. Altogether, our data showed that PDNPs can partially counteract ROS-induced damages in both healthy and ARSACS patients-derived fibroblasts, making them a potential therapeutic candidate to treat or at least ameliorate the condition of oxidative stress associated with ARSACS disease.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses, 4 batches of healthy fibroblasts and 4 batches of fibroblasts derived from ARSACS patients were seeded in Petri dishes at 10000 cells/cm2. Upon reaching approximately full confluency, cells were incubated for 72 h with cell culture medium doped (or not, as controls) with 100 µg/ml of PDNPs. After incubation with PDNPs, a part of the cells were treated for 24 h with 100 µM of TBH and then detached through trypsinization, rinsed once in DPBS, and obtained pellet frozen at -80°C. After thawing, samples were lysed, reduced, and alkylated in 50 μl LYSE buffer (Preomics) at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 s. Lysates samples were digested with 0.7 μg Trypsin and 0.3 μg LysC overnight at 37°C. To remove PDNPs a 20 min centrifuge step at 20000 I has been performed, and the supernatants were processed with iST protocol.The resulting peptides were analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Elution was performed using a 200 cm uPAC C18 column (PharmaFluidics) mounted in the thermostated column compartment maintained at 50°C. Firstly, a concentration gradient from 5% to 10% of buffer B was applied (80% ACN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), coupled with a flow gradient from 750 nl/min to 350 nl/min for 15 min. Then, peptides were eluted with a 60 min non-linear gradient from 10% to 60% of buffer B at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min. Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120 K in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z and with a standard AGC target. Advanced Peak Detection was enabled for MS1 measurements. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 30% and with a Custom AGC target. For precursor selection, the least abundant signals in the three ranges 375-575 m/z, 574-775 m/z, and 774-1500 m/z were prioritized. Dynamic exclusion was set at 25 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software25, version 1.6.17.0, was used to process the raw data. The false discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of proteins, peptides, and PSM (peptide-spectrum match) was set to 0.01. A minimum length of 6 aminoacids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 October 2020). In the processing, the variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), and Deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option “match between runs” to reduce the number of the missing proteins. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software26 version 1.6.14.0. GO enrichment specific for skin fibroblast was obtained with the webserver HumanBase.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are active molecules involved in several biological functions. When the production of ROS is not counterbalanced by the action of protective antioxidant mechanisms present in living organisms, a condition of oxidative stress can arise with consequent damage to biological structures. The brain is one of the main ROS-generating organs in the human body, with the consequence that most of the neurological disorders are associated with an overproduction of ROS. Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is a neurodegenerative disease associated with mutations in the sacsin gene (<i>SACS</i>). At cellular level, ARSACS is characterized by mitochondrial impairments, a reduction in bioenergetic processes, and by both an over-production of and an over-sensitivity to ROS. Several antioxidant molecules have been proposed as a potential treatment for ARSACS, such as idebenone and resveratrol. Polydopamine nanoparticles (PDNPs) gained significant attention in recent years owing to their peculiar physical/chemical properties, and especially because of their antioxidant activity. PDNPs have shown a great ROS scavenging capacity that, combined with their completely organic nature that grants them the ability to be degraded and excreted by living organisms, make them a promising candidate in the treatment of oxidative stress-related disorders. In this work, we assessed the effect of PDNPs on human fibroblasts derived from ARSACS patients in terms of antioxidant properties and protein expression. PDNP interaction with fibroblasts was analyzed in terms of biocompatibility, internalization and uptake pathway, reduction of ROS levels, prevention of ROS-induced apoptosis/necrosis, and protective action upon ROS-induced mitochondrial dysfunctions. Moreover, a complete proteomic analysis was performed. Altogether, our data showed that PDNPs can partially counteract ROS-induced damages in ARSACS patient-derived fibroblasts, making them a potential therapeutic candidate to treat - or at least to ameliorate - the condition of oxidative stress associated with ARSACS.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen species, Arsacs, Polydopamine nanoparticles, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


