### Accession
PXD025367

### Title
Comparative proteomic profiling reveals specific adaptation of Vibrio anguillarum to oxidative stress, iron deprivation and humoral components of innate immunity

### Description
The gram-negative bacterium Vibrio (Listonella) anguillarum is the causative agent of vibriosis, a bacterial disease affecting aquacultural industry across the globe. The full mechanism of V. anguillarum pathogenesis is not completely understood, but many virulence determinants have been identified. The current study aimed to obtain molecular insights into the proteome response of the bacterium to several conditions mimicking vibriosis. Our data shed light on the adaptability of V. anguillarum to oxidative stress, iron limitations and the complement system, and offer potential virulence determinants associated in particular with septicemia over the course of vibriosis.

### Sample Protocol
Vibrio anguillarum was grown either in bacteriologic LBs20 at 25C with agitation where samples were harvested at OD600 0.3-0.4, 0.6-0.7 and >1.0, or in M9va supplemented with pooled salmon serum. Harvested samples were centrifuged and separated into secretome and pellet. The pellet were homogenized using beads. Proteins were precipitated with TCA, digested with trypsin and analyzed with nanoLC-MS/MS (Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled to a Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 was used and data were searched againt UniProt proteome UP00006800. Proteins were identified at 1%FDR and LFQ was used for quantification. Proteins were only considered if they were present in at least two replicates in at least one condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Vaaje-Kolstad
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science Norwegian University of Life Sciences Post Office Box 5003 1432, Ås Norway


