### Accession
PXD005580

### Title
Proteome dynamcis in biobanked horse peripheral blood derived lymphocytes (PBL) with induced autoimmune uveitis

### Description
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) is the only spontaneous model for recurrent autoimmune uveitis in humans, where T cells target retinal proteins. Differences between normal and autoaggressive lymphocytes were identified in this study by analyzing peripheral blood derived lymphocytes (PBL) proteomes from the same case with IRBP-induced uveitis sampled before (day 0), during (day 15) and after uveitic attack (day 23). Relative protein abundances of PBL were investigated in a quantitative, label-free differential proteome analysis in cells that were kept frozen for 14 years since the initial experiment. Quantitative data could be acquired for 2632 proteins at all three time-points. Profound changes (> 2 fold change) in PBL protein abundance were observed when comparing day 0 to 15, representing acute inflammation (234 regulated proteins) and day 0 to 23 (cessation; 382 regulated). Significant differences applied to proteins with functions in integrin signaling during active uveitis, involving “Erk and pi-3 kinase are necessary for collagen binding in corneal epithelia”, “Integrins in angiogenesis” and “Integrin-linked kinase signaling” pathways. In contrast, at cessation of uveitic attack, significantly changed proteins belonged to pathways of “nongenotropic androgen signaling”, “classical complement pathway” and “Amb2 integrin signaling”. Several members of respective pathways were earlier shown to be changed in naturally occurring uveitis, underscoring the significance of these findings here and proofing the value of the induced model in mimicking spontaneous autoimmune uveitis.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free quantitative proteome analyses, cells were thawn in a 37 °C waterbath and  immediately transferred into 10 ml prewarmed RPMI medium. Cells were washed in RPMI (5 min, 400 x g, RT), resuspended and filtered through a 70 µm cell strainer. After two additional washing steps in RPMI, cells were pelleted for 8 min (400 x g, 4 °C) and shock frozen at -80 °C. Cells were processed for LC-MS/MS with the in-StageTip (iST) method with slight adaptations. Briefly, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5), boiled for 8 min at 95 °C and subsequently sonicated for 5 x 1 min using a waterbath sonicator (Elma Transsonic T310-H). Protein content was determined using BCA assay and 15 µg protein lysate were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 40 mM CAA. Subsequently, lysates were diluted 1:10 with dilution buffer (10% (v/v) ACN, 25mM Tris pH 8.5) containing 1 µg Trypsin and Lys-C each and digested overnight at 37 °C. After digestion peptides were acidified to an end-concentration of 1 % TFA. Prior to peptide loading to the StageTip, activation of material (14-gauge plug SDB-RPS, EmporeTM, 3M Bioanalytical Technologies) was performed by successively applying 50 µl acetone, isopropanol, methanol and 0.2 % TFA (v/v) each step followed by centrifugation (1 min, 1000 x g). Acidified peptides were transferred to the StageTip and loaded onto activated SDB-RPS material by centrifugation for 1-2 min for 1500 x g. The loading procedure was repeated three times followed by three washing steps with 100 µl 0.2 % TFA (v/v). Peptide elution was performed in 3 fractions by successive application of 60 µl elution buffers 1-3 and centrifugation for 1-2 min for up to 1500 x g (Buffer 1, 100 mM NH4HCO2 40 % ACN 0.5 % Formic Acid; Buffer 2, 150 mM NH4HCO2 60 % ACN 0.5 % Formic Acid 50 mM NaOH; Buffer 3, 5 % NH4OH 80 % ACN). Eluates were collected and evaporated using a SpeedVac centrifuge. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl loading buffer (2 % ACN, 0.5 % TFA), briefly sonicated and used for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC–MSMS mass spectrometry was performed as previously described on an LTQ OrbitrapXL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Briefly, peptides were automatically loaded to a nano trap column before separation by reversed phase chromatography with the following gradient of increasing ACN concentrations in 0.1% formic acid over 170 minutes: 135 minutes of 6 % to 31 % followed by 5 minutes from 31 % to 71 % ACN and 5 minutes stable 71 %ACN. Between each gradient the ACN in 0.1% FA concentration was set back to starting conditions for 20 minutes. The 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. During fragment analysis, a high-resolution (60,000 full width at half-maximum) MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 200 to 1500 Da.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra of the different samples were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 2.0 , Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label-free quantification as previously described [10]. All MS/MS spectra were exported from the Progenesis QI software as Mascot generic files (mgf) and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.5.1) using the Ensembl Horse protein database (version 2.75, 22654 sequences, http://www.ensembl.org). Search parameters used were 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications.  Mascot integrated decoy database search was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% when searching was performed on the concatenated mgf files with a percolator ion score cut-off of 15 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Identifications were re-imported into Progenesis QI. For quantification, all unique peptides of an identified protein were included and the total cumulative normalized abundance was calculated by summing up the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to the respective protein.

### Publication Abstract
Equine recurrent uveitis is the only spontaneous model for recurrent autoimmune uveitis in humans, where T cells target retinal proteins. Differences between normal and autoaggressive lymphocytes were identified in this study by analyzing peripheral blood derived lymphocytes (PBL) proteomes from the same case with interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein induced uveitis sampled before (Day 0), during (Day 15), and after uveitic attack (Day 23). Relative protein abundances of PBL were investigated in a quantitative, label-free differential proteome analysis in cells that were kept frozen for 14 years since the initial experiment. Quantitative data could be acquired for 2632 proteins at all three time points. Profound changes (&#x2265;2-fold change) in PBL protein abundance were observed when comparing Day 0 with 15, representing acute inflammation (1070 regulated proteins) and Day 0 with 23 (cessation; 1571 regulated). Significant differences applied to proteins with functions in integrin signaling during active uveitis, involving "Erk and pi-3 kinase are necessary for collagen binding in corneal epithelia," "integrins in angiogenesis," and "integrin-linked kinase signaling" pathways. In contrast, at cessation of uveitic attack, significantly changed proteins belonged to pathways of "nongenotropic androgen signaling," "classical complement pathway," and "Amb2 integrin signaling." Several members of respective pathways were earlier shown to be changed in naturally occurring uveitis, underscoring the significance of these findings here and proofing the value of the induced model in mimicking spontaneous autoimmune uveitis. All MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (dataset identifier PXD005580).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Lymphocytes, Inflammation, Autoimmune, Frozen, Cfa

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg,Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH)

### Submitter
Marlen Lepper

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg,Germany


