### Accession
PXD027234

### Title
Cross-linking/Mass Spectrometry Combined with Ion Mobility on a timsTOF Pro Instrument for Structural Proteomics

### Description
The combination of cross-linking/mass spectrometry (XL-MS) and ion mobility is still underexplored for conducting protein conformational and protein-protein interaction studies. We present a method for analyzing cross-linking mixtures on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer that allows separating ions based on their gas phase mobilities. Cross-linking was performed with three urea-based MS-cleavable cross-linkers that deliver distinct fragmentation patterns for cross-linked species upon collisional activation. The discrimination of cross-linked species from non-cross-linked peptides was readily performed based on their collisional cross sections. We demonstrate the general feasibility of our combined XL-MS/ion mobility approach for three protein systems of increasing complexity: (i) Bovine serum albumin, (ii) E. coli ribosome, and (iii) HEK293T cell nuclear extracts. We identified a total of 623 unique cross-linking sites for BSA, 670 for the E. coli ribosome, and 1,617 unique cross-links for nuclear extracts, corresponding to 1,088 intra- and 529 interprotein interactions and yielding 564 distinct protein-protein interactions. Our results underline the strength of combining XL-MS with ion mobility not only for deriving 3D-structures of single proteins, but also for performing system-wide protein interaction studies.

### Sample Protocol
Three different systems (BSA, E.coli ribosome, nuclei) were cross-linked with DSBU (for BSA DSAU and DSPU were also used). Digested samples of BSA and the E. coli ribosome were analyzed in three technical replicates, nuclear extract samples in three biological replicates by LC/MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer equipped with CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a µPAC 50 column (PharmaFluidics). After trapping, peptides were eluted by a linear 90-min (for BSA and ribosome) or 240-min (for nuclear lysates) water-ACN gradient from 3% (v/v) to 35% (v/v) ACN. For elution, a flow gradient was employed ranging from 900 nl/min to 600 nl/min in 15 min, followed by a constant flow rate of 600 nl/min

### Data Protocol
Identification of cross-links was performed with MeroX 2.0.1.7. The following settings were applied: Proteolytic cleavage: C-terminal at Lys and Arg for BSA and ribosome (3 missed cleavages were allowed), for nuclear extracts also N-terminal at Asp and Glu (3 missed cleavages were allowed), peptide lengths of 5 to 50 amino acids, modifications: alkylation of Cys by iodoacetamide (fixed), oxidation of Met (variable), cross-linker specificity: Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, N-terminus (sites 1 and 2 for BSA and ribosome); Lys and N-terminus and Lys, Ser, N-terminus (sites 1 and 2, respectively, for nuclear lysates), search algorithm: RISEUP mode with up to two missing ions (for BSA and ribosome) or proteome-wide mode with minimum peptide score of 5 (for nuclear extracts), precursor mass accuracy: 15 ppm, fragment ion mass accuracy: 25 ppm, signal-to-noise ratio < 2 (for BSA and ribosome) or < 1.5 (for nuclear lysates), precursor mass correction enabled, 10% intensity as prescore cut-off, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off, and minimum score cut-off: 20. Proteome Discoverer 2.4 was used for the identification of proteins present in nuclear lysates (all relevant fractions from the three biological replicates were combined) using the human proteome database (uniprot.org; accession date: Nov. 15, 2020; 20,315 entries). All protein IDs with FDR < 5% were combined in a sub-database (2803 entries: 2654 entries at 1% FDR, 149 entries at 5% FDR) for subsequent cross-link searches with MeroX

### Publication Abstract
The combination of cross-linking/mass spectrometry (XL-MS) and ion mobility is still underexplored for conducting protein conformational and protein-protein interaction studies. We present a method for analyzing cross-linking mixtures on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer that allows separating ions based on their gas-phase mobilities. Cross-linking was performed with three urea-based MS-cleavable cross-linkers that deliver distinct fragmentation patterns for cross-linked species upon collisional activation. The discrimination of cross-linked species from non-cross-linked peptides was readily performed based on their collisional cross sections. We demonstrate the general feasibility of our combined XL-MS/ion mobility approach for three protein systems of increasing complexity: (i) bovine serum albumin (BSA), (ii) <i>Escherichia coli</i> ribosome, and (iii) HEK293T cell nuclear lysates. We identified a total of 623 unique cross-linking sites for BSA, 670 for the <i>E. coli</i> ribosome, and 1623 unique cross-links for nuclear lysates, corresponding to 1088 intra- and 535 interprotein interactions and yielding 564 distinct protein-protein interactions. Our results underline the strength of combining XL-MS with ion mobility not only for deriving three-dimensional (3D) structures of single proteins but also for performing system-wide protein interaction studies.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Protein 3d-structure, Protein interaction networks, Ion mobility, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MLU Halle, Inst. f. Pharmacy
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics  Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry  Institute of Pharmacy  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg  Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3, Entrance C  D-06120 Halle/Saale

### Submitter
Christian Ihling

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics  Center for Structural Mass Spectrometry  Institute of Pharmacy  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg  Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3, Entrance C  D-06120 Halle/Saale


