### Accession
PXD046731

### Title
Integrative Multianalytical Model Based on Novel Plasma Protein Biomarkers for Distinguishing Lung Adenocarcinoma and Benign Pulmonary Nodules

### Description
Given the pressing clinical problem of making decision in diagnosis for subjects with pulmonary nodules, we aimed to discover novel plasma protein biomarkers for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and benign pulmonary nodules (BPN), then develop an integrative multianalytical model to guide the clinical management of LUAD and BPN patients. Through label-free quantitative plasma proteomic analysis, twelve differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in LUAD and BPN were screened. The diagnostic abilities of the DEPs were validated in two independent validation cohorts. The results showed that the level of three candidate proteins (PRDX2, PON1, APOC3) were lower in the plasma of LUAD than BPN. The three candidate proteins were combined with three promising computed tomography (CT) indicators (Spiculation, Vascular Notch Sign, Lobulation) and three traditional markers (CEA, CA125, CYFRA21-1) to construct an integrative multianalytical model, which was effective in distinguishing LUAD from BPN, with AUC of 0.904, sensitivity of 81.44% and specificity of 90.14%. Moreover, the model possessed impressive diagnostic performance between early LUADs and BPNs, with the AUC, sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of 0.868, 65.63%, 90.14% and 82.52%, respectively. This model maybe a useful auxiliary diagnostic tool for LUAD and BPN by achieving a better balance of sensitivity and specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free quantitative plasma proteomics analysis 1.1 Protein extraction The plasma samples were taken out from -80 ℃, thawed in 4 ℃ and then centrifuged (4 ℃, 12000g, 10min) to remove cellular debris of sample. Next, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The high abundance proteins were removed by Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (Thermo Fisher). Finally, the protein concentration was determined by BCA kit and the quality of the extracted protein was analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). 1.2 Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to make the urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and second digestion at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for 4 h. 1.3 Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis The peptide fragment solution was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Then the solution was separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Fisher). In the meantime, the concentration gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) was comprised of an increase from 6% to 25% over 90 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min. After separated by UPLC system, the peptide was injected into electrospray ionization ion source for ionization, and then analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometry (MS). The voltage of ion source was set to 2.2kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high resolution Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher). The scanning range of primary mass spectrometry was set to 350-1800 m/z, and the scan resolution was set to 70,000. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry was fixed at 100 m/z, and the secondary scan resolution was set at 17,500. The data-dependent scanning program is used as the data acquisition mode. That is, after primary scanning, the top 10 peptide mother ions with the highest signal intensity were selected to enter the high energy collision dissociation collision cell in turn for fragmentation with 28% fragmentation energy, and the secondary mass spectrometry analysis was also performed in turn. In order to improve the effective utilization of MS, the automatic gain control was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 40,000 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms, and the dynamic exclusion time of MS/MS scanning was set to 30 seconds to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions

### Data Protocol
1.4 Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. A common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminant proteins in the identification results. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Cysteine alkylation was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, and deamidation were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Given the pressing clinical problem of making a decision in diagnosis for subjects with pulmonary nodules, we aimed to discover novel plasma protein biomarkers for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and benign pulmonary nodules (BPNs) and then develop an integrative multianalytical model to guide the clinical management of LUAD and BPN patients. Through label-free quantitative plasma proteomic analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD046731), 12 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in LUAD and BPN were screened. The diagnostic abilities of DEPs were validated in two independent validation cohorts. The results showed that the levels of three candidate proteins (PRDX2, PON1, and APOC3) were lower in the plasma of LUAD than in BPN. The three candidate proteins were combined with three promising computed tomography indicators (spiculation, vascular notch sign, and lobulation) and three traditional markers (CEA, CA125, and CYFRA21-1) to construct an integrative multianalytical model, which was effective in distinguishing LUAD from BPN, with an AUC of 0.904, a sensitivity of 81.44%, and a specificity of 90.14%. Moreover, the model possessed impressive diagnostic performance between early LUADs and BPNs, with the AUC, sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 0.868, 65.63%, 90.14%, and 82.52%, respectively. This model may be a useful auxiliary diagnostic tool for LUAD and BPN by achieving a better balance of sensitivity and specificity.

### Keywords
Benign pulmonary nodules, Plasma proteomics, Differential diagnosis, Lung adenocarcinoma, Integrative multianalytical model

### Affiliations
Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
Xue Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liping Dai
Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University


