### Accession
PXD002708

### Title
Identification of herpes virus proteines palmitoyled in RPE-1 cells

### Description
Protein palmitoylation regulates diverse aspects of cellular function and organization and plays a key role in host immune responses to infection. Palmitoylation also modulates the function and localization of virus-encoded proteins. In Serwa et al. (doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.06.024), we employed chemical proteomics tools, bio-orthogonal palmitic acid analogue (heptadec-16-ynoic acid, YnPal), and a multi-functional capture reagent (AzTB) to study palmitoylation events during infection with three strains of herpes simplex virus (HSV-1[17], HSV-1[KOS], HSV-2[186]). We found that a significant fraction of the viral proteome (twelve HSV-encoded proteins) undergoes palmitoylation; we identified a number of virus membrane glycoproteins, structural proteins, and kinases. Furthermore, we identified palmitoylation sites on five HSV-encoded proteins utilising a complementary methodology (Acyl-RAC). This paper also reports selective HSV-induced alterations to palmitoylation and myristoylation of host proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Tagging via substrate. For each virus strain applied, 3 populations of heavy cells and three populations of light cells (2 × 10^7 cells each) were infected at MOI = 5 in serum-free SILAC DMEM-F12 media for 1 hr. Media were removed and replaced by fresh media supplemented with 2% dialyzed FBS. At 6 hpi, heavy media were supplemented with heptadec-16-ynoic acid (40 μM) and light media were supplemented with palmitic acid (40 μM). At 19 hpi, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS (2×) and harvested in SDS lysis buffer. Protein concentrations were determined; corresponding heavy and light lysates mixed 1:1 (0.4 mg each), diluted to 2 mg/ml. 24 μl of a mixture containing AzTB (4 μl of 10 mM in water), CuSO4 (8 μl of 50 mM in water), TCEP (8 μl of 50 mM in water), tris(benzyltriazoylmethyl)amine (4 μl of 10 mM in DMSO) was added to samples, which were then vortex mixed for 1 hr at RT, and the reaction was stopped by addition of EDTA (8 μl of 500 mM in water). Proteins were precipitated (chloroform/methanol/sample, 0.25:1:1 v/v/v), protein pellets isolated by centrifugation (17,000 × g, 10 min), washed twice with methanol (1 ml), and air dried. The pellets were then reconstituted in SDS lysis buffer, diluted to 0.4% SDS with PBS, and final protein concentration of 1 mg/ml. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Agarose-NeutrAvidin beads (40 μl of pre-washed) were added to proteins in 0.4% SDS in PBS (1 mg/ml). The mixtures were gently vortex mixed for 90 min at RT. The supernatant was removed and the beads washed with 1% SDS in PBS (3 × 1 ml), and then with 100 mM AMBIC (3 × 1 ml). The beads were incubated with 5 mM TCEP in 100 mM AMBIC (100 μl) for 20 min at 55°C, washed with 50 mM AMBIC, and incubated with 5 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM AMBIC (100 μl) for 20 min at RT in the dark. The beads were subsequently washed with 50 mM AMBIC (4 × 1 ml). Proteins bound to NeutrAvidin-agarose beads were incubated with sequencing-grade trypsin (0.5 μg) in 50 mM AMBIC (100 μl) for 16–20 hr in a thermo-shaker set to 37°C. The reaction was terminated with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5 μl) and the beads spun (7,000 × g, 4 min). Tryptic peptides were desalted by the Stage-Tip method.   Acyl-RAC (identification of palmitoylation sites on HSV proteins). 3 populations of cells (4 × 10^7 cells each) cultured in DMEM-F12 (non-SILAC) were infected with HSV-1[17] at MOI = 5 in serum-free DMEM-F12 for 1 hr. The media were removed and replaced by fresh DMEM-F12 supplemented with 2% NCS. At 19 hpi, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS (2×) and harvested in 2% SDS in Tris buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5). Samples were probe sonicated on ice and spun at 5,000 × g for 20 min to remove insoluble nuclear material. Protein concentration was determined. The lysates (4 mg of proteins each) were diluted with Tris buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5) to the final SDS concentration of 1% and protein concentration of 2 mg/ml. To block non-palmitoylated cysteines, samples were treated with TCEP (final concentration 5 μM) and N-ethylmaleimide (final concentration 10 μM) for 30 min at 40°C. Proteins were precipitated (chloroform/methanol/sample 0.25:1:1 v/v/v), protein pellets isolated by centrifugation (17,000 × g, 10 min), washed with methanol (5 × 1 ml), and air dried. Proteins were reconstituted in 2% SDS in Tris buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5), diluted with Tris buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5) to the final SDS concentration of 1.5% and protein concentration of 3 mg/ml, and spun (17,000 × g, 10 min) to remove traces of insoluble material. Each sample was then divided into two parts, to produce two groups of three samples. One group was treated with hydroxylamine (final concentration 0.25 M), whereas the second (control) group was treated with NaCl (final concentration 0.25 M) for 2 hr at RT, both in the presence of Thiopropyl Sepharose 6B resin (20 mg per sample). Hydroxylamine solution was produced by neutralization of hydroxylamine hydrochloride with NaOH, hence the addition of NaCl to the control samples. The resin was spun (7,000 × g, 4 min), supernatant discarded, and the resin washed with 2% SDS in Tris buffer (3 × 1 ml) and Tris buffer (3 × 1 ml). Proteins bound to the resin were suspended in 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8) (100 μl), sequencing-grade trypsin (0.5 μg) added, and the mixtures incubated for 16 hr in a thermo-shaker set to 37°C. The resin was spun (7,000 × g, 4 min), the supernatant discarded, resin washed with 2% SDS in Tris buffer (3 × 1 ml), Tris buffer (3 × 1 ml), 80% aqueous acetonitrile (3 × 1 ml), 50% aqueous methanol (3 × 1 ml), and 50 mM AMBIC (3 × 1 ml). Thiol-containing peptides were eluted from the resin by the incubation with DTT (final concentration 50 mM) for 40 min at 40°C. The resin was spun (7,000 × g, 4 min), supernatant withdrawn, cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 60 mM) for 20 min at RT in the dark, and peptides desalted by the Stage-Tip method.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant1.5. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For in silico digests of reference proteomes the following peptide bond cleavages were allowed: arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid (a general setting referred to as trypsin/P). Heavy/intermediate/light isotopic forms of arginine and lysine were used where appropriate. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups. Nine raw mass spectrometer files corresponding to samples obtained from biological triplicate infections with three viral strained has been re-searched together in MaxQuant (‘match between runs’ and ‘re-quantify’ functions were enabled in the software) against a combined database of Human, HSV-1, and HSV-2 reference proteins from Uniprot. Six raw mass spectrometer files corresponding to three biological samples divided and treated either with hydroxylamine or NaCl has been re-searched together with in MaxQuant. (‘match between runs’ function was disabled in the software) against a combined database of Human and HSV-1 reference proteins from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
Protein fatty acylation regulates diverse aspects of cellular function and organization and plays a key role in host immune responses to infection. Acylation also modulates the function and localization of virus-encoded proteins. Here, we employ chemical proteomics tools, bio-orthogonal probes, and capture reagents to study myristoylation and palmitoylation during infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV). Using in-gel fluorescence imaging and quantitative mass spectrometry, we demonstrate a generalized reduction in myristoylation of host proteins, whereas palmitoylation of host proteins, including regulators of interferon and tetraspanin family proteins, was selectively repressed. Furthermore, we found that a significant fraction of the viral proteome undergoes palmitoylation; we identified a number of virus membrane glycoproteins, structural proteins, and kinases. Taken together, our results provide broad oversight of protein acylation during HSV infection, a roadmap for similar analysis in other systems, and a resource with which to pursue specific analysis of systems and functions.

### Keywords
Tagging by substrate, Herpes virus, Palmitoylation, Acyl-rac, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London


