### Accession
PXD015313

### Title
MS analysis of cellular targets of an engineered selective PSD-95 PDZ domain ligand

### Description
Designing highly specific modulators of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is especially challenging in the context of multiple paralogs and conserved interaction surfaces. In this case, direct generation of selective and competitive inhibitors is hindered by high similarity within the evolutionary-related protein interfaces and PPI domains. We report here a strategy that addresses this challenge by using a semi-rational approach that separates the modulator design into two functional parts. We first achieve specificity toward a region outside of the interface by employing a selection by phage display coupled with molecular and cellular validation. Highly selective competition is then generated by appending the more degenerate interaction peptide to bind against the target interface. We have applied this approach to PSD-95, an essential multi-PDZ domain-containing synaptic scaffold protein that belongs to a larger family of paralogs. We show here that with this strategy we could specifically target a single PDZ domain within the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 over highly similar PDZ domains in PSD-93, SAP-97 and SAP-102. Our work provides the first paralog-selective and domain specific inhibitor of PSD-95, and describes a method to efficiently target other conserved PPI modules. This archive contains the comparative LC/MS/MS analysis of cellular targets of an engineered selective PSD-95 PDZ domain ligand, Xph20-ETWV, against the fusion with a naïve clone, Xph0-ETWV and a control non-binding protein (mSacrlet-i).

### Sample Protocol
Xph fusions to PDZ domain-binding motifs (Xph20-ETWV and Xph0-ETWV) were cloned into the home-made pIGb vector by inserting the desired genes between BamHI and XhoI or NdeI and XhoI restriction sites respectively. Home-made E. coli BL21 (DE3) competent cells (source ThermoFisher Scientific, C600003) containing the pACYC-mCh-BirA plasmid were transformed with the gene of interest into pIGb. Transformed bacteria were selected on LB plate containing chloramphenicol and kanamycin for maintaining the two expression plasmids. 5 mL of LB starter cultures with appropriate antibiotics were inoculated into 300 mL of ZYM-5052 auto-inducing media containing the appropriate antibiotics (30 µg/mL for kanamycin and 34.5 µg/mL for chloramphenicol). Cultures were grown in sterile glass vessel 5 h at 37 °C at 250 rpm. Biotin (50 µM) was then added to the medium and the temperature was lowered to 16 °C for expression of the target proteins (20 h). Proteins were purified using a standard protocol for His-tagged proteins with Nickel Affinity gel. Biotinylation yields were evaluated using a SDS-PAGE assay. Brains were obtained from adult (2-3 months old) Sprague-Dawley rats raised in the animal facility of Bordeaux University B 33 063 917. Briefly, frozen brains (2 x ~1.5 g) were thawed in 20 mL ice cold modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA) containing a protease inhibitor mixture (1:1,000; Protease Inhibitor Cocktail set III; Calbiochem) for about 5 min and cut into small pieces. The tissues were homogenized using a glass/teflon homogenizer. Homogenates were centrifuged at 7,500 g for 25 min at 4 °C to remove cell debris. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80 °C until the affinity-based isolation (pull-down) experiments were performed. The pull-down assay was performed using a KingFisher Duo system in 96 deep-well plates. As a preclearing step, brain lysate (200 µL per point) was first incubated with 50 µL of streptavidin-coated magnetic beads at room temperature in 1.5 mL low-binding tubes. After 10 min of incubation, the magnetic beads were captured and the cleared brain lysate supernatant was recovered and placed in new low binding tubes into which biotinylated proteins were added at a concentration of 60 nM (12 pmoles of b-mScarlet, bXph20-ETWV and bXph0-ETWV). During the 10 min incubation of the lysate and the biotinylated proteins, 40 µL of Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin were equilibrated in RIPA buffer with 0.5 % BSA. Beads were then incubated with the proteins – lysate pre-mix and were washed three time with 1 mL of RIPA-BSA and nine time with 1mL of RIPA without BSA and finally transferred to 2x sample loading buffer. The samples were heated for 5 min at 75 °C. Protein sample were solubilized in Laemlli buffer and were deposited onto SDS-PAGE. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the gel subsequently cut in 1 mm x 1 mm pieces. Gel pieces were digested with trypsin and peptide mixture was analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  For the analysis of pull-down material, 10 µL of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 50-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 105 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120,000 (at m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4 x 105 ions collected within 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s and top speed fragmentation in HCD mode was performed over a 3 s cycle. MS/MS scans with a target value of 3 x 103 ions were collected in the ion trap with a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Additionally, only +2 to +7 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 30% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide and an intensity threshold was set to 5 x 103.

### Data Protocol
Pull-down on brain lysates For the pull-down material analysis, data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against three bait protein sequences imbedded in the Rattus norvegicus Reference Proteome Set (from Uniprot 2019-05; 29938 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and protein N-terminal Acetylation (+42 Da) were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. Peaks were detected and integrated using the Minora algorithm embedded in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were quantified based on unique peptides intensities. Normalization was performed based on total protein amount. Protein ratios were calculated based protein abundancies. A statistical test (ANOVA) was calculated based protein individual values. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides, fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Designing highly specific modulators of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is especially challenging in the context of multiple paralogs and conserved interaction surfaces. In this case, direct generation of selective and competitive inhibitors is hindered by high similarity within the evolutionary-related protein interfaces. We report here a strategy that uses a semi-rational approach to separate the modulator design into two functional parts. We first achieve specificity toward a region outside of the interface by using phage display selection coupled with molecular and cellular validation. Highly selective competition is then generated by appending the more degenerate interaction peptide to contact the target interface. We apply this approach to specifically bind a single PDZ domain within the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 over highly similar PDZ domains in PSD-93, SAP-97 and SAP-102. Our work provides a paralog-selective and domain specific inhibitor of PSD-95, and describes a method to efficiently target other conserved PPI modules.

### Keywords
Engineered ligand/pdz domains/pull-down

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France ( lab head )
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Univ. Bordeaux, Plateforme Proteome, 33000, Bordeaux, France ( lab head )


