### Accession
PXD009208

### Title
Systems-wide analysis of serine-ADP-ribosylation reveals widespread occurrence and site-specific overlap with phosphorylation - Part 1, ADP-ribosylation data.

### Description
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a reversible posttranslational modification involved in a range of cellular processes. Here, we report system-wide identification of serine ADPr in human cells upon oxidative stress. High-resolution mass spectrometry and unrestricted data processing confirm that serine residues are the major target of ADPr in HeLa cells. Proteome-wide analysis identifies 3,090 serine ADPr sites, with 97% of acceptor sites modulating more than 2-fold upon oxidative stress, while treatment with the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib abrogates this induction. Serine ADPr predominantly targets nuclear proteins, while structural-predictive analyses reveal that serine ADPr preferentially targets disordered protein regions. The identified ADP-ribosylated serines significantly overlap with known phosphorylated serines, and large-scale phosphoproteomics analysis provides evidence for the site-specific crosstalk between serine ADPr and phosphorylation. Collectively, we demonstrate that serine ADPr is a widespread modification and a major nuclear signaling response to oxidative stress, with a regulatory scope comparable to other extensive posttranslational modifications - Part 1, ADP-ribosylation data.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were either left untreated or treated for 10 min with 1 mM H2O2, and with or without one hour pre-treatment with the PARP inhibitor Olaparib (10 μM) in case of H2O2 treatment. All experiments were carried out in biological cell culture quadruplicate (n=4). For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS, lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using the Af1521 macrodomain. Subsequently, one-third of the samples were purified and eluted as single-shot using low-pH StageTips, and two-thirds of the samples were high-pH fractionated on StageTip. All samples were analyzed on 15-cm long analytical columns, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, and packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). The analytical column was heated to 40 °C, and elution of peptides from the column was achieved by application of gradients with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and increasing amounts of Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). For single shot samples, the primary gradient ranged from 4% buffer B to 40% buffer B over 90 minutes, followed by an increase to 55% buffer B to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a washing block of 20 minutes. For fractionated samples, the gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 40% buffer B over 62 minutes, followed by a washing block of 18 minutes. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo), with the ions analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275 °C, and RF level to 30%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer dissociation (ETD) using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters. Only precursors with charge state 3-5 were considered, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 72 seconds for single shot samples, and 48 seconds for fractionated samples. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap, and settings included a loop count of 5, a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
For the main search, all RAW files were analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt on the 23rd of January, 2018. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and ADP-ribosylation on a wide range of amino acid residues (CDEHKRSTY) were included as potential variable modifications. A maximum allowance of 5 variable modifications per peptide was used. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled. Second peptide search was enabled (default), and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 1 minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Data was filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and the site-specific levels. For the unrestricted search, only single-shot RAW files were analyzed with MaxQuant to minimize computational processing time. All other search parameters were the same as for the main search, with exceptions outlined below. For the unrestricted search, ADP-ribosylation was allowed as a variable modification on all 20 naturally occurring amino acids, no other variable modifications were considered, the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide was set to 1, and the maximum peptide mass was set to 2,500.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) is a reversible posttranslational modification involved in a range of cellular processes. Here, we report system-wide identification of serine ADPr in human cells upon oxidative stress. High-resolution mass spectrometry and unrestricted data processing confirm that serine residues are the major target of ADPr in HeLa cells. Proteome-wide analysis identifies 3,090 serine ADPr sites, with 97% of acceptor sites modulating more than 2-fold upon oxidative stress, while treatment with the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor olaparib abrogates this induction. Serine ADPr predominantly targets nuclear proteins, while structural-predictive analyses reveal that serine ADPr preferentially targets disordered protein regions. The identified ADP-ribosylated serines significantly overlap with known phosphorylated serines, and large-scale phosphoproteomics analysis provides evidence for site-specific crosstalk between serine ADPr and phosphorylation. Collectively, we demonstrate that serine ADPr is a widespread modification and a major nuclear signaling response to oxidative stress, with a regulatory scope comparable to other extensive posttranslational modifications.

### Keywords
Hela, Adp-ribosylation, Etd, Serine, Unrestricted, Adp, Ribosylation, Lumos

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


