### Accession
PXD008509

### Title
Discovery and characterization of ZUFSP, a novel DUB class important for genome stability

### Description
Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are important regulators of ubiquitin signaling. Here, we report the discovery of deubiquitinating activity in ZUFSP/C6orf113. High-resolution crystal structures of ZUFSP in complex with ubiquitin reveal several distinctive features of ubiquitin recognition and catalysis. Our analyses reveal that ZUFSP is a novel DUB with no homology to any known DUBs, leading us to classify ZUFSP as the seventh DUB family. Intriguingly, the minimal catalytic domain does not cleave polyubiquitin. We identify two new ubiquitin binding domains in ZUFSP: a ZHA (ZUFSP helical arm) that binds to the distal ubiquitin and an atypical UBZ domain in ZUFSP that binds to polyubiquitin. Importantly, both domains are essential for ZUFSP to selectively cleave K63-linked polyubiquitin. We show that ZUFSP localizes to DNA lesions, where it plays an important role in genome stability pathways, functioning to prevent spontaneous DNA damage and also promote cellular survival in response to exogenous DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation for MS analyses 5μg of anti-ZUFSP antibody or anti-rabbit IgG antibody was conjugated to around 10 μl of magnetic beads (Bio-Rad) for 1 h at 4°C in PBS. Beads were washed with PBS-T (0.1 %Tween-20). Nuclear extract from HEK293 cells was prepared using the protocol described above and precleared on anti-rabbit IgG beads for 0.5 h at room temperature. Subsequently 20 mg of precleared lysate was used per immunoprecipitation (IP) with the ZUFSP antibody. IP was carried out for 1 h at room temperature. Both preclearing and ZUFSP conjugated beads were washed 5 times with IP buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 84 mM KCl, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 5% Glycerol). Proteins were eluted with 120 mM glycine pH 2 (3 time/5 min/30 μl). Acidic pH was neutralised with 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8. Samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 10 mM IA prior to in-solution tryptic digestion (overnight at 37 °C). C18 clean-up was performed, and proteins were eluted in 50% ACN /0.5 TNA and then dried. Preclearing beads were used as a control. The experiment was performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.13) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProt complete human sequence database (March 2015). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while N-term modification was set as variable. MaxQuant LFQ (Label free quantitation) was enabled with match between runs. Proteins were identified with peptide and protein FDR (False Discovery Rate) cut-off of 1 %. Spectral count values were extracted and subjected to SAINTexpress (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) (Teo et al., 2014) to identify bona fide ZUFSP interacting proteins. The DAVID functional enrichment tool was used to perform pathway analysis for biological process (Huang et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are important regulators of ubiquitin signaling. Here, we report the discovery of deubiquitinating activity in ZUFSP/C6orf113. High-resolution crystal structures of ZUFSP in complex with ubiquitin reveal several distinctive features of ubiquitin recognition and catalysis. Our analyses reveal that ZUFSP is a novel DUB with no homology to any known DUBs, leading us to classify ZUFSP as the seventh DUB family. Intriguingly, the minimal catalytic domain does not cleave polyubiquitin. We identify two ubiquitin binding domains in ZUFSP: a ZHA (ZUFSP helical arm) that binds to the distal ubiquitin and an atypical UBZ domain in ZUFSP that binds to polyubiquitin. Importantly, both domains are essential for ZUFSP to selectively cleave K63-linked polyubiquitin. We show that ZUFSP localizes to DNA lesions, where it plays an important role in genome stability pathways, functioning to prevent spontaneous DNA damage and also promote cellular survival in response to exogenous DNA damage.

### Keywords
Deubiquitinase, Dna damage, Ubiquitin binding domain

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences Sir James Black Centre University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

### Submitter
Yogesh Kulathu

### Lab Head
Dr Yogesh Kulathu
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences Sir James Black Centre University of Dundee Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.


