### Accession
PXD038982

### Title
Proteomics and Metabolomics based analysis of Metabolic changes in a swine model of Pulmonary Hypertension

### Description
Pulmonary vein stenosis (PVS) is a rare type of Pulmonary Hypertension (PH), which impacts the flow and pressure within the lung tissue and vasculature resulting in endothelial dysfunction and metabolic changes. We used a pig model in order to mimic PH post PVS using pulmonary vein banding (PVB) of the lower lobes for 12 weeks to investigate the alteration of pressure and flow which provides an impetus for development of PH. In order to develop site-specific therapies, our current study aimed to employ proteomics and metabolomics on both the upper and lower lobes of the pig lung to identify compartment-specific metabolic alterations.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen lung tissue samples were cryo-pulverized in a CP02 Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) with an impact level of 5 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tissue lysis was performed in 8 M urea/0.5 M NH4HCO3 with ultrasonication (18 cycles of 10 s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Total protein concentration was quantified using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Fifty micrograms of protein were digested sequentially, firstly with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals Europe GmbH, Neuss, Germany) for 4 h and subsequently with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. 1 μg of the digest was injected on an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X instrument operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Peptides were transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm×2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm×50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 250 nl/min flow-rate with a 160-min gradient of 3-25% of solvent B followed by 10-min ramp to 40% and 5-min ramp to 85%. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B of 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. MS spectra were acquired using a top 15 data-dependent acquisition method on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done using MaxQuant (v.1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016) and the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (v.7-5-2020). All statistical analyses and data visualization were performed using R (R core team 2021). Prior to statistical analysis, potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits were excluded. Proteins with at least two peptides detected in at least three samples of each condition were quantified using the MS-EmpiRe algorithm (Ammar et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary vein stenosis (PVS) causes a rare type of pulmonary hypertension (PH) by impacting the flow and pressure within the pulmonary vasculature, resulting in endothelial dysfunction and metabolic changes. A prudent line of treatment in this type of PH would be targeted therapy to relieve the pressure and reverse the flow-related changes. We used a swine model in order to mimic PH after PVS using pulmonary vein banding (PVB) of the lower lobes for 12 weeks to mimic the hemodynamic profile associated with PH and investigated the molecular alterations that provide an impetus for the development of PH. Our current study aimed to employ unbiased proteomic and metabolomic analyses on both the upper and lower lobes of the swine lung to identify regions with metabolic alterations. We detected changes in the upper lobes for the PVB animals mainly pertaining to fatty acid metabolism, reactive oxygen species (ROS) signaling and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and small, albeit, significant changes in the lower lobes for purine metabolism.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, Pig model, Pulmonary hypertension

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, Germnay
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, Germnay


