### Accession
PXD018564

### Title
Fibrinogen function achieved through multiple covalent states

### Description
Disulfide bonds link pairs of cysteine amino acids and their formation is assumed to be complete in the mature, functional protein. We tested this assumption by quantifying the redox state of disulfide bonds in the thrombosis protein, fibrinogen. There is an extraordinary disulfide lability in fibrinogen, with 13 bonds in the protein ranging from 10 to 50% reduced in human donors, indicating that fibrinogen exists in hundreds of different disulfide-bonded states. The significance of this finding for fibrinogen conversion to fibrin was investigated. Fibrin polymer formation triggers formation of disulfides in fibrin molecules, which is required for a robust fibrin matrix that withstands the mechanical forces of flowing blood and resists premature fibrinolysis. The covalent states of fibrinogen are changed by fluid shear forces ex vivo and in vivo, indicating that the different states are dynamic. These findings demonstrate that proteins can exist and function as a multitude of covalent forms.

### Sample Protocol
Fibrinogen was immunoprecipitated from plasma and the free Cysteines labeled with IPA-C12. Following reduction with DTT, the Cysteines that were involved in the disulfide bonds were lakylated with IPA-C13. Samples were digested with trypsin and submited for mass spec

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by Mascot and the reduced ratio was calculated with Xcalibur qualbrowser by comparing the area of the peptide labeled with IPA-C12 with the one labeled with IPA-C13.

### Publication Abstract
Disulfide bonds link pairs of cysteine amino acids and their formation is assumed to be complete in the mature, functional protein. Here, we test this assumption by quantifying the redox state of disulfide bonds in the blood clotting protein fibrinogen. The disulfide status of fibrinogen from healthy human donor plasma and cultured human hepatocytes are measured using differential cysteine alkylation and mass spectrometry. This analysis identifies 13 disulfide bonds that are 10-50% reduced, indicating that fibrinogen is produced in multiple disulfide-bonded or covalent states. We further show that disulfides form upon fibrin polymerization and are required for a robust fibrin matrix that withstands the mechanical forces of flowing blood and resists premature fibrinolysis. The covalent states of fibrinogen are changed by fluid shear forces ex vivo and in vivo, indicating that the different states are dynamic. These findings demonstrate that fibrinogen exists and functions as multiple covalent forms.

### Keywords
Redox state, Alpha2 macroglobulin, Fibrinogen, Cysteines

### Affiliations
Head, ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre, The Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia
ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre

### Submitter
Diego Butera

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Hogg
Head, ACRF Centenary Cancer Research Centre, The Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, NSW, Australia


