### Accession
PXD029710

### Title
Nanodiamond Solid Phase Extraction and Triton X-114 Cloud Point Separation for Robust Fractionation and Shotgun Proteomics Analysis of Human Serum Proteome

### Description
Human serum is one of the most attractive specimens in biomarker research. However, its overcomplicated properties have hindered the analysis of low-abundance proteins by conventional mass spectrometry techniques. This work proposes an innovative strategy for utilizing nanodiamonds (NDs) in combination with Triton X-114 protein extraction to fractionate the crude serum to six pH-tuned fractions, simplifying the overall proteome and facilitate protein profiling with high efficiency. A total of 663 pro-teins are identified and evenly distributed among the fractions along with 39 FDA-approved biomarkers – a remarkable increase from the 230 proteins found in unfractioned crude serum. In the low-abundance proteins section, 88 proteins with 7 FDA-approved biomarkers are detected – a marked increase from the 15 proteins observed in the untreated sample. Notably, fractions at pH11, derived from the aqueous phase of detergent separation, suggest potential applications in rapid and robust protein analysis. Notably, by outlining the excellent properties of the NDs for proteomic research, this work suggests a promising extraction protocol utilizing the great compatibility of NDs with streamlined serum proteomics, and identifies potential avenues for future developments. Finally, we believe that this proposed method to improve shotgun proteomics may be of interest to a specialized proteomics community.

### Sample Protocol
Protein capture with nanodiamond. In this work, proteins were (1) simply non-selectively captured by ND with the direct addition of 30 µL ND (10 mg/mL) solution to the protein at pH3 (typically, formic acid (FA) was added to the final concentration of 0.1% (w/w)) or (2) selectively captured at different pH values (refer to the fractionation section) and subsequently left at room temperature (rt) in 5 minutes for the complete adherence of the proteins to ND. The protein-ND complex solution was centrifuged to collect the pellet, which was washed once by 500 µL of 0.1% FA and once by H2O (300 µL).  Each of the aforementioned washes was initiated by add-ing FA or H2O, then shaking the solution in an ultrasonic sonicator tank for 5 minutes, rt, to complete resuspension of the protein-ND in the solution. The solution was centrifuged (13000 xg, rt, 5 minutes) to collect the pellet. Triton X-114 two-phase cloud point separation. The serum sample was prepared by adding 10 µL crude serum to 500 µL of 3% Triton X-114 (w/w) with the addition of 0.2% Coomassie Blue R-250 (0.5 µL) to facilitate the differ-entiation between the detergent-rich phase and aqueous phase. The sample was then mixed and incubated at 4 °C for one hour, allowing for the complete dissolution of cells and membranes in the detergent solution, followed by centrifugation at a speed of 13000 xg, 4 °C to remove any cell debris and impurities. Triton X-114 phase separation was then induced by incubating the sample at 37 °C for 10 minutes. At this point, the sample was centrifuged (13000 xg, rt, 5 minutes) to speed up the separation progress. The two phases of Triton X-114 were then isolated to different microfuge tubes. Serum pH-tuned fractionation by nanodiamond. A simple fractionation task with minimal work was designed. Two phases obtained from the previous step were diluted with H2O to the final volume of 1 mL. Phase separation samples of serum were fractionated commencing at pH11 by adding 50 µL of 2 M Na2CO3, then captured by ND for the first time as described in the section above. The supernatant was then sequentially pH-tuned to pH7 by adding 25 µL of 6 N HCl and captured by ND for the second time. The last fractionation at pH3 was induced by adding 10 µL of 6 N HCl to the super-natant from pH7 fractionation and was followed by the ND protein capture for the third time. Nanodiamond-based digestion. From one initial crude serum sample, a total number of six fractions of protein-ND complex were obtained from the previous step undergoing trypsinolytic digestion. 150 µL of H2O was added to all six solutions with the aid of an ultrasonic sonicator to resus-pend the protein-ND complex completely. A 50 μL of 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 was added to each of the six solutions for reduction at 56 °C for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the alkylation was performed in the dark for 30 minutes by the addition of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, 50 μL) in 25 mM NH4HCO3. To terminate the reaction, 1 mL of 0.1% FA (v/v) was added to the above solutions. The complex of protein-ND was precipitated by centrifugation (13000 xg, rt, 5 minutes) and washed twice by 500 μL of H2O to remove impurities and chemical residues. Next, H2O (100 μL) and NH4HCO3 (100 mM, 25 µL) were added to the samples to resuspend the protein-ND complex with the assistance of a sonicator. Finally, trypsin (1 µg) was added to each of the six solutions and incubated overnight at 37 °C.  After digestion, the suspensions were centrifuged (13000 xg, rt, 5 minutes) to collect the peptide-rich first supernatant (125 µL). The remaining peptides in the pellet were collected through adding 100 µL peptide extraction buffer (20 mM NH4HCO3/50% acetonitrile and resuspending the ND and centrifugation to collect the second supernatant (100 µL). All the aforementioned supernatants (225 µL each tube) were evaporated using a vacuum evaporator before being desalted by the Ziptip C18 column. The protocol was adapted from manufacturer instructions.  The crude serum sample for the control was digested in solution as follows: an aliquot of crude serum (0.5 μL, ~30 μg protein) was added to the solution of 2 M NH4HCO3 (400 μL) for denaturation at 95 °C for 20 minutes. The serum underwent reduction at 56 °C, 60 minutes by 8 mM DTT, alkylation in dark, rt, 30 minutes by 20 mM IAA and digestion at 37 °C, overnight by 1 µg trypsin. FA was then added to the final concentration of 1% to stop the reaction. Salts and con-taminants were removed with a Ziptip C18 column, as recommended by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
The spectral results were bioinformatically analyzed by the PEAKS studios 6 program (Bioinformatic Solution Inc, Can-ada). For a more stringent database, we prefer Uni-Prot/SwissProt Homo sapiens Knowledge Base to Human International Protein Index (IPI). UniProt is manually annotated and reviewed and has up-to-date data, whereas IPI is now defunct. We accessed the SwissProt database in June 2018. The enzyme was set to trypsin, while static modification was set to cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Trypsin miss cleavage site was set to 2, while mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm of pre-cursor ions and 0.5 Da of fragment ions. The results were filtered to have a False Discovery Rate of 0.01, and also, unique peptide possession was required to improve the reliability of the results (including possible contaminants). GRAVY points of proteins are calculated by the online GRAVY calculator (available at http://www.gravy-calculator.de/index.php). Proteins were classified as membrane proteins according to the online UniProt Gene Ontology, while the number of transmembrane domains (TM) were predicted by the online tool TMHMM Server v2.0 (Technical University of Denmark). All websites were accessed in August 2018. Label-free quantitative spectral counts and intensity were performed by MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 (2018)

### Publication Abstract
Human serum is one of the most attractive specimens in biomarker research. However, its overcomplicated properties have hindered the analysis of low-abundance proteins by conventional mass spectrometry techniques. This work proposes an innovative strategy for utilizing nanodiamonds (NDs) in combination with Triton X-114 protein extraction to fractionate the crude serum to six pH-tuned fractions, simplifying the overall proteome and facilitating protein profiling with high efficiency. A total of 663 proteins are identified and evenly distributed among the fractions along with 39 FDA-approved biomarkers&#x2500;a remarkable increase from the 230 proteins found in unfractionated crude serum. In the low-abundance protein section, 88 proteins with 7 FDA-approved biomarkers are detected&#x2500;a marked increase from the 15 proteins (2 biomarkers) observed in the untreated sample. Notably, fractions at pH 11, derived from the aqueous phase of detergent separation, suggest potential applications in rapid and robust serum proteome analysis. Notably, by outlining the excellent properties of NDs for proteomic research, this work suggests a promising extraction protocol utilizing the great compatibility of NDs with streamlined serum proteomics and identifies potential avenues for future developments. Finally, we believe that this work not just improves shotgun proteomics but also opens up studies on the interaction between NDs and the human proteome. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD029710.

### Keywords
Solid phase extraction, Human serum, Nanodiamond, Fractionation, Lc-ms/ms, Triton x-114, Proteomic analysis, Cloud point separation, Prote-ome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Hanoi, 100000, Vietnam
Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Trong-Nghia Le

### Lab Head
Dr Minh Dinh Pham
Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, Hanoi, 100000, Vietnam


