### Accession
PXD015441

### Title
Yildirim 4398 Nup153 Interactome

### Description
Identify Nup153 interacting proteins in Co-IP coupled with LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Samples in 1X Lamelli Sample Loading buffer were run into a 4-12% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel (NuPage, Invitrogen) in MES running buffer for approximately 5 minutes. The entire MW range was excised and subjected to standardized in-gel trypsin digestion (http://www.genome.duke.edu/cores/proteomics/sample-preparation/documents/In-gelDigestionProtocolrevised.pdf). Extracted peptides were lyophilized to dryness and resuspended in 12 uL of 0.2% formic acid/2% acetonitrile. Each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC equipped with a 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 75 µm I.D. X 250 mm reversed-phase column. The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Following a 3 µL injection, peptides were trapped for 3 min on a 5 µm Symmetry C18 180 µm I.D. X 20 mm column at 5 µl/min in 99.9% A. The analytical column was then switched in-line and a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 40% B was performed over 90 min at 400 nL/min. The analytical column was connected to a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Cambridge, MA) with a 10 µm tip orifice and coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) through an electrospray interface operating in a data-dependent mode of acquisition. The instrument was set to acquire a precursor MS scan from m/z 375-1600 at R=70,000 (target AGC 1e6, max IT 60 ms) with MS/MS spectra acquired at R=17,500 (target AGC 5e4, max IT 60 ms). For all experiments, HCD energy settings were 27v and a 20 s dynamic exclusion was employed for previously fragmented precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) and then submitted to independent Mascot searches (Matrix Science) against an SwissProt Human database containing both forward and reverse entries of each protein. Search tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da on C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (+15.9949 Da on M) and deamidation (+0.98 Da on NQ) were considered dynamic mass modifications. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold and scoring thresholds were set to achieve a peptide false discovery rate of 1% using the PeptideProphet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleoporin proteins (Nups) have been proposed to mediate spatial and temporal chromatin organization during gene regulation. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms in mammalian cells are not well understood. Here, we report that Nucleoporin 153 (NUP153) interacts with the chromatin architectural proteins, CTCF and cohesin, and mediates their binding across cis-regulatory elements and TAD boundaries in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. NUP153 depletion results in altered CTCF and cohesin binding and differential gene expression - specifically at the bivalent developmental genes. To investigate the molecular mechanism, we utilize epidermal growth factor (EGF)-inducible immediate early genes (IEGs). We find that NUP153 controls CTCF and cohesin binding at the cis-regulatory elements and POL II pausing during the basal state. Furthermore, efficient IEG transcription relies on NUP153. We propose that NUP153 links the nuclear pore complex (NPC) to chromatin architecture allowing genes that are poised to respond rapidly to developmental cues to be properly modulated.

### Keywords
Nup153 interaction

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Eda Yildirim
Duke University Department of Cell Biology


