### Accession
PXD021031

### Title
Identification of signalling pathways downstream of ARHGEF17

### Description
Somatic DNA copy number variations (CNVs) are prevalent in cancer and can drive cancer progression albeit with often uncharacterized roles in altering cell signaling states. We developed a computational approach to predict regulators of signaling from the integrative analysis of genomic and proteomic pan-cancer datasets. Among the predictions, we identified ARHGEF17 to be a regulator of hippo-signaling and performed (phospho)proteomics analysis to test these predictions.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were conducted separately in two cell lines: MDA-MB-468 and T-47D cells. Samples were collected for 3 biological replicates of mock-treated, siARHGEF17-treated and siPLA2G16-treated cells of each cell line. Protein sample preparation, proteins were trypsin-digested and TMT labelled. Each sample was split for full proteome analysis (10%) and phosphoproteome analysis (90%). The portion for the phospho-proteome analysis was fractionated using basic reversed phase C18 chromatography, each fraction was enriched using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit (Thermo Scientific, #A32992) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The Phosphopeptide-enriched fractions were analysed on the Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) The total proteome was fractionated using basic reversed-phase C18 chromatography and analysed with the Fusion-Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Both systems were configured with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Both total proteome and phospho-proteome raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software for peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tem4

### Affiliations
European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), UK
European Bioinformatics Institute

### Submitter
Danish Memon

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Beltrao
European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), UK


