### Accession
PXD033401

### Title
Spatial multiomic analysis of synthesis, transport and secretion in the hypothalamus-neurohypophysial system

### Description
The cell bodies of hypothalamic magnocellular neurones (MCNs) are confined to the hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus (SON) whereas their axons project to the anatomically discrete posterior pituitary gland (PP). We have taken advantage of this unique anatomical structure to document proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics in neuronal cell bodies and axonal terminals in response to neuronal activation induced by water deprivation (WD). We have found that proteome and phosphoproteome responses to WD are very different between cell bodies and axonal terminals, indicating the need of each cell domain to differentially adapt in response to stimuli. Whilst changes in the proteome and phosphoproteome in the cell body are involved in protein synthesis and cytoskeleton reorganisation, respectively, in the axonal terminals they regulate synaptic vesicle cycle and secretion. Further, by comparison with transcriptome data, we have identified peptides that are not synthesised in the SON, but are present as a consequence of afferent delivery.

### Sample Protocol
SON samples were collected bilaterally using a 1-mm micropunch (Fine Scientific Tools) from 100 μm brain coronal sections in a cryostat as described (Greenwood et al., 2014). Proteins from SON and NIL samples were extracted in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6; 150 mM NaCl; 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate; 0.5% sodium deoxycholate; 1% Nonidet P-40; 1 mM EDTA) containing the protease inhibitors 1mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Merck, P7626), Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32963) and Pierce Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32957) in three sonication cycles of 12 seconds. Samples were incubated in ice for 30 minutes, vortexing every 5 minutes, and then centrifuged at 10000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay. Total proteome and Phospho proteome analysis were performed at the Bristol Proteomics Facility, University of Bristol. Aliquots of 100 µg of each sample were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) sixteen plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled. For the Total proteome analysis, an aliquot of 50 µg of the pooled sample was desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting fractions (20 in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For the Phosphoproteome analysis, the remainder of the TMT-labelled pooled sample was also desalted using a SepPak cartridge (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce).  The flow-through and washes from the TiO2-based enrichment were then subjected to FeNTA-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). The phospho-enriched samples were evaporated to dryness and then resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).   High pH RP fractions (Total proteome analysis) or the phospho-enriched fractions (Phospho-proteome analysis) were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% for maximal TMT reporter ion yield.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Rat database (downloaded July 2021: 35859 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. For the Phospho-proteome analysis, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) was also included as a variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The cell bodies of hypothalamic magnocellular neurones are densely packed in the hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus, whereas their axons project to the anatomically discrete posterior pituitary gland. We have taken advantage of this unique anatomical structure to establish proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics in neuronal cell bodies and axonal terminals in response to physiological stimulation. We have found that proteome and phosphoproteome responses to neuronal stimulation are very different between somatic and axonal neuronal compartments, indicating the need of each cell domain to differentially adapt. In particular, changes in the phosphoproteome in the cell body are involved in the reorganization of the cytoskeleton and in axonal terminals the regulation of synaptic and secretory processes. We have identified that prohormone precursors including vasopressin and oxytocin are phosphorylated in axonal terminals and are hyperphosphorylated following stimulation. By multiomic integration of transcriptome and proteomic data, we identify changes to proteins present in afferent inputs to this nucleus.

### Keywords
Son, Rat, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Posterior pituitary, Vasopressin

### Affiliations
Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Benjamin Gillard

### Lab Head
Dr Professor David Murphy
Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol


