### Accession
PXD000325

### Title
QuiXoT+ project: General Statistical framework for quantitative proteomics by stable isotope labeling

### Description
Protein identification was carried out by searching against a joint Human + Yeast Swissprot database (Uniprot release 57.3 May 2009, 26885 entries), in order to increase statistical power of peptide identification, which was supplemented with porcine trypsin, and using SEQUEST algorithm (Bioworks 3.2 package, Thermo Finnigan). For SILAC, we used variable (methionine oxidation, lysine and arginine modification of +6 Da) and fixed modifications (cysteine carboxamidomethylation). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 2Da, fragment mass tolerance to 1.2Da and up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin were allowed. The same collections of MS/MS spectra were also searched against inverted databases constructed from the same target databases. SEQUEST results were analyzed using the probability ratio method 22b, taking into account isoelectric points of peptides to improve peptide identification 9b. False discovery rates (FDR) of peptide identifications were calculated from the search results against the inverted databases using the refined method 9b.        The combination of stable isotope labeling (SIL) with mass spectrometry (MS) allows comparison of the abundance of thousands of proteins in complex mixtures. However, interpretation of the large datasets generated by these techniques remains a challenge since appropriate statistical standards are lacking. Here we present the first generally applicable model that accurately explains the behavior of data obtained using current SIL approaches, including 18O, iTRAQ and SILAC labeling, and different MS instruments. The model decomposes the total technical variance into the spectral, peptide and protein variance components, and its general validity was demonstrated by confronting 48 experimental distributions against 18 different null hypotheses. In addition to its general applicability, the performance of the algorithm was similar or better than that of other existing methods. The model also provides a general framework to integrate quantitative information, allowing a comparative analysis of the results obtained from different SIL experiments. The model was applied to the global analysis of protein alterations induced by low H2O2 concentrations in yeast, demonstrating the increased statistical power that may be achieved by rigorous data integration. Our results highlight the importance of establishing an adequate and validated statistical framework for the analysis of high-throughput data.       Except for TOF/TOF MS/MS files, protein identification was carried out by searching against a joint Human+YeastSwissprot database (Uniprot release 57.3 May 2009, 26885 entries), in order to increase statistical power of peptide identification, which was supplemented with porcine trypsin, and using SEQUEST algorithm (Bioworks 3.2 package, Thermo Finnigan). For 18O-labeled samples variable (methionine oxidation, lysine and arginine modification of +4 Da) and fixed modifications (cysteine carboxamidomethylation) were used. For iTRAQ, we allowed variable (methionine oxidation) and fixed modifications (cysteine carboxamidomethylation, lysine and N- terminal modification of +144.1020 Da). For SILAC, we used variable (methionine oxidation, lysine and arginine modification of +6 Da) and fixed modifications (cysteine carboxamidomethylation). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 2Da, fragment mass tolerance to 1.2Da and up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin were allowed. The same collections of MS/MS spectra were also searched against inverted databases constructed from the same target databases. SEQUEST results were analyzed using the probability ratio method 22b, taking into account isoelectric points of peptides to improve peptide identification 9b. False discovery rates (FDR) of peptide identifications were calculated from the search results against the inverted databases using the refined method 9b. TOF/TOF MS/MS spectra were converted to MGF files by using the 4000 Series Explorer V.3.5.1 internal processor and the following parameters: mass range from precursor -20 Da to 60 Da, peak density of 50 peaks per 200 Da with S/N >1 and minimum area >1 with a maximum number of 100 peaks per precursor. These files were analyzed with the Mascot V2.2.06 search engine using the database and search conditions indicated above.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from the lysine auxotrophic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain YMJ38 (his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 ura3Δ0 arg4Δ::kanMX4 trp1Δ::kanMx4 lys2Δ) were cultured and SILAC-labeled with [13C6]l-lysine and [13C6]l-arginine as previously described (Gruhler et al. 2005). SILAC light (A) and heavy (A*) media were prepared from minimal synthetic dextrose medium (0.5% (w/v) ammonium sulfate, 2% (w/v) glucose, 0.17% (w/v) nitrogen base without amino acids, and 20 mg/L of amino acids except for lysine and arginine) (Gruhler et al. 2005). Cells were grown in the corresponding medium at 30 °C and with shaking at 200 rpm until OD600 = 0.8. After adjusting both cell cultures to OD600 = 0.4 with the corresponding SILAC medium, culture A was split in two equal volumes, 20% (v/v) H2O2 (Panreac) was added to one of them (sample B) at a final concentration of 0.5 mM, and the other sample remained as a control (sample A). The three cell cultures (A, A*, and B) were grown at 30 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for 3 h until OD600 = 1.6 and were then centrifuged at 3000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cell pellets were washed three times with cold distilled water, taken up in 500 μL of homogenization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, and 5 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and the protease inhibitors cocktail from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and lysed using a homogenizer with glass Ballotini beads (0.45 μm) (Sigma). Cell lysates were centrifuged (13 000g) at 4 °C for 15 min, and protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad). The cleared lysates were stored in aliquots of 100 or 500 μg of protein. The lysate aliquots from the three samples (A, non treated; B, treated; and A*, nontreated, SILAC-labeled) were subjected to high-throughput quantitation using the iTRAQ, 18O, and SILAC-labeling techniques using both low- and high-resolution instruments in a total of 16 experiments performed in different laboratories. Eight experiments were performed to test the null hypothesis associated with each technique, and another eight experiments were performed to analyze the effect of H2O2 treatment. In each experiment, the lysate aliquots were independently digested, and the resulting peptides were labeled (except in the SILAC cases). Each lysate aliquot was trypsin-digested separately using the whole proteome in-gel digestion protocol we described previously (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al. 2011). Prior to digestion, the gel bands were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. iTRAQ labeling was performed essentially according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 18O labeling was performed following the robust protocol that we have previously described in detail (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al. 2011). In all of the experiments peptides were IEF-separated into 24 fractions exactly as described previously (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al. 2011) and analyzed on a linear ion trap LTQ (Thermo-Finnigan), an LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo-Finnigan) or a MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Applied Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using either SEQUEST or Mascot. SEQUEST results were analyzed using the probability ratio method (Martinez-Bartolome et al. 2008) taking into account isoelectric points of peptides to improve peptide identification (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al. 2011). For low-resolution MS data (LTQ) obtained by 18O labeling, peptide quantification from ZoomScan spectra and calculation of labeling efficiencies of peptides were performed by fitting the spectra to a theoretical function as described previously (Lopez-Ferrer et al. 2006) using QuiXoT, a program written in C# in our laboratory, which is available at http://www.cnic.es/en/inflamacion/proteomica/wiki/. For high-resolution MS data (LTQ-Orbitrap) obtained by 18O labeling, quantification was performed directly in the full-scan spectrum with the same algorithm used for calculating labeling efficiency by taking into account the theoretical isotopic envelope of the identified peptide (Ramos-Fernandez et al. 2007), with the exception that mass peaks were not fitted to a Gaussian/double-exponential distribution but to the maximum intensity of each MS peak within a 0.02 m/z window around the theoretical m/z value. The same methods were used for low- and high-resolution SILAC data, respectively, except that the difference between the labeled and nonlabeled species was calculated from the peptide sequence and no correction for labeling efficiency was used. For iTRAQ data, only the intensity of the reporter ions within 0.4 Da windows around the theoretical values was taken into account for the quantification. Reporter intensities are corrected for isotopic contaminants by taking the information provided by the manufacturer into consideration. For each spectrum, a fitting weight was calculated upon quantification by taking into account the intensity of peaks and the mean squared deviation between the theoretical curve and the experimental data. The data analysis workflow was performed as previously described (Jorge et al. 2009). The statistical model used to analyze the quantitative data is described in full detail in the Supporting Information.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of stable isotope labeling (SIL) with mass spectrometry (MS) allows comparison of the abundance of thousands of proteins in complex mixtures. However, interpretation of the large data sets generated by these techniques remains a challenge because appropriate statistical standards are lacking. Here, we present a generally applicable model that accurately explains the behavior of data obtained using current SIL approaches, including (18)O, iTRAQ, and SILAC labeling, and different MS instruments. The model decomposes the total technical variance into the spectral, peptide, and protein variance components, and its general validity was demonstrated by confronting 48 experimental distributions against 18 different null hypotheses. In addition to its general applicability, the performance of the algorithm was at least similar than that of other existing methods. The model also provides a general framework to integrate quantitative and error information fully, allowing a comparative analysis of the results obtained from different SIL experiments. The model was applied to the global analysis of protein alterations induced by low H&#x2082;O&#x2082; concentrations in yeast, demonstrating the increased statistical power that may be achieved by rigorous data integration. Our results highlight the importance of establishing an adequate and validated statistical framework for the analysis of high-throughput data.

### Keywords
Yeast, Statistical analysis, Quantitative proteomics, Stable isotope labeling

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology and Inflammation
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, 28029, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Marco Trevisan-Herraz

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, 28029, Madrid, Spain


