### Accession
PXD009424

### Title
Fibroblasts grown in 3D -  Three-Dimensional Cell Culture Conditions Affect the Proteome of Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts

### Description
Here, we introduce a 3D cell culture system based on a mixture of collagen I and matrigelTM amenable to stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture and quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analyses. We study the extra- and intracellular proteomic response of skin fibroblast isolated from healthy volunteers in comparison to cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) on 3D culture conditions

### Sample Protocol
separation of WCL and ECM by SDS-PAGE and analysis by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 was used to process SILAC labeled samples

### Publication Abstract
In vitro cell culture systems are an invaluable tool for cell biological research to study molecular pathways and to characterize processes critical in human pathophysiology. However, the experimental conditions in two-dimensional (2D) cell cultures often differ substantially from the in vivo situation, which continuously raises concerns about the reliability and conferrability of the obtained results. Three-dimensional (3D) cell cultures have been shown to closer mimic in vivo conditions and are commonly employed, for example, in pharmacological screens. Here, we introduce a 3D cell culture system based on a mixture of collagen I and matrigel amenable to stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analyses. We study the extra- and intracellular proteomic response of skin fibroblast isolated from healthy volunteers in comparison to cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) on 3D culture conditions. Both, control cells and CAF, change their proteomic composition based on the culture conditions. Critically, cell type differences observed in 2D are often not preserved in 3D, which commonly closer resemble phenotypes observed in vivo. Especially, extracellular matrix and plasma membrane proteins are differentially regulated in 2D versus 3D.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Fibroblasts, Skin, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland


