### Accession
PXD032737

### Title
Rattus norvegicus lung LC-MS/MS

### Description
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were used to establish exhausted-exercise model by motorized rodent treadmill. Yu-Ping-Feng-San at doses of 2.18 g/kg was administrated by gavage before exercise training for 10 consecutive days. Quantitative proteomics was performed for assessing the related mechanism of Yu-Ping-Feng-San.

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out in CapitalBio Technology (Beijing, China). Briefly, at the end of 10-day exhausted-exercise protocol, lung tissue protein was extracted and quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The protein was labeled by TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) with different reporter ions (126-131 Da) for relative quantification. The labeled peptides aliquots were combined for fractionation and further LC-MC analysis by using Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Twenty most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS detected at a mass resolution of 35,000 at m/z of 400 in Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). All the tandem mass spectra were produced by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) method. The MS/MS data was collected and searched against the Rattus norvegicus database using the SEQUEST algorithms.

### Data Protocol
A protein with fold change ≥1.5, and the presence of least two unique peptides with a P-value < 0.05, was considered to be a differentially expressed protein (DEP). At last, DEPs were analyzed by referring to three key databases: Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Reactome and the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG). David 6.8 was used for pathway enrichment for 69 proteins that could be regulated by Yu-Ping-Feng-San. Heat map and line charts were made by R studio (version 4.1.1).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Yu-ping-feng powder (YPF) is a compound traditional Chinese medicine extensively used in China for respiratory diseases. However, the role of YPF in alveolar-capillary barrier dysfunction remains unknown. This study aimed to explore the effect and potential mechanism of YPF on alveolar-capillary barrier injury induced by exhausted exercise. <b>Methods:</b> Male Sprague-Dawley rats were used to establish an exhausted-exercise model by using a motorized rodent treadmill. YPF at doses of 2.18&#xa0;g/kg was administrated by gavage before exercise training for 10 consecutive days. Food intake-weight/body weight, blood gas analysis, lung water percent content, BALF protein concentration, morphological observation, quantitative proteomics, real-time PCR, and Western blot were performed. A rat pulmonary microvascular endothelial cell line (PMVEC) subjected to hypoxia was applied for assessing the related mechanism. <b>Results:</b> YPF attenuated the decrease of food intake weight/body weight, improved lung swelling and hemorrhage, alleviated the increase of lung water percent content and BALF protein concentration, and inhibited the impairment of lung morphology. In addition, YPF increased the expression of claudin 3, claudin 18, occludin, VE-cadherin, and &#x3b2;-catenin, attenuated the epithelial and endothelial hyperpermeability <i>in vivo</i> and/or <i>in vitro</i>, and the stress fiber formation in PMVECs after hypoxia. Quantitative proteomics discovered that the effect of YPF implicated the Siah2-ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway, Gng12-PAK1-MLCK, and RhoA/ROCK, which was further confirmed by Western blot. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032737. <b>Conclusion:</b> YPF ameliorated alveolar-capillary barrier injury induced by exhausted exercise, which is accounted for at least partly by the regulation of cytoskeleton.

### Keywords
Rattus norvegicus, Lc-ms/ms, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100191, People’s Republic of China
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Di Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing-Yan Han
Department of Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, 38 Xueyuan Road, Beijing 100191, People’s Republic of China


