### Accession
PXD010808

### Title
B cell Lymphomas present Immunoglobulin Neoantigens

### Description
Immunoglobulin gene rearrangement and somatic hypermutation have the potential to create neoantigens in non-Hodgkin B cell lymphoma.  However, the presentation of these putative immunoglobulin neoantigens by B cell lymphomas has not been proven. We used MHC immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to define antigens presented by follicular lymphomas (FL), chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLL), diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and mantle cell lymphomas (MCL).  We found presentation of the clonal immunoglobulin molecule, including neoantigens by both class I and class II MHC, though more commonly in class II MHC.  To determine whether B cell activation could promote presentation of immunoglobulin neoantigens, we used a toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) agonists to upregulate expression of MHC-II.   This resulted in enhanced class II MHC presentation of the immunoglobulin variable region including neoantigens.  These findings demonstrate that immunoglobulin neoantigens are presented across most subtypes of B cell lymphomas.  Activation of lymphoma cells to upregulate antigen presentation boosts presentation of immunoglobulin neoantigens and represents a strategy for augmenting lymphoma immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-class I and class II peptidomes were extracted from follicular lymphomas (FL), chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLL), diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and mantle cell lymphomas (MCL). In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). For all MHC-1 captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the pan HLA-A-, B-, and C- antibody W6/32 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. For MHC class II captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the HLA-DR specific antibody L243 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads.  Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted on C18 based StageTips. The isolated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were queried against the personalized proteome databases using both SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and PEAKS DB search engines (PEAKS Studio 8) (Zhang et al., 2012). Spectra were also interpreted by de novo sequencing (PEAKS Studio 8) to improve high-confidence peptide identification. For all searches with SEQUEST the msConvert program (v3.0.45) was used to generate peak lists from the original data, and spectra were then assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST (v28.12) algorithm. For all searches with PEAKS the RAW data files were imported into PEAKS and subjected to default data refinement (deisotoping, charge deconvolution, peak centroiding). For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For SEQUEST and PEAKS DB, enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N,Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neoantigens, Mhc, Orbitrap, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology, Stanford University, USA


