### Accession
PXD033586

### Title
The marine Bacteroidetes Muricauda sp. MAR_2010_75 digests diatom β-mannan

### Description
The polysaccharide β-mannan, which is common in terrestrial plants but unknown in microalgae, was recently detected during diatom blooms. We identified a β-mannan polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) in the genome of the marine Flavobacterium Muricauda sp. MAR_2010_75 which resembles PULs in bacteria from diverse ecosystems. Proteomics showed the β-mannan induced translation of 22 proteins encoded within the PUL.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of Muricauda sp. MAR_2010_75 grown to late exponential phase with glucomannan, galactomannan, homomannan, mannose and citrus pectin (control) as sole carbon source were used for proteome analyses. Triplicates of 100 mL cultures were harvested via centrifugation (4 000 x g, 20 min). Cells were washed twice with TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0)) and then resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) containing Roche ‘cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Lysis Buffer) (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were disrupted via sonication (3 x 30 s) (HD/UV 2070, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany) and cell debris was removed by centrifugation.  Integral membrane and cytosolic proteins for subproteomes from glucomannan cultures were separated by ultracentrifugation at 100 000 x g and 4 °C for 65 min. The pelleted membrane was resuspended in TE buffer and thoroughly ground using a glass homogenizer. For the extraction of the extracellular fraction, the culture supernatant was filtered using a 0.2 μm filter to remove remaining cells and then incubated with StrataClean beads at 4 °C and 150 rpm over night to bind cell-detached protein. The mixture was centrifuged at 10 000 x g and 4 °C and washed once with TE buffer. Remaining buffer was evaporated using a SpeedVac (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Protein concentration of all samples except the extracellular fraction was determined using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 25 µg of protein were loaded on a 10% 1D-SDS polyacrylamide gel and separated according to their molecular weight for 90 min at 120 V. After fixing with 40% ethanol/10% acetic acid followed by Coomassie G-250 staining, the proteins were in-gel digested overnight (16 h) using trypsin.  Peptides were separated as described previously by using reversed phase C18 column chromatography on a nano ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), which was online-coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a target-decoy protein sequence database including sequences and reverse sequences of Muricauda sp. MAR_2010_75 and of common laboratory contaminants using MaxQuant applying a protein as well as peptide level FDR of 0.01 (1%). Only proteins that could be detected in at least two of three replicates were classed as identified. Automatically calculated iBAQ values (intensity-based absolute quantification) were used to manually calculate % riBAQ values (relative iBAQ; giving the relative protein abundance in % of all proteins in the same sample) for semiquantitative comparisons between samples from different conditions. Tests for differential expression were performed using Perseus v. 1.6.2.3 with Welch’s two-sided t-test (permutation-based FDR 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The polysaccharide &#x3b2;-mannan, which is common in terrestrial plants but unknown in microalgae, was recently detected during diatom blooms. We identified a &#x3b2;-mannan polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) in the genome of the marine flavobacterium Muricauda sp. MAR_2010_75. Proteomics showed &#x3b2;-mannan induced translation of 22 proteins encoded within the PUL. Biochemical and structural analyses deduced the enzymatic cascade for &#x3b2;-mannan utilization. A conserved GH26 &#x3b2;-mannanase with endo-activity depolymerized the &#x3b2;-mannan. Consistent with the biochemistry, X-ray crystallography showed the typical TIM-barrel fold of related enzymes found in terrestrial &#x3b2;-mannan degraders. Structural and biochemical analyses of a second GH26 allowed the prediction of an exo-activity on shorter manno-gluco oligosaccharides. Further analysis demonstrated exo-&#x3b1;-1,6-galactosidase- and endo-&#x3b2;-1,4-glucanase activity of the PUL-encoded GH27 and GH5_26, respectively, indicating the target substrate is a galactoglucomannan. Epitope&#xa0;deletion assays with mannanases as analytic tools indicate the presence of &#x3b2;-mannan in the diatoms Coscinodiscus wailesii and Chaetoceros affinis. Mannanases from the PUL were active on diatom &#x3b2;-mannan and polysaccharide extracts sampled during a microalgal bloom at the North Sea. Together these results demonstrate that marine microorganisms use a conserved enzymatic cascade to degrade &#x3b2;-mannans of marine and terrestrial origin and that this metabolic pathway plays a role in marine carbon cycling.

### Keywords
Polysaccharide degradation, Marine bacteroidetes, Muricauda, Subproteome, Β-mannan

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Insititute of Pharmacy, Department Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
University of Greifswald, Department Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Irena Beidler

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder
University of Greifswald, Insititute of Pharmacy, Department Pharmaceutical Biotechnology


