### Accession
PXD007210

### Title
miRNA Lisbon

### Description
Proteomic analysis of differentially expressed proteins in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-10A cell lines when miR-200c and miR-203 were transiently expressed or inhibited, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Transient expression of mimic or anti-miRNAs was performed in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-10A. The transfection agent used was FuGENE HD transfection reagent (Promega # E2311). Pre-miR™ miRNA Precursor with the respective negative control was used at a concentration of 30 nM and Anti-miR™ miRNA Inhibitor with respective negative control. RNA, miRNAs and DNA were purified with AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini kit (Qiagen # 80204) and RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit (Qiagen # 74204).  Reverse transcription qPCR was done by using the Universal cDNA synthesis kit II (Exiqon # 203301) and ExiLENT SYBR® Green master mix (Exiqon # 203403). The lysis buffer (50 mM Tris.base pH=8; 150 mM NaCl; 5 mM Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA); 1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40; 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF); and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche # 11 697 498 001))  was added to cell pellet and centifuged to extract the whole cell proteome. Protein quantification was done by Bradford assay using protein assay dye reagent concentrate (Bio-Rad # 500-0006) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard (Bio-Rad #500-0206).  Protein extracts were dissolved in the sample buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 2% SDS, 25% glycerol, 0.01% Bromophenol Blue, 5 % 2-Mercaptoethanol) to the concentration of 50 μg of protein and were then heated at 95 °C for 10 minutes and run on 1D gel electrophoresis (Criterion Tris-HCl gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, Ca, USA) 12.5% 12+2 wells; Running buffer: 0.25 M Tris-base, 1.92 M Glycine, 1 % (w/v) SDS). The gels were stained with GelCode Blue (Bio-Rad) and the samples cut out of the gel and fractionated to 96 samples in total, for the greater protein coverage. Reduction was performed with 10 mM solution of DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3 60 min at 56 °C. Samples were thereafter alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in dark at room temperature, followed by clean up with 100 mM NH4HCO3, ACN,100 m NH4HCO 3 and ACN. Trypsin digestion of samples was done, with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3, overnight at 37°C. Proteins were extracted from gel slices with 75% ACN, 5% TFA buffer, dried in a SpeedVac and dissolved in 10 µl 0.1% FA for MS analysis. 5 μl of samples were injected on the ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data was analysed in Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, version 4.1.4804).  Only proteins, from the data analysis above, with Q values lower than 0.01 were selected for further analysis.  Next, peak intensity values were log2 transformed and the mean of two independent experiences was calculated.  The peptides for proteins chosen from above were selected from Peptide Atlas and synthesized (JPT Peptides, Berlin).  SRM transition lists were generated using Skyline software for the designated proteins. The SRM measurements were performed on a TSQ Vantage triple stage quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Data from LC/MS and SRM was normalized using Log2. All selected proteins were analysed for their ontology using PANTHER internet tools (figure 2). Next, we statistically tested all eligible proteins using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test (p value < 0,05) using GraphPad Prism 5 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mir-203; mir-200c; micrornas; rt-qpcr; lc/ms; srm; mcf-10a; mda-mb-231; breast cancer.

### Affiliations
Immunotechnology, LTH, Lund University
Department of Immunotechnology

### Submitter
Emila Kurbasic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Immunotechnology, LTH, Lund University


