### Accession
PXD028783

### Title
The Bartonella autotransporter CFA is a protective antigen and hypervariable target of neutralizing antibodies blocking erythrocyte infection

### Description
Antibodies are key to the clearance of Bartonella bacteremia, but the mechanisms and targets of protective antibodies are unknown and bacterial evasion strategies remain elusive. We studied experimental Bartonella taylorii infection of mice, its natural host, and investigated protective immune responses. Clearance of bacteremia depended on specific antibodies that interfere with bacterial attachment to erythrocytes. Accordingly, antibodies were effective in the absence of complement and Fc-receptors. Moreover, they formed independently of B-cell hypermutation and isotype class switch. The cloning of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) led to the identification of the bacterial autotransporter CFA as a protective antibody target, and vaccination against CFA protected against Bartonella bacteremia. MAb binding mapped to a region of CFA that is hypervariable in both human- and mouse-pathogenic Bartonella strains, suggesting mutational antibody evasion. These insights further our understanding of Bartonella immunity and immune evasion and elucidate mechanisms driving high Bartonella prevalence in the wild.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, aliquots of 0.4 μg of total peptides were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, in water) to 35% solvent B over 50 minutes to 50% solvent B over 10 minutes to 95% solvent B over 2 minutes and 95% solvent B over 18 minutes at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 120,000 full width at half maximum (at 400 m/z, MS1) followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense MS signals. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s. The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the concatenated Homo sapiens (UniProt, Mai 2016) and Bartonella taylorii (UniProt, July 2016) proteome and commonly observed contaminants (in total 44102 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The following search criteria were used: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments) was set. The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were normalized and statically analyzed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.4 to obtain protein relative abundances. This analysis included summation of peak areas per protein and LC MS/MS run followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of differentially abundant proteins between conditions. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package. The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial genus <i>Bartonella</i> comprises numerous emerging pathogens that cause a broad spectrum of disease manifestations in humans. The targets and mechanisms of the anti-<i>Bartonella</i> immune defense are ill-defined and bacterial immune evasion strategies remain elusive. We found that experimentally infected mice resolved <i>Bartonella</i> infection by mounting antibody responses that neutralized the bacteria, preventing their attachment to erythrocytes and suppressing bacteremia independent of complement or Fc receptors. <i>Bartonella</i>-neutralizing antibody responses were rapidly induced and depended on CD40 signaling but not on affinity maturation. We cloned neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and by mass spectrometry identified the bacterial autotransporter CFA (CAMP-like factor autotransporter) as a neutralizing antibody target. Vaccination against CFA suppressed <i>Bartonella</i> bacteremia, validating CFA as a protective antigen. We mapped <i>Bartonella</i>-neutralizing mAb binding to a domain in CFA that we found is hypervariable in both human and mouse pathogenic strains, indicating mutational antibody evasion at the <i>Bartonella</i> subspecies level. These insights into <i>Bartonella</i> immunity and immune evasion provide a conceptual framework for vaccine development, identifying important challenges in this endeavor.

### Keywords
Infection, Lc-ms, Bartonella

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


