### Accession
PXD009123

### Title
The secretome and N-glycosylation profiles of the charophycean green alga, Penium margaritaceum, resemble those of embryophytes

### Description
The secretome is defined as the population of proteins that are secreted into the extracellular environment. Many proteins that are secreted by eukaryotes are N-glycosylated; however, there are striking differences in the diversity and conservation of N-glycosylation patterns between taxa. For example, the secretome and N-glycosylation structures differ between land plants and chlorophyte green algae, but it is not clear when this divergence took place during plant evolution. A potentially valuable system to study this issue is provided by the charophycean green algae (CGA), the immediate ancestors of land plants. In this study, we used lectin affinity chromatography (LAC) coupled with mass spectrometry to characterize the secretome, including secreted N-glycoproteins, of Penium margaritaceum, a member of the CGA. The identified secreted proteins and N-glycans were compared to those known from the chlorophyte green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the model land plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, to establish their evolutionary context. Our approach allowed the identification of cell wall proteins and proteins modified with N-glycans that are identical to those of embryophytes, suggesting that the P. margaritaceum secretome is more closely related to those of land plants than to those of chlorophytes. The results of this study support the hypothesis that many of the proteins associated with plant cell wall modification, as well as other extracellular processes, evolved prior to the colonization of terrestrial habitats.

### Sample Protocol
Algal protein extraction and ConA-based lectin affinity chromatography (LAC) Five mL of concentrated P. margaritaceum culture was mixed with 10 mL of extraction buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7, 0.2 M CaCl2, 0.5M NaCl, and 20 μL/g fresh weight protease inhibitor cocktail [Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO]). The cells were then disrupted using a Bead-Beater homogenizer and 0.5 mm zirconia/silica beads for 5 min. The resulting suspension was sonicated 10 times for 10 s with a sonic dismembrator model 100 on full power. The suspension was centrifuged at 25 000 x g, at 4°C for 30 min and the supernatant was used for enrichment of N-glycoproteins by LAC. The eluted glycoproteins were concentrated and the eluting buffer was exchanged for 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, using a 5 kDa cutoff centrifugal before being lyophilized dry system.  Trypsin digestion and N-glycopeptide enrichment  N-glycoproteins enriched were dissolved in 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min, at room temperature, before dilution to a final concentration of 1 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with trypsin at a 1:20 w/w trypsin: protein ratio for 16 h at 37°C. The pH of the trypsinized samples was then adjusted to 5.0 with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). N-glycopeptides were dried using a SpeedVac  prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analysis Samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a "CorConneX" nano ion source using a 10- m analyte emitter. The Orbitrap was interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system. Each reconstituted fraction (5 μL) was injected onto a PepMap C18 trap column (5 µm, 300 µm X 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 μL/min flow rate, and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75 µm x 15cm), using a 60-min gradient from 5% to 40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) at 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 1.5 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. The Fourier Transform mass analyzer (FTMA) was calibrated using either the background polysiloxane ion signal (m/z 445.120025) as an internal lock mass or the Ultramark 1621 external calibrant. The instrument was operated in parallel data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using the FTMA for one survey MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (fwhm at m/z 400) for the mass range of m/z 375-1800 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the 7 most intense peaks with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 7,500 in both LTQ mass analyzer and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)-based FTMA at 7,500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at repeat count 1 with a 25 s repeat duration, exclusion list size of 500, 45 s exclusion duration, and ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. Collision induced dissociation (CID) parameters were set at the following values: isolation width 2.0 m/z, normalized collision energy 35%, activation Q at 0.25, and activation time 10 ms. The activation time was 0.1 ms for HCD analysis.

### Data Protocol
The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis for characterization of glycosylation sites was performed on an UltiMate3000 nanoLC system coupled with a hybrid triple quadrupole linear ion trap mass spectrometer, the 4000 Q Trap. The tryptic peptides bound to PGC (5  L) were injected. MS data acquisition in a 4000 Qtrap was performed using Analyst 1.4.2 software and operated using precursor ion (PI) scan-triggered information-dependent acquisition (IDA) analysis.  The precursor ion scan of the oxonium ion (HexNAc+ at m/z 204.08) was monitored using a step size of 0.2 Da across a mass range of m/z 500-1,600 and the parameters were set as previously reported. For IDA analysis, each precursor ion scan was followed by one enhanced resolution scan and the two highest intensity ions with multiple charge states were selected for MS/MS using rolling collision energy (CE) that was set based on the charge state and m/z value of each ion. In the rolling CE setting, high CE and low CE were applied in two separate acquisition methods to gain sequence information regarding both peptides and glycans. We obtained MS/MS spectra with cross-ring fragmentation using high energy. However, the glycan structures reported in this study are based on empirical glycan composition and structure of N-glycans reported previously in the literature.  DDA raw data from the Orbitrap was converted into MASCOT generic format (MGF) files using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. The subsequent searches were carried out using Mascot Daemon (version 2.3, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) with the following parameters: semi-tryptic protease specificity, one missed cleavage allowed, 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.8 Da for CID and 0.05 Da for HCD fragment ion mass tolerance with a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation. Mass spectra were used to search translated in-house unigene databases generated from RNA-Seq data derived from P. margaritaceum cell cultures, or PlantGDB (http://www.plantgdb.org/). In addition, we used a unigene database generated with sequence reads from Coleochaete orbicularis and Spirogyra pratensis. Only peptides that matched with a MASCOT score above the 95% confidence interval threshold (p < 0.05, MASCOT score ≥ 44) were considered for protein identification. In cases where the protein was identified by a single peptide match, the threshold was set at a 99% confidence interval (MASCOT score ≥51). These MASCOT scores resulted in a false-positive identification rate of 4.56%. Only proteins containing at least one unique peptide (a sequence that had not been previously assigned to a different protein) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The secretome can be defined as the population of proteins that are secreted into the extracellular environment. Many proteins that are secreted by eukaryotes are <i>N</i>-glycosylated. However, there are striking differences in the diversity and conservation of <i>N</i>-glycosylation patterns between taxa. For example, the secretome and <i>N</i>-glycosylation structures differ between land plants and chlorophyte green algae, but it is not clear when this divergence took place during plant evolution. A potentially valuable system to study this issue is provided by the charophycean green algae (CGA), which is the immediate ancestors of land plants. In this study, we used lectin affinity chromatography (LAC) coupled with mass spectrometry to characterize the secretome including secreted <i>N</i>-glycoproteins of <i>Penium margaritaceum</i>, which is a member of the CGA. The identified secreted proteins and <i>N</i>-glycans were compared to those known from the chlorophyte green alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> and the model land plant, <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, to establish their evolutionary context. Our approach allowed the identification of cell wall proteins and proteins modified with <i>N</i>-glycans that are identical to those of embryophytes, which suggests that the <i>P. margaritaceum</i> secretome is more closely related to those of land plants than to those of chlorophytes. The results of this study support the hypothesis that many of the proteins associated with plant cell wall modification as well as other extracellular processes evolved prior to the colonization of terrestrial habitats.

### Keywords
Secretome; cell wall proteins; embryophytes; charophycean green algae; n-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.

### Submitter
Eliel Ruiz-May

### Lab Head
Dr Jocelyn K. C. Rose
Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University


