### Accession
PXD000513

### Title
Photo-cross-linking mass spectrometry for single amino acid assignment of RNA-binding sites in RNA-binding proteins

### Description
Mass spectrometry data of peptide–RNA cross-links derived from complex biological systems. Yeast (pre-)mRNPs were isolated by TAP tag purification of Cbp20; human protein–RNA complexes were assembled on an aptamer tagged pre-mRNA. Isolated complexes were UV irradiated. For each of the aforementioned experiments, a non-irradiated control was prepared. Yeast RBPs cross-linked in vivo after labeling with 4-thio-uridine (4SU) were isolated with oligo d(T). All samples were enriched for cross-linked heteroconjugates prior to LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Details on sample processing and analysis are described in detail in the corresponding publication.

### Data Protocol
The raw data deposited here was converted to mzML with msconvert and centroided with OpenMS. For data analysis, further filtering steps were performed with OpenMS. MS/MS spectra with confident peptide identifications (FDR < 1%) were filtered. For the first two systems, MS/MS spectra of precursors appearing both in the UV irradiated sample and the non-irradiated control at comparable intensities (fold change < 2) were removed. For the remaining precursors, variants were generated by subtracting masses of potentially cross-linked (oligo-)nucleotides. The resulting precursor variants were submitted into OMSSA for database search. The best-scoring peptide-to-spectrum match for each MS/MS spectrum was retained and summarized in an idXML file, provided here. For the control samples, the deposited idXML contains confidently identified non-cross-linked peptides (FDR < 1%). Details on data processing and analysis as well as rationality behind the data analysis workflow are described in detail in the corresponding publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cross-linking, Rnp, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen

### Submitter
Timo Sachsenberg

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Kohlbacher
University of Tübingen


