### Accession
PXD028591

### Title
BRAT1 Links Integrator and Defective RNA Processing with Neurodegeneration

### Description
Mutations in BRAT1, encoding BRCA1-associated ATM activator 1, have been associated with neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders characterized by heterogeneous phenotypes with varying levels of clinical severity. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease pathology remain poorly understood. Here, we show that BRAT1 is a functional component of the RNA processing protein complex, Integrator. BRAT1 interacts with the INTS9/INTS11 heterodimer, the core Integrator cleavage complex that processes the 3’ ends of various non-coding RNAs and pre-mRNAs, and we find that Integrator integrity and function are disrupted by BRAT1 deletion. In particular, defects in BRAT1 impede proper 3’ end processing of UsnRNAs, snoRNAs, and replication-dependent histone mRNAs, and alter expression of protein-coding genes. Importantly, defects in Integrator integrity and function are also evident in patient-derived cells from BRAT1 related neurological disease. Collectively, these data identify BRAT1 as a functional component of Integrator and link defects in this critical endonuclease complex with hereditary neurodegenerative disease.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates from wild type and BRAT1-/- (clone #8) U2OS cells were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate containing 2 % sodium deoxycholate. Cysteins were reduced with 10 mM final concentration of tris(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphine and blocked with 20 mM final concentration of S-methylmethanethiosulfonate (60°C for 30 min). Samples were cleaved on beads with 1 g of trypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion samples were centrifuged and supernatants were collected and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to 1 % final concentration. Sodium deoxycholate was removed by extraction to ethylacetate1. Peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore)2. Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 m particles, 100 Å pore size) was used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1 % formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 m, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 m x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 l/min. Loading buffer was composed of water, 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with Mobile phase B gradient from 4 % to 35 % B in 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 msec. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 sec with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 sec cycles3

### Data Protocol
All data were analysed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.1)4. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Human database (downloaded from uniprot.org in July 2019, containing 20 444 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms described recently. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software5.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in BRAT1, encoding BRCA1-associated ATM activator 1, have been associated with neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders characterized by heterogeneous phenotypes with varying levels of clinical severity. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease pathology remain poorly understood. Here, we show that BRAT1 tightly interacts with INTS9/INTS11 subunits of the Integrator complex that processes 3' ends of various noncoding RNAs and pre-mRNAs. We find that Integrator functions are disrupted by BRAT1 deletion. In particular, defects in BRAT1 impede proper 3' end processing of UsnRNAs and snoRNAs, replication-dependent histone pre-mRNA processing, and alter the expression of protein-coding genes. Importantly, impairments in Integrator function are also evident in patient-derived cells from BRAT1 related neurological disease. Collectively, our data suggest that defects in BRAT1 interfere with proper Integrator functions, leading to incorrect expression of RNAs and proteins, resulting in neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Integrator complex, Neurodegeneration, Small nuclear rna, Brat1

### Affiliations
Charles University
Laboratory of Genome Dynamics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague 4, 142 20, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Hana Hanzlikova
Laboratory of Genome Dynamics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague 4, 142 20, Czech Republic


