### Accession
PXD031992

### Title
Differential UBE2H-CTLH E2-E3 ubiquitylation modulesregulate erythroid maturation

### Description
The developmentof haematopoietic stem cellsinto mature erythrocytes–erythropoiesis –is a controlled  process characterized  by  cellular  reorganisation  and  drastic reshaping  of  the proteome  landscape.Failure  of  ordered  erythropoiesis  isassociated  with  anaemias and haematological  malignancies. Although  the  ubiquitin (UB) system isa known  crucial post-translational regulator in erythropoiesis, how the erythrocyteis reshaped by the UBsystemis poorly  understood.Bymeasuringthe proteomiclandscape  of in  vitrohuman  erythropoiesis models, we founddynamic differential expression ofsubunitsof the CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complexthat   formeddistinctmaturation stage-dependent   assemblies   of structurally homologous RANBP9-and  RANBP10-CTLH  complexes.Moreover,protein  abundance  of CTLH’s  cognate  E2-conjugating  enzyme  UBE2H increased during terminal  differentiation,which  dependedon  catalyticallyactive  CTLH  E3complexes.CRISPR-Cas9  mediated inactivation of all CTLH E3 assemblies by targeting the catalytic subunit MAEA,orUBE2H, triggered  spontaneous  and  accelerated maturationof  erythroid  progenitor  cellsincluding increased   heme   and   haemoglobin   synthesis. Thus, the   orderly   progression   of   human erythropoiesis is controlled by the assembly of distinct UBE2H-CTLHmodulesfunctioning at different developmental stages.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in SDC buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate in100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and then heated for 5 min at 95°C. Lysates were cooled on ice and sonicated for 15 min at 4°. Protein concentration was determined by Tryptophan assay as described in (Kulak et al, 2014) and equal amount of proteins were reduced and alkylated by 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, respectively, for 5 min at 45°C. Proteins were subsequently digested by the addition of 1:100 LysC and Trypsin overnight at 37°C with agitation (1,500 rpm). Next day, around 10 µg of protein material was processed using an in-StageTip (iST) protocol (Kulak et al., 2014). Briefly, samples were at least 4-fold diluted with 1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol to a final volume of 200 μL and loaded onto SDB-RPS StageTips (Empore). Tips are then washed with 200μL of 1% TFA in isopropanol and 200μL 0.2% TFA/2% ACN (acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with 80 μl of 1.25% Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH)/80% ACN and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf). MS loading buffer (0.2% TFA/2%ACN (v/v)) was added to the dried samples prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were measured optically at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; Thermo Scientific) and subsequently equalized using MS loading buffer. Approximately, 300-500 ng peptide from each sample was analyzed using a 100 min gradient single shot DIA method.   LC-MS/MS analysis and data processing Nanoflow LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap instrument, namely Q Exactive HF-X and a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We used a 50 cm HPLC column (75 µm inner diameter, in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Column temperature was kept at 60°C with an in-house developed oven.  Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid (FA) (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 80 min gradient of 5–30 % of buffer B (80 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA (v/v)), followed by a 4 min increase to 60 % of buffer B and a 4 min increase to 95 % of buffer B, and a 4 min wash of 95% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Buffer B concentration was decreased to 4% in 4 min and stayed at 4% for 4 min. MS data were acquired using the MaxQuant Live software and a data‐independent acquisition (DIA) mode (Wichmann et al, 2019). Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300-1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. Full MS events were followed by 33 MS/MS windows per cycle at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 3e6 or an Xcalibur-automated maximum injection time. The spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The single shot DIA runs of HUDEP2 samples were searched with direct DIA (dDIA) mode in Spectronaut version 14 (Biognosys AG) for final protein identification and quantification. All searches were performed against the human SwissProt reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 42,431 entries downloaded in July 2019. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used with a maximum of two miscleavages permitted and a peptide length of 7–52 amino acids. A protein and precursor FDR of 1% were used for filtering and subsequent reporting in samples (q-value mode). We mainly performed data analysis in the Perseus (version 1.6.0.9 and 1.6.1.3) (Tyanova et al, 2016). Protein intensities were log2-transformed for further analysis. Data sets were filtered to make sure that identified proteins showed expression in all biological triplicates of at least one experimental group and the missing values were subsequently replaced by random numbers that were drawn from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8). PCA of experimental groups and biological replicates was performed using Perseus. Multi-sample test (ANOVA) for determining if any of the means of experimental group was significantly different from each other was applied to protein data set. For truncation, we used permutation-based FDR which was set to 0.01 or 0.05 in conjunction with an S0-parameter of 0.1. For hierarchical clustering of significant proteins, median protein abundances of biological replicates were z-scored and clustered using Euclidean as a distance measure for row and/or column clustering. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichments in the clusters were calculated by Fisher’s exact test using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR for truncation. Mean log2 ratios of biological triplicates and the corresponding P-values were visualized with volcano plots and significance was based on a FDR < 0.05 or 0.01. Network representation of significantly regulated proteins was performed with the STRING app (1.5.1) in Cytoscape (3.7.2).

### Publication Abstract
The development of haematopoietic stem cells into mature erythrocytes - erythropoiesis - is a controlled process characterized by cellular reorganization and drastic reshaping of the proteome landscape. Failure of ordered erythropoiesis is associated with anaemias and haematological malignancies. Although the ubiquitin system is a known crucial post-translational regulator in erythropoiesis, how the erythrocyte is reshaped by the ubiquitin system is poorly understood. By measuring the proteomic landscape of in vitro human erythropoiesis models, we found dynamic differential expression of subunits of the CTLH E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that formed maturation stage-dependent assemblies of topologically homologous RANBP9- and RANBP10-CTLH complexes. Moreover, protein abundance of CTLH's cognate E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UBE2H increased during terminal differentiation, and UBE2H expression depended on catalytically active CTLH E3 complexes. CRISPR-Cas9-mediated inactivation of CTLH E3 assemblies or UBE2H in erythroid progenitors revealed defects, including spontaneous and accelerated erythroid maturation as well as inefficient enucleation. Thus, we propose that dynamic maturation stage-specific changes of UBE2H-CTLH E2-E3 modules control the orderly progression of human erythropoiesis.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Ube2h, Ms, Proteomics, Gid complex, Ctlh complex, Dia, E2, E3

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Department  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Department  Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


