### Accession
PXD008663

### Title
Searching N-terminal modifications of proteins starting with Gly in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Characterization of Myristoylated proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana Col 0 wild type

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from A. thaliana Col. 0 seedling as described in the associated article are used to perform N-terminus enrichment using SCX chromatography after d3-Acetylation of free N-termini and later analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Such approach usually combines a few acquisition files, i.e. 10 files related to each individual SCX fraction (1h analysis) and 6 files related to combined fractions.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.4 software was used for protein identification and co-translational modification characterization using TAIR-10 database. Trypsin/P rules were used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 20 ppm and 0.5 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and Lysine d3-Acetylation was considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, d0 (endogeneous) and d3 (chemically induced) N-terminal acetylation, N-myristoylation and Cystein Palmytoylation were considered as variable modifications. To extract specifically N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported in XML format and submitted to an in-house script written in python.

### Publication Abstract
An organism's entire protein modification repertoire has yet to be comprehensively mapped. N-myristoylation (MYR) is a crucial eukaryotic N-terminal protein modification. Here we mapped complete Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana myristoylomes. The crystal structures of human modifier NMT1 complexed with reactive and nonreactive target-mimicking peptide ligands revealed unexpected binding clefts and a modifier recognition pattern. This information allowed integrated mapping of myristoylomes using peptide macroarrays, dedicated prediction algorithms, and in vivo mass spectrometry. Global MYR profiling at the genomic scale identified over a thousand novel, heterogeneous targets in both organisms. Surprisingly, MYR involved a non-negligible set of overlapping targets with N-acetylation, and the sequence signature marks for a third proximal acylation-S-palmitoylation-were genomically imprinted, allowing recognition of sequences exhibiting both acylations. Together, the data extend the N-end rule concept for Gly-starting proteins to subcellular compartmentalization and reveal the main neighbors influencing protein modification profiles and consequent cell fate.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, N-terminus, N-acetylation, Methionine excision, Myristoylation, N-myristoyltransferase

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.


