### Accession
PXD037620

### Title
RBPMS mediates smooth muscle specific alternative splicing via oligomerization and modulation of trans splicing factor recruitment

### Description
RBPMS regulates alternative splicing decision via recruiting other trans factors. This experiment aims to investigate the interactome of Strep-II tagged recombinant RBPMS in Hela nuclear extract. The interactome of the full length protein is compared to the construct lacking the far C-terminal 20 amino acids. The “R” series indicates full-length RBPMS pull-down. The “P” series indicates truncated RBPMS pull-down. The “BL” series indicates full length RBPMS pull-down in the absence of nuclear extract input but with bovine serum albumin beads blocking reagent. The “N” series indicates non-baited negative control pull-down.

### Sample Protocol
After Strep II tag affinity pull-down, the interactome was elute with 50 mM Biotin from the beads separate by short SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, stained with Coomassie. The serial gel slices were excised and digested in situ with trypsin. The extracted tryptic peptides were analyzed using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Protein identification was conducted by searching Human database downloaded in 2020, UniPort, using Mascot algorithm within Scaffold. To conduct filtering and fold-change analysis, the missing value in the dataset was imputed using randomly assigned numbers centred around the minimum value (q-th quantile, q=0.01) of the Total Precursor Intensity distribution. Only proteins with two or more unique peptides each showing a false discovery rate < 1.0% were included for analysis. The minimum exclusive spectrum count in each sample was set to the average count for that sample to allow calculation of log2FC value. Proteins with log2FC < 1 were considered as non-specific binders and removed.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative pre-mRNA splicing decisions are regulated by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) that can activate or repress regulated splice sites. Repressive RBPs typically harness multivalent interactions to bind stably to target RNAs. Multivalency can be achieved by homomeric oligomerization and heteromeric interactions with other RBPs, often mediated by intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), and by possessing multiple RNA binding domains. Cell-specific splicing decisions often involve the action of widely expressed RBPs, which are able to bind multivalently around target exons, but without effect in the absence of a cell-specific regulator. To address how cell-specific regulators can collaborate with constitutive RBPs in alternative splicing regulation, we used the smooth-muscle specific regulator RBPMS. Recombinant RBPMS is sufficient to confer smooth muscle cell specific alternative splicing of Tpm1 exon 3 in cell-free assays by preventing assembly of ATP-dependent splicing complexes. This activity depends upon a C-terminal IDR that facilitates dynamic higher-order self-assembly, cooperative binding to multivalent RNA and interactions with widely expressed splicing co-regulators, including MBNL1 and RBFOX2, allowing cooperative assembly of stable cell-specific regulatory complexes.

### Keywords
Human; lc msms; rbpms; ap-ms: splicing factor; rbp

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Chris WJ Smith
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge


