### Accession
PXD039490

### Title
Proteomic profiling of embryonic retina to facilitate ocular disease gene discovery

### Description
To expedite gene discovery in eye development and its associated defects, we previously developed a bioinformatics resource-tool iSyTE (integrated Systems Tool for Eye gene discovery). However, iSyTE is presently limited to lens tissue and is predominantly based on transcriptomics datasets. Therefore, to extend the iSyTE approach to retina development on the proteome level, we performed high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on mouse embryonic day (E)14.5 retina and identified an average of 3,300 proteins per sample (n=5). High-throughput expression profiling-based gene discovery approaches–involving either transcriptomics or proteomics–pose a key challenge of prioritizing select candidates from thousands of RNA/proteins expressed in a particular cell/tissue type. To address this, we used MS/MS proteome data from mouse whole embryonic body (WB) as a reference dataset and performed comparative analysis–termed “in silico WB-subtraction”–with the retina proteome dataset. In silico WB-subtraction identified 90 high-priority proteins with retina-enriched expression at stringency criteria of 2.5 average spectral counts, 2.0 fold-enrichment, False Discovery Rate <0.01. These top candidates represent a pool of retina-enriched proteins, several of which are associated with retinal biology and/or defects (e.g., Aldh1a1, Ank2, Ank3, Dcn, Dync2h1, Egfr, Ephb2, Fbln5, Fbn2, Hras, Igf2bp1, Msi1, Rbp1, Rlbp1, Tenm3, Yap1, etc.), indicating the effectiveness of this approach.  Importantly, in silico WB-subtraction also identified several new high-priority candidates with potential regulatory function in retina development. Finally, proteins exhibiting expression or enriched-expression in the retina are made accessible in a user-friendly manner at iSyTE (https://research.bioinformatics.udel.edu/iSyTE/), to allow effective visualization of this information by the research community to facilitate eye gene discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: Mice of the background C57BL/6J, obtained from The Jackson Laboratory, were used as wild-type animals in this study, and were bred and maintained at the University of Delaware Center for Animal research facility. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved the animal protocol (AUP#1226). Animal experiments described in this study were performed in adherence to the guidelines in the Association of Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO) statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research.  Tissue Collection and Processing: Mice were bred and pregnant females were euthanized for obtaining embryos for collection of retina tissue. The day on which a vaginal plug was detected was designated as embryonic day (E) 0.5, and tissues was collected at E14.5. Retina tissues were micro-dissected from E14.5 mouse embryos and stored at -80C until further processing. Five biological replicates with each replicate consisting of two retinas isolated from the same embryo were collected. Tissue samples were suspended in 120 microliters of TEAB buffer (167 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer) and subjected to probe-sonication in a Fisher Scientific 60 Sonic Dismembrator. To these lysed samples, 40 microliters of 20% SDS, 1% DCA and 40 microliters of water were added to bring the total volume of each sample to 200 microliters (final concentration: 4% SDS, 0.2% DCA, 100 mM TEAB), which were next centrifuged (16000 x g, 2 min., room temperature) followed by heating (90C for 15 min.). Sample protein quantification was estimated by BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFischer Cat. No. 23225). For each biological replicate (n = 5 biological replicates), 55 micrograms of protein/sample was subjected to trypsinization using a modified enhanced filter-aided digestion protocol (e-FASP) using Amicon 30 kDa ultracentrifugation devices. Next, the samples were subjected to TCEP (Tris Carboxy Ethyl Phosphene) reducing reagent at 90C for 10 min, followed by transferring to an Amicon filter. Samples were then buffer exchanged into 8 M Urea, 0.2% deoxycholic acid (DCA), 100 mM TEAB. Next, samples were subjected to alkylation with iodoacetamide, exchanged into 0.2% DCA, 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) digestion buffer, and subjected to overnight digestion by trypsin (1:20 enzyme:substrate concentration). After overnight trypsin digestion, samples were subjected to centrifugation and the filtrate, which containing the peptides, was subjected to extraction with ethyl acetate, which served to remove DCA. A SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was then used to dry the samples which were then resuspended in 100 microliters of HPLC-grade water. Next, a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit was used to perform a peptide assay on the samples and the average peptide recovery from mouse E14.5 retina samples was estimated to be ~45 micrograms/sample.  Mass Spectrometry: Digested protein samples (concentration: 4 micrograms in 5% Formic acid) were loaded for 5 min on an Acclaim PepMap 0.1 x 20 mm NanoViper C18 peptide trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (flow rate: 10 microliters/min; mobile phase: in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). PepMap RSLC C18 2-micron particle, 75 micron x 50 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for separating peptides over 205 min on a 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient (mobile phase: 0.1% formic acid, 300 nl/min flow rate) with Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLC nano UPLC system. An Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to collect tandem MS data, using data dependent analysis (DDA) and the MS/DD-MS/MS instrument method (full MS resolutions: 120,000 at m/z 200, mass range 375-1500, charge state 2-7; full MS AGC target: 400,000; intensity threshold: 5,000; max inject time: 50 ms and 10 ppm dynamic exclusion for 60 s; AGC target value for fragment spectra: 5,000; isolation mode: quadrupole; isolation width: 1.6 m/z; isolation offset: off; activation type: CID; collision energy: fixed 35%; maximum injection time: 300 ms; detector type: IonTrap). Centroid mode using positive polarity was used to acquire data.

### Data Protocol
Raw File Conversion and Database Search: MSConvert (Proteowizard toolkit) was used to convert RAW files to MS2 format for the samples. The retina samples had ~74K MS2 scans per run. Software (available at https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities.git) was used to download a canonical mouse reference proteome (version 2019.04; 22,287 sequences) from UniProt. To this, a concatenated sequence-reversed decoy database was added along with common contaminants (179 sequences) to obtain 44,932 entries.  Peptide sequences were assigned to the MS2 spectra (PSMs) using the Comet search engine, which was configured as follows: tryptic cleavage (maximum of two missed cleavages); monoisotopic parent ion mass tolerance of 1.25 Da; monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005 Da; fragment bin offset of 0.4; b-, y-, and neutral loss ions were used in scoring (flanking peaks were not used); variable modification of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine was specified; static modification of alkylation (+57.0215 Da) of cysteines was specified.    PSM Error Control: The PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git) and the target/decoy method was used for post-processing the highest scoring matches for individual PSMs (obtained from Comet) using false discovery rate (FDR) error control. Peptides of different charge states (2+, 3+, and 4+ were considered) and modification state (unmodified or oxidized) were processed to derive accurate delta mass conditional score histograms. FDR values were estimated based on target and decoy score histograms as a function of a Peptide-Prophet-like discriminant score to set thresholds for experiment-wide PSM FDR of 1%. A minimum length of 7 amino acids-length were considered for peptide matches. The number of confidently identified (1% FDR) PSMs per sample averaged 35.4K and the identification rate was 48%.  Protein Inference: The expressed proteins were inferred, using basic parsimony principles, based on the filtered PSM sequences. Homologous protein family members were grouped using an extended parsimony algorithm when evidence to distinguish family members was insufficient.  In total, 3,963 proteins were detected after grouping (excluding common contaminant proteins) with 37 decoy matches, for a protein FDR of about 0.9%. The average number of proteins identified per sample was 3,296.  Quantitative Analysis: For the retina and the WB samples, equal amounts of protein were digested, and the total spectral counts (SpC, a robust semi-quantitative measure) were estimated. The retina and the WB samples were individually scaled to the average total spectral count per sample. The retina and the WB samples had about 3,300 protein identifications per sample. Next, the proteins with enriched expression in the retina compared to WB were determined as follows: For individual proteins, the average SpC for all samples was computed from the scaled data, and only values greater than 2.5 (2,675 proteins) were considered in the differential expressed enrichment analysis between the retina and WB. The bioconductor package, edgeR, was used for differential gene expression analysis. The default Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrections and the exact test in edgeR were applied in R (version 3.5.3).

### Publication Abstract
To expedite gene discovery in eye development and its associated defects, we previously developed a bioinformatics resource-tool iSyTE (integrated Systems Tool for Eye gene discovery). However, iSyTE is presently limited to lens tissue and is predominantly based on transcriptomics datasets. Therefore, to extend iSyTE to other eye tissues on the proteome level, we performed high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on mouse embryonic day (E)14.5 retina and retinal pigment epithelium combined tissue and identified an average of 3300 proteins per sample (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5). High-throughput expression profiling-based gene discovery approaches-involving either transcriptomics or proteomics-pose a key challenge of prioritizing candidates from thousands of RNA/proteins expressed. To address this, we used MS/MS proteome data from mouse whole embryonic body (WB) as a reference dataset and performed comparative analysis-termed "in silico WB-subtraction"-with the retina proteome dataset. In silico WB-subtraction identified 90 high-priority proteins with retina-enriched expression at stringency criteria of&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;2.5 average spectral counts,&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;2.0 fold-enrichment, false discovery rate&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01. These top candidates represent a pool of retina-enriched proteins, several of which are associated with retinal biology and/or defects (e.g., Aldh1a1, Ank2, Ank3, Dcn, Dync2h1, Egfr, Ephb2, Fbln5, Fbn2, Hras, Igf2bp1, Msi1, Rbp1, Rlbp1, Tenm3, Yap1, etc.), indicating the effectiveness of this approach. Importantly, in silico WB-subtraction also identified several new high-priority candidates with potential regulatory function in retina development. Finally, proteins exhibiting expression or enriched-expression in the retina are made accessible in a user-friendly manner at iSyTE ( https://research.bioinformatics.udel.edu/iSyTE/ ), to allow effective visualization of this information and facilitate eye gene discovery.

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Development, Proteome, Retina, Isyte, Gene discovery, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences University of Delaware  Newark, DE, USA.
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Salil Lachke
Department of Biological Sciences University of Delaware  Newark, DE, USA.


