### Accession
PXD012031

### Title
Intestinal crypt cells and the microbiome undergo abrupt reprogramming at the onset of colonic infection

### Description
We used the mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium to model gut infections. Following oral inoculation C. rodentium resides in the caecum for the first 3 days, before it infects the colon on the 4th day. Here we show that while the host is unresponsive to the infection on day 3, there is an abrupt reprogramming of the cellular composition of the crypt, involving depletion of goblet and deep crypt secretory cells, as well as metabolism (e.g. simultaneous up-regulation of cholesterol biogenesis, import and efflux), DNA damage repair and proliferation, which correlated with Ki67 staining, on day 4. Reduction in the abundance of proteins involved in the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, leading to oxygenation of the gut, coincided with instant expansion of mucosal-associated Enterobacteriaceae. These results show that sensing a small number of pathogenic bacteria triggers immediate intrinsic changes to the epithelium physiology and the microbiota, which parallel innate gut immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets were dissolved in 100 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 0.1% SDS assisted with pulsed probe sonication. Protein concentration was measured with Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 100 μg of total protein were prepared for trypsin digestion. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP) final concentration followed by 1h incubation at 60°C, then blocked with a final concentration of 10mM freshly prepared Iodoacetamide (IAA) solution in dark for 30 min. Trypsin (Pierce, MS grade) was added at a final concentration 70 ng/μL for overnight digestion. The resultant peptides were diluted up to 100 μL with 0.1 M TEAB buffer and labelled with TMT 11-plex reagent vial (Thermo Scientific) according to manufactures instructions. Basic reverse-phase peptide fractionation Offline peptide fractionation based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography was performed using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, 120 Å) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with an auto sampler. Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was composed of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 100 μL mobile phase A, for fractionation using a multi-step gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min as follows: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected in a time dependent manner every 30 sec and dried. Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Analysis LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and a volume of 7 μL was loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the μlPickUp mode at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a multi-step gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column (Dionex) retrofitted to an electrospray emitter (New Objective, FS360-20-10-D-20) at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was composed of 100% H2O, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 95 min gradient to 42% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 8 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 2 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursors between 400-1500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 3×105 and IT 100 ms with the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 35 ms. MS3 quantification spectra were acquired with further HCD fragmentation of the top 10 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) excluding neutral losses of maximum m/z 30. Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.5 Th, collision energy was applied at 45% and the AGC setting was at 6×104 with 100ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired only for the mass range 120-140 with 60k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification The acquired mass spectra were submitted to the SequestHT search engine implemented in the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) software for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages and minimum length of 6 amino acids. TMT6plex at N-terminus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. A maximum of two different dynamic modifications were allowed for each peptide. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a fasta files containing the UniProt Reference Proteomes of 16,608 mouse reviewed protein entries and 4,862 Citrobacter rodentium protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a custom TMT 11plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification. The enterocytes obtained at days 8 and 14 post PBS treatment were used as the controls for log2Ratio calculations. The WT and ΔespO+espO infections were used as biological replicates in each day post treatment for the characterization of the mouse enterocytes response to Citrobacter infection. Differential expression p-values were computed based on a single-sample t-test using the Perseus proteomics tool and the average protein log2Ratios from the two measurements in each time point were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
We used the mouse attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogen <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i>, which models the human A/E pathogens enteropathogenic <i>Escherichia coli</i> and enterohemorrhagic <i>E. coli</i> (EPEC and EHEC), to temporally resolve intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) responses and changes to the microbiome during <i>in vivo</i> infection. We found the host to be unresponsive during the first 3&#x2009;days postinfection (DPI), when <i>C. rodentium</i> resides in the caecum. In contrast, at 4 DPI, the day of colonic colonization, despite only sporadic adhesion to the apex of the crypt, we observed robust upregulation of cell cycle and DNA repair processes, which were associated with expansion of the crypt Ki67-positive replicative zone, and downregulation of multiple metabolic processes (including the tricarboxylic acid [TCA] cycle and oxidative phosphorylation). Moreover, we observed dramatic depletion of goblet and deep crypt secretory cells and an atypical regulation of cholesterol homeostasis in IECs during early infection, with simultaneous upregulation of cholesterol biogenesis (e.g., 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase [Hmgcr]), import (e.g., low-density lipoprotein receptor [Ldlr]), and efflux (e.g., AbcA1). We also detected interleukin 22 (IL-22) responses in IECs (e.g., Reg3&#x3b3;) on the day of colonic colonization, which occurred concomitantly with a bloom of commensal Enterobacteriaceae on the mucosal surface. These results unravel a new paradigm in host-pathogen-microbiome interactions, showing for the first time that sensing a small number of pathogenic bacteria triggers swift intrinsic changes to the IEC composition and function, in tandem with significant changes to the mucosa-associated microbiome, which parallel innate immune responses.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The mouse pathogen <i>C. rodentium</i> is a widely used model for colonic infection and has been a major tool in fundamental discoveries in the fields of bacterial pathogenesis and mucosal immunology. Despite extensive studies probing acute <i>C. rodentium</i> infection, our understanding of the early stages preceding the infection climax remains relatively undetailed. To this end, we apply a multiomics approach to resolve temporal changes to the host and microbiome during early infection. Unexpectedly, we found immediate and dramatic responses occurring on the day of colonic infection, both in the host intestinal epithelial cells and in the microbiome. Our study suggests changes in cholesterol and carbon metabolism in epithelial cells are instantly induced upon pathogen detection in the colon, corresponding with a shift to primarily facultative anaerobes constituting the microbiome. This study contributes to our knowledge of disease pathogenesis and mechanisms of barrier regulation, which is required for development of novel therapeutics targeting the intestinal epithelium.

### Keywords
Infection, Mouse, Tmt, Colon, Citrobacter

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research


