### Accession
PXD029071

### Title
Transglutaminase 3 crosslinks MUC2 and stabilizes the colonic mucus layer

### Description
Mucus/MUC2 from TGM3-deficient mice is less cross-linked with isopeptide-bond cross-links compared to Mucus/MUC2 from WT mice. This results in protease-labile MUC2-molecules that become degraded in the colonic lumen

### Sample Protocol
Mucus was collected from mouse colon by gentle scraping and MUC2 mono- and oligomers were separated via composite agagarose-PAGE followed by Alcian Blue staining. MUC2 bands were excised from the gel and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into *mgf files using MSConvert (Proteowizard 3.0). Peak lists were searched using the MASCOT search engine. Database: UniProt (vers.06/2017)&in-house mucin database; static modification: carbamidomethylation; variable modification: oxidation of mehtionine; error tolerance parent ion: 5ppm; error tolerance fragment ion: 0.2 Da; enzymes: Trypsin and AspN.

### Publication Abstract
The colonic mucus layer is organized as a two-layered system providing a physical barrier against pathogens and simultaneously harboring the commensal flora. The factors&#xa0;contributing to the organization of this gel network are not well understood. In this study, the impact of transglutaminase activity on this architecture was analyzed. Here, we show that transglutaminase TGM3 is the major transglutaminase-isoform expressed and synthesized in the colon. Furthermore, intrinsic extracellular transglutaminase activity in the secreted mucus was demonstrated in vitro and ex vivo. Absence of this acyl-transferase activity resulted in faster degradation of the major mucus component the MUC2 mucin and changed the biochemical properties of mucus. Finally, TGM3-deficient mice showed an early increased susceptibility to Dextran Sodium Sulfate-induced colitis. Here, we report that natural isopeptide cross-linking by TGM3 is important for mucus homeostasis and protection of the colon from inflammation, reducing the risk of colitis.

### Keywords
Muc2, Transglutaminase, Mucus

### Affiliations
University of Gothenburg Institute of Biomedicine Department of Medical Biochemistry Mucin Biology Groups Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Christian Recktenwald

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Claes Hansson
University of Gothenburg Institute of Biomedicine Department of Medical Biochemistry Mucin Biology Groups Sweden


