### Accession
PXD039424

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the mandibular glands from the Chinese crocodile lizard, Shinisaurus crocodilurus – another venomous lizard?

### Description
Based on its phylogenetic relationship to monitor lizards (Varanidae), Gila monsters (Heloderma spp.), and the earless monitor Lanthanotus borneesis, the Chinese crocodile lizard, Shinisaurus crocodilurus, has been assigned to the Toxicofera clade, which comprises venomous reptiles. However, no data about composition and biological activities of its oral secretion have been reported. In the present study, a proteomic analysis of the mandibular gland of S. crocodilurus and, for comparison, of the herbivorous Solomon Island skink Corucia zebrata, was performed. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the teeth from S. crocodilurus revealed a sharp ridge on the anterior surface, but no grooves, whereas those of C. zebrata possess a flattened crown with a pointed cusp. Proteomic analysis of their gland extracts provided no evidence of venom-derived peptides or proteins, strongly supporting the non-venomous character of these lizards.

### Sample Protocol
The mandibular glands from a captive bred specimens of S. crocodilurus (adult male, 38 cm total body length) and Salomon Island skink, C. zebrata (adult male, 35 cm total body length), which both had been kept frozen at -20 oC after their natural death, were excised, homogenized in physiological saline by ultrasonication and centrifuged at 3.000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant was lyophilized and submitted to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mandibular gland extracts of S. crocodilurus and C. zebrata were analysed using two proteomic strategies: a 'shotgun' MS/MS approach (Lomonte et al., 2020), and a SDS-PAGE decomplexation bottom-up LC-MS/MS workflow (Calvete, 2014).   For the shotgun analysis, 15 μg of total proteins extracted from the pooled left and right gland extract were diluted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min at 56 °C), alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (20 min in the dark), and digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (37 °C, overnight). After stopping the reaction with 0.5 μL of formic acid, the tryptic peptide digests were centrifuged and separated by RP-HPLC on a nano-Easy 1200 chromatograph (Thermo) on-line with a Q-Exactive Plus® mass spectrometer (Thermo). Ten μL samples (~0.7 μg of peptide mixture) were loaded onto a C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm particle; Thermo), washed with 0.1% formic acid (solution A), and separated at 200 nL/min on a C18 Easyspray PepMap® column (75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm particle; Thermo). A gradient toward solution B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was developed for a total of 45 min (1–5% B in 1 min, 5–26% B in 30 min, 26–79% B in 6 min, 79–99% B in 2 min, and 99% B for 6 min). MS spectra were acquired in positive mode at 1.9 kV, with a capillary temperature of 200 °C, using 1 μscan in the range 400–1600 m/z, maximum injection time of 50 msec, AGC target of 1×106, and resolution of 70,000. The top 10 ions with 2–5 positive charges were fragmented with AGC target of 3×106, minimum AGC 2×103, maximum injection time 110 msec, dynamic exclusion time 5 s, and resolution 17,500. MS/MS spectra were processed against protein sequences contained in the UniProt database for Lepidosauria (February 2020; 294,690 entries) using Peaks X® (Bioinformatics Solutions). Parent and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 15.0 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin in semispecific mode were allowed. Filtration parameters for match acceptance were set to FDR<0.1%, detection of ≥1 unique peptide, and -10lgP protein score ≥30.    For the bottom-up strategy, the proteins extracted from the left and right mandibular gland of S. crocodilurus and C. zebrata were separated by SDS-PAGE in 10% polyacrylamide gels run under reduced conditions. Protein bands were excised from Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained gels and subjected to automated in-gel reduction and alkylation (as described above for the 'shotgun' MS/MS approach) on a Genomics Solution ProGest™ Protein Digestion Workstation. Tryptic digests were submitted to MS/MS analysis on a nano-Acquity UltraPerformance LC® (UPLC®) equipped with a BEH130 C18 (100µm x 100mm, 1.7 µm particle size) column in-line with a Waters SYNAPT G2 High Definition mass spectrometer. Doubly and triply charged ions were selected for CID-MS/MS. Fragmentation spectra were submitted to MASCOT Server (version 2.6) at http://www.matrixscience.com and matched against the last update of the NCBI non-redundant database.

### Publication Abstract
Based on its phylogenetic relationship to monitor lizards (Varanidae), Gila monsters (Heloderma spp.), and the earless monitor Lanthanotus borneesis, the Chinese crocodile lizard, Shinisaurus crocodilurus, has been assigned to the Toxicofera clade, which comprises venomous reptiles. However, no data about composition and biological activities of its oral secretion have been reported. In the present study, a proteomic analysis of the mandibular gland of S. crocodilurus and, for comparison, of the herbivorous Solomon Island skink Corucia zebrata, was performed. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of the teeth from S. crocodilurus revealed a sharp ridge on the anterior surface, but no grooves, whereas those of C. zebrata possess a flattened crown with a pointed cusp. Proteomic analysis of their gland extracts provided no evidence of venom-derived peptides or proteins, strongly supporting the non-venomous character of these lizards. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039424.

### Keywords
Chinese crocodile lizard; shinisaurus crocodilurus; solomon island skink; corucia zebrata; mandibular gland; proteomic analysis.

### Affiliations
CSIC 
Evolutionary and translational venomics Lab, Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC

### Submitter
Davinia Pla 

### Lab Head
Dr Juan José Calvete Chornet
Evolutionary and translational venomics Lab, Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC


