### Accession
PXD035435

### Title
Blue light promotes zero-valent sulfur production in a deep-sea bacterium

### Description
Bacteria isolated from diverse environments were found to sense blue light to regulate their biological functions. However, this ability of deep-sea bacteria has been studied rarely. In this study, we found serendipitously that blue light stimulated excess zero-valent sulfur (ZVS) production of E. flavus 21-3, which was isolated from the deep-sea cold seep and possessed a novel thiosulfate oxidation pathway. Its ZVS production responding to the blue light was mediated by a light-oxygen-voltage histidine kinase (LOV-1477), a diguanylate cyclase (DGC-2902), a PilZ protein (mPilZ-1753) and the key thiosulfate dehydrogenase (TsdA) in its thiosulfate oxidation pathway. Subsequently, the thiosulfohydrolase (SoxB-277) was found working with another SoxB (SoxB-285) and being as substitute for each other to generate ZVS. This study provided an example of deep-sea bacteria sensing blue light to regulate thiosulfate oxidation. Deep-sea blue light potentially helped these blue-light-sensing bacteria adapt harsh conditions by diversifying their biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Culitvatted the strain with 100 mM thiosulfate in blue light or the dark for 48 hours or 72 hours.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against NCBI database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Light, Adaptive strategy, Deep-sea bacterium, Thiosulfate oxidation, Zero-valent sulfur

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ruining Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Chaomin Sun
Institute of Oceanology Chinese Academy of Sciences


