### Accession
PXD038237

### Title
The NFIB/CARM1 Partnership is a Therapeutic Target for Small Cell Lung Cancer

### Description
This project identified NFI family members as CARM1 substrates. NFIB was previously reported to play a critical role in the development of small cell lung cancer. We provided evidence that the arginine methylation of NFIB is required for its oncogenic function in small cell lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins from MEFs or HeLa cells were loaded into SDS-PAGE gel and electrophorized for 20 minutes. The gel plug containing the proteins of interest was excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were eluted and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using the Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC in line with the Orbitrap Fusion hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were assigned to peptide sequences using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo) with the Sequest-HT database search algorithm. The appropriate Uniprot (mouse or human) database was used along with a list of common protein contaminants. Scaffold software (Proteome Software) provided data validation. The protein identifications were filtered for minimum 2 peptide at 95% confidence and 99% protein confidence. Lists of credible methyl-peptide sequence assignments were generated for samples from MEFs and lists of credible peptide sequence assignments were generated for samples from HeLa and H69 cells. Mass accuracy of 10 ppm MS (FT) and 0.8 Da MS/MS for ion trap. Cysteine fixed modificationwith carbamidomethylation, variable modification Met oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
The coactivator associated arginine methyltransferase (CARM1) promotes transcription, as its name implies. It does so by modifying histones and chromatin bound proteins. We identified nuclear factor I B (NFIB) as a CARM1 substrate and show that this transcription factor utilizes CARM1 as a coactivator. Biochemical studies reveal that tripartite motif 29 (TRIM29) is an effector molecule for methylated NFIB. Importantly, NFIB harbors both oncogenic and metastatic activities, and is often overexpressed in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Here, we explore the possibility that CARM1 methylation of NFIB is important for its transforming activity. Using a SCLC mouse model, we show that both CARM1 and the CARM1 methylation site on NFIB are critical for the rapid onset of SCLC. Furthermore, CARM1 and methylated NFIB are responsible for maintaining similar open chromatin states in tumors. Together, these findings suggest that CARM1 might be a therapeutic target for SCLC.

### Keywords
Sclc, Nfib, Carm1, Trim29, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Maria Person

### Lab Head
Dr Mark T. Bedford
Professor, Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX


