### Accession
PXD006546

### Title
Disassembly of Functional Membrane Microdomains Relapses Antibiotic Resistance in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Bacteria spatially confine cellular processes like protease secretion and signal transduction in membrane platforms termed functional membrane microdomains, which in certain organisational and functional features resemble the lipid rafts of eukaryotic cells. However, a rigorous understanding of their composition, assembly and biological significance is unknown. Here we use the human pathogen methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) to show that the organization of these platforms requires a preferential interaction between unphosphorylated membrane saccharolipids and the scaffold protein flotillin. This interaction leads to their accumulation in specific membrane microdomains concomitantly to the attraction of membrane-associated multimeric complexes, for which flotillin promotes efficient oligomerization. One of these harbored proteins is the penicillin-binding protein PBP2a, responsible for penicillin resistance in MRSA. We took PBP2a as showcase to demonstrate that flotillin mutants are also defective in PBP2a oligomerization and activity. Thus, perturbation of microdomains assembly, using commercially available drugs, interferes with PBP2a oligomerization and causes a relapse of MRSA penicillin resistance in vitro and in vivo, resulting in MRSA infections susceptible to conventional penicillin treatments. Our study shows that bacterial cells organize sophisticated programs for cellular compartmentalization and unravels a novel strategy to develop antimicrobial therapies for multi-drug resistance pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Proteins were reduced in 1x LDS sample buffer (Thermo Scientific) with 50mM DTT for 5 min at 95 °C, alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark and precipitated with an 4.5-fold volume of -20 °C cold acetone. Protein pellets were washed 3 times with 400 ul cold acetone. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digests were performed first with 0.5 ug LysC (Wako) for 1 h at 30 °C, 600 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf), then 0.5 ug trypsin (Promega) was added and allowed to digest overnight at 37 °C, 600 rpm. SDC was removed by extraction with ethylacetate [1]. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf) to remove remaining ethylacetate. Peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips [2]. Each Stage Tip was prepared with 5 disks of C18 Empore SPE Disks (3M) in a 200 µl pipet tip. Peptides were eluted with 60 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator, and stored at -20 °C. Peptides were dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  [1] Masuda T, Tomita M, Ishihama Y (2008). J. Proteome Res. 7: 731–40. [2] Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. (2003). Anal. Chem. 75: 663–70.  LC-MS/MS analysis NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 3 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 120-minute linear gradient from 3 % to 32 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid.  MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120000 at m/z 200. Data dependent MS/MS scans were measured with a Top Speed method and a cycle time of 3 sec in the ion trap analyzer with rapid scan rate and HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision. Dynamic exclusion was applied with an exclusion duration of 60 sec; excluded from selection were isotopes, singly charged precursors and charge states greater than 7. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was 1x104. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2x105 for MS scans. For MS/MS scans, recommended universal method settings were applied (AGC target: 3x103, max. injection time: 0.25 s, injection of ions for all available parallelizable time). EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis For MS raw data file processing, database searches and quantification, MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 was used [1]. The search was performed against a Staphylococcus aureus database derived from UniProt. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity and 3 allowed miscleavages.  Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Q) and oxidation (on Met). For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used [2]. Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.  Further data analysis steps were done with in-house developed R scripts. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples (total lysate) were imputed with values close to the baseline if intensities in the corresponding DRM or DSM samples were present. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 1% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.3. For all experimental conditions, protein ratios of LFQ intensities from DRM or DSM against total lysate were calculated. For the identification of significantly enriched proteins, robust boxplot based statistics were used. Briefly, outliers from intensity binned (at least 200 per bin) protein ratio distributions with a values outside of the 1.5x or 3x interquartile range (IQR) were identified. For distance matrix calculations and hierarchical clustering, R functions dist (“Euclidean”) and hclust (“ward.D2”) were used. [1] Cox, J. and Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 2008, 26, pp 1367-72. [2] Cox J., Hein M. Y., Luber C. A., Paron I., Nagaraj N., and Mann M., Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics, 2014, 13, pp 2513–2526.

### Publication Abstract
A number of bacterial cell processes are confined functional membrane microdomains (FMMs), structurally and functionally similar to lipid rafts of eukaryotic cells. How bacteria organize these intricate platforms and what their biological significance is remain important questions. Using the pathogen methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), we show here that membrane-carotenoid interaction with the scaffold protein flotillin leads to FMM formation, which can be visualized using super-resolution array tomography. These membrane platforms accumulate multimeric protein complexes, for which flotillin facilitates efficient oligomerization. One of these proteins is PBP2a, responsible for penicillin resistance in MRSA. Flotillin mutants are defective in PBP2a oligomerization. Perturbation of FMM assembly using available drugs interferes with PBP2a oligomerization and disables MRSA penicillin resistance in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo, resulting in MRSA infections that are susceptible to penicillin treatment. Our study demonstrates that bacteria possess sophisticated cell organization programs and defines alternative therapies to fight multidrug-resistant pathogens using conventional antibiotics.

### Keywords
Membrane platforms, Lc-ms/ms, Drm, Staphylococcus aureus, Dsm

### Affiliations
University Wuerzburg
Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine University of Wuerzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Wuerzburg Germany

### Submitter
Jens Vanselow

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine University of Wuerzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Wuerzburg Germany


