### Accession
PXD028245

### Title
Global phosphoproteomics in SCF stimulated  human skin mast cells

### Description
Global phosphoproteomics can reveal signaling cascades in unprecedented detail. The SCF/KIT axis represents a vital hematopoietic receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) system with gain-of-function mutations prompting the development of mastocytosis and leukemia. Here, we employed a label-free phosphoproteomics profiling strategy to provide the first comprehensive portrayal of SCF-triggered phosphosignaling. Employing untransformed skin-derived mast cells expressing vast amounts of KIT, we uncover around 10,500 class-I-phosphosites following ligand-induced KIT dimerization. Apart from STAT5, the MEK/ERK cascade (including upstream and downstream events) stood out as highly stimulatable by SCF compared to less impacted PI3K/Akt>p38>JNK, a pattern validated by time-resolved immunoblotting. Direct comparison between MEK/ERKÕs and PI3KÕs support of basic programs (anti-apoptosis, cell cycle progression) revealed equipotency with substantial redundancy between the modules. In functional outputs, ERK showed dominance over PI3K regarding cytokine stimulation (TNF-a, IL-8, LIF, OSM) and was the only contributor in the induction of immediate early genes (Fos, JunB, Egr1). Our proteome-wide screen also found Å1,000 phosphosites currently undescribed in databases, pertaining to multiple protein classes. Among candidates, capicua (and components of its network) experienced massive phosphorylation by SCF. Perturbation with capicua by RNA interference unveiled its function as a potent KIT repressor, whose deregulation may contribute to the development of mastocytosis. We demonstrate the utility of an unbiased approach to uncover single protein entities and entire networks activated by RTKs, that can be surveyed experimentally. This rich resource enhances our understanding of RTK-elicited signaling networks and can serve as a benchmark to identify pathological processes, e.g. under circumstances of KIT deregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Mast cells were stimulated with SCF (10 ng/ml) (or PBS as control) for 8 or 30 minutes, lysed, trypsin digested, desalted. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using IMAC. Peptides were separated on a 20-cm-reversed-phase column connected to a High-Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Berlin, Germany). The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in the data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collision dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (v1.6.2.6) using decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2019-07) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q), phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide, protein and site identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification.  “Match between runs” and integrated LFQ quantitation algorithm were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Scf, Phosphoproteome, Mast cells

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Core Unit Proteomics, Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Core Unit Proteomics, Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin Germany


