### Accession
PXD046944

### Title
NMDA glutamate receptor antagonist MK-801 induces proteome changes in adult human brain slices which are partially counteracted by haloperidol and clozapine

### Description
Deciphering the molecular pathways associated with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAr) hypofunction and its interaction with antipsychotics is necessary to advance our understanding of the basis of schizophrenia, as well as our capacity to treat this disease. In this regard, the development of human brain-derived models amenable for studying the neurobiology of schizophrenia may contribute to fill the gaps led by the widely employed animal models. Here we assessed the proteomic changes induced by the NMDA glutamate receptor antagonist MK-801 on human brain slice cultures obtained from adult donors submitted to resective neurosurgery. Initially, we demonstrated that MK-801 diminishes NMDA glutamate receptor signaling in human brain slices in culture. Next, using mass- spectrometry-based proteomics and systems biology in silico analyses, we found that MK-801 led to alterations in proteins related to several pathways previously associated with schizophrenia pathophysiology including ephrin, opioid, melatonin, sirtuin signaling, interleukin 8, endocannabinoid and synaptic vesicle cycle. We also evaluated the impact of both typical and atypical antipsychotics on MK-801-induced proteome changes. Interestingly, the atypical antipsychotic clozapine showed a more significant capacity to counteract the protein alterations induced by NMDAr hypofunction than haloperidol. Finally, using our dataset we identified potential modulators of the MK-801-induced proteome changes, which may be considered promising targets to treat NMDAr hypofunction in schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Slices were subjected to a brief sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to desalt samples. The whole lane was cut from the gel and the proteins were subjected to reduction and alkylation by incubation with 100 μl of 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Amersham Biosciences) for 20 min in the dark at RT. Trypsin (sequencing grade; Sigma-Aldrich/Promega) was used for digestion, (1:50 enzyme: substrate), with overnight incubation (12–16 h) at 37 °C as described (SHEVCHENKO et al., 2006). Incubation of formic acid (5%) for 5 minutes at RT was used to stop the digestion. Then, samples were centrifuge for 45 min at 4 °C and 20,850×g (Eppendorf 5430R Microcentrifuge (RRID:SCR_019849) and the supernatants were transferred to low binding microtubes (Axygen, Cat.# MCT-150-L-C). Lastly, samples were concentrated in the Eppendorf Vacufuge Plus Concentrator (RRID:SCR_019876) and reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH10, and the concentration of peptides was determined (DeNovix—DS11 Spectrophotometer) and samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL with 20 mM. The experiment was performed in a blinding condition.  2.4.2 NanoLC-ESI MS/MS Peptides were injected into an ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) M-Class coupled online to a Waters Synapt G2 Mass Spectrometer (RRID:SCR_020880). Samples were loaded into an XBridge BEH130 C18 5µm x 300 µm x 50 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA), to perform prior fractionation of the peptides. This one-dimensional separation was carried out using 5 binary gradients with 20 mM pH 10 ammonium formate in acetonitrile (ACN), at 400 nL.min-1. Eluted peptides were trapped in a Symmetry C18 5 µm x 180 µm x 20 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA), and buffer was exchanged to ACN containing 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 2 µL.min-1. The two-dimensional separation was performed in an HSS T3 1.8 µm x 75 µm x 150 mm column (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA), using a binary gradient from 3 to 40 % ACN with 0.1 % formic acid, during 36 min, followed by a binary gradient from 40 to 85% during 15 min, at a flow rate of 400 nL.min-1. Fractionated peptides were ionized by nano-Electrospray in positive mode (nano-ESI+) and the mass-spectrometry analysis was performed in Data-Independent Acquisition settings. The precursor ions were separated in ion mobility and fractionated by collision-induced dissociation (HDMSE, Waters (RRID:SCR_024589)). The acquisition range utilized was 50 to 2000 m/z, using a collision energy fragmentation ramp of 19 to 53 eV. Glu-fibrinopeptide B was used as a reference lock mass compound. The experiment was performed in blinding condition (the experiment was performed by a different person than the experimenter).

### Data Protocol
Processing Parameters and Database Search Raw data processing, protein identification, and protein quantitation were performed using the Progenesis QI for proteomics 4.0 and Ion Accounting algorithm ((RRID:SCR_018923) - Nonlinear Dynamics). The processing parameters included automatic mode for MS-TOF resolution and chromatographic peak width. The low and elevated-energy detection thresholds were optimized by the software. A minimumMinimum of 2 fragment ions matched per peptide, a minimum of 5 fragment ions matched per protein, a minimum of 1 unique peptide matched per protein, 1 possible trypsin missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The experiment was performed in blinding conditionscondition (the experiment was performed by a different person than the experimenter).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antipsychotics, Organotypic culture, Schizophrenia, Nmdar hypofunction, Haloperidol, Clozapine

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, DBBT, IB, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Brazil
University of Campinas

### Submitter
Guilherme Reis-de-Oliveira

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, DBBT, IB, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Brazil


