### Accession
PXD017122

### Title
An integrated model system to study biofilm-associated adaptation to antimicrobials and resistance evolution in Pseudomonas aeruginosa MPAO1

### Description
Using an integrated model system for reproducible growth of biofilms, a JPIAMR-funded consortium of researchers* studied the expressed proteome of P. aeruginosa strain MPAO1 under i) planktonic growth, and ii) biofilm formation conditions. The model system included, as a first step, the sequencing and de novo assembly of the complete genome of this opportunistic human pathogen that belongs to the notorious group of Gram-negative ESKAPE pathogens. MPAO1 is also the parental strain for the widely used transposon (Tn) mutant library from the University of Washington. The complete MPAO1 genome sequence turned out to harbor several deletions and insertions compared to the PAO1-UW reference genome including numerous MPAO1-unique genes. As a second step in the model system, a biofilm flow cell based on poly (dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) was designed to reproducibly study and identify known and novel genes related to biofilm growth and antibiotic resistance (ABR) from the Tn mutant collection. With the complete genome as optimal basis, publicly available TnSeq data were reanalyzed to identify known and novel essential genes. Furthermore, shotgun proteomics data was generated uncovering 1530 (planktonic) and 1728 (biofilm) expressed proteins, respectively, resulting in the identification of 1922 (33.1%) of the 5799 annotated P. aeruginosa MPAO1 proteins. They included proteins known to be differentially expressed during biofilm formation, and proteogenomic evidence for proteins uniquely encoded by MPAO1 as well as novel proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For planktonic protein extractions, 10 mL MPAO1 (three replicates) was grown overnight (~18 h) in M9 medium under gentle rotation (150 rpm), centrifuged at 4,000 xg/5 min/RT, and the pellet resuspended in 1 mL Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). Biofilms were grown for 72 h (three replicates) using the microfluidic device as previously described, the PDMS device removed from the glass coverslip, and the combined biofilm biomass from 3 lanes harvested into 1 mL HBSS. Cells from both populations were washed twice in HBSS at 10,000 xg/5 min/RT and the pellets resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 35 mM CHAPS, 20 mM DTT, 1 M NaCl). Samples were frozen at -80 oC for 30 min and then thawed at 34 oC for 20 min. Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation was performed by adding the bacterial samples to 100% ice-cold acetone and 100% trichloroacetic acid in a 1:8:1 ratio and precipitating at -20 oC for 1 h. Samples were then centrifuged (18,000 xg/10 min/4 oC), the supernatant discarded, and the pellet washed twice with 1 mL ice-cold acetone (18,000 xg/10 min/4 oC). Acetone was removed, the pellet air-dried at room temperature, and resuspended in 0.1 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) plus 0.1 % Rapigest. Protein sample validation was performed by 1DE gel electrophoresis Protein samples were heated at 80 oC for 10 min, then DTT added at a final concentration of 2 mM and incubated at 60 oC for 45 min. Samples were then briefly vortexed, pulse spun, and cooled to room temperature before adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 6 mM. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 45 min (protected from light), vortexed and pulse spun briefly, then trypsin was added at a final concentration of 1.3 µg/mL. Following incubation overnight at 37 oC (protected from light), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.5% then incubated at 37 oC for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 xg for 10 min at RT, the supernatants removed and vacuum concentrated. The resultant pellets were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and peptide quantification was performed using the Direct Detect system (Merck Millipore) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples were normalized then vacuum concentrated in preparation for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Peptide extracts (1 µg on column) were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) using a PepMap C18 EASY-Spray LC column (2 μm particle size, 75 μm x 75 cm column (Thermo Scientific)) over a 140 min (single run) linear gradient of 3–25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were introduced using an EASY‐Spray source at 2000 V to a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. Full MS spectra were recorded from 300 to 1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution using TopSpeed mode at a cycle time of 3 s. Peptide ions were isolated using an isolation width of 1.6 amu and trapped at a maximal injection time of 120 ms with an AGC target of 300,000. Higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was induced at an energy setting of 28 for peptides with a charge state of 2–4. Fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution. Analysis of raw data was performed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific) and the data processed to generate reduced charge state and deisotoped precursor and associated product ion peak lists. These peak lists were searched against the P. aeruginosa MPAO1 protein database (5799 proteins + 256 common contaminants). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic digestion and the variable modification was set to contain oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with randomized decoy database searches and was adjusted to below 1% FDR at the protein level. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were identified with DESeq2.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa MPAO1 is the parental strain of the widely utilized transposon mutant collection for this important clinical pathogen. Here, we validate a model system to identify genes involved in biofilm growth and biofilm-associated antibiotic resistance. Our model employs a genomics-driven workflow to assemble the complete MPAO1 genome, identify unique and conserved genes by comparative genomics with the PAO1 reference strain and genes missed within existing assemblies by proteogenomics. Among over 200 unique MPAO1 genes, we identified six general essential genes that were overlooked when mapping public Tn-seq data sets against PAO1, including an antitoxin. Genomic data were integrated with phenotypic data from an experimental workflow using a user-friendly, soft lithography-based microfluidic flow chamber for biofilm growth and a screen with the Tn-mutant library in microtiter plates. The screen identified hitherto unknown genes involved in biofilm growth and antibiotic resistance. Experiments conducted with the flow chamber across three laboratories delivered reproducible data on P. aeruginosa biofilms and validated the function of both known genes and genes identified in the Tn-mutant screens. Differential protein abundance data from planktonic cells versus biofilm confirmed the upregulation of candidates known to affect biofilm formation, of structural and secreted proteins of type VI secretion systems, and provided proteogenomic evidence for some missed MPAO1 genes. This integrated, broadly applicable model promises to improve the mechanistic understanding of biofilm formation, antimicrobial tolerance, and resistance evolution in biofilms.

### Keywords
Strain mpao1, Transposon sequencing, Colistin, Genome sequencing, Antimicrobials, Comparative genomics, Flow chamber, Shotgun proteomics, Antibiotic resistance related proteins, Proteogenomics, Planktonic, Biofilm, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Agroscope 
Associate Professor in Proteomics, Head of Proteomics, Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton, UK

### Submitter
Christian Ahrens

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Paul Skipp
Associate Professor in Proteomics, Head of Proteomics, Centre for Proteomic Research, University of Southampton, UK


