### Accession
PXD012760

### Title
Carboxylic acid consumption and production by Corynebacterium glutamicum_LC-MS/MS

### Description
Corynebacterium glutamicum is well-known as an industrial workhorse, most notably for its use in the bulk production of amino acids in the feed and food sector. Fast growth and robustness against oscillatory oxygen availability, which can occur in large-scale bioreactors, are advantageous properties of this bacterium. However, previous studies of the effect of gradients in scale-down reactors with complex media disclosed an accumulation of several carboxylic acids and a parallel decrease of growth and product accumulation by C. glutamicum. This study addresses the impact of carboxylic acids, e.g. acetate and L-lactate, on the cultivation process and their potential role in scale up related performance losses. In order to mimic a discontinuous oxygen supply, a fluctuating power input in shake flask and stirred tank cultivations with mineral salt was applied. One focus of this study is to identify relative changes in the proteome due to the differing availability of carboxylic acids under discontinuous oxygen supply.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were taken in triplicate from two biological replicates. Two milliliters of cell suspension were centrifuged (10 min, 4 °C, 21,500 x g). The pellet was immediately frozen and stored at −80 °C. Further processing was performed as described in detail by Voges et al., 2012. A mechanical cell disrup-tion was performed, followed by the addition of 15N labeled whole cell internal standard to the cell extract and tryptically digested. Subsequent analysis was performed with a LC-MS/MS using an Infinity 1260 HPLC system (Agilent) hyphenated to a Q-ToF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) as described by Limberg et al., 2017.  Voges R, Noack S. Quantification of proteome dynamics in Corynebacterium glutamicum by 15N-labeling and selected reaction monitoring. J Proteomics. 2012;75:2660-2669.  Limberg M, Schulte J, Aryani T, Mahr R. Metabolic profile of 1, 5-diaminopentane producing Corynebacterium glutamicum under scale-down conditions: Blueprint for robustness to bioreactor. Biotechnol. 2017;114:560-575.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and peak integration was performed with the software package PeakView® (AB Sciex). Protein identification and quantification was carried out with the software ProteinPilot™ (AB Sciex). The resulting fold change levels represent the ratio of normalized target protein peak area, which were obtained under stress conditions, to the normalized peak area, obtained under reference conditions. All results were normalized to the 15N labeled internal standard. Corresponding statistical analysis was performed via MarkerView™ (AB Sciex). The analysis was performed at the Research Center Jülich. Proteins with a fold change of between 0.5 and 2 and a p value (student test) below 0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Corynebacterium glutamicum is well-known as an industrial workhorse, most notably for its use in the bulk production of amino acids in the feed and food sector. Previous studies of the effect of gradients in scale-down reactors with complex media disclosed an accumulation of several carboxylic acids and a parallel decrease of growth and product accumulation. This study, therefore, addresses the impact of carboxylic acids, for example, acetate and l-lactate, on the cultivation of the cadaverine producing strain C. glutamicum DM1945&#x394;act3:P<sub>tuf</sub> -ldcC<sup>opt</sup> and their potential role in scale up related performance losses. A fluctuating power input in shake flask and stirred tank cultivations with mineral salt was applied to mimic discontinuous oxygen availability. Results demonstrate, whenever sufficient oxygen was available, C. glutamicum recovered from previously occurring stressful conditions like an oxygen limiting phase. Reassimilation of acids was detected simultaneously. In cultures, which were supplemented with either acetate or l-lactate, a rapid cometabolization of both acids in presence of glucose was observed, showing conversion rates of 7.8 and 3.8 mmol g<sub>cell dry weight</sub><sup>-1</sup> hr<sup>-1</sup> , respectively. Uptake of these acids was accompanied by increased oxygen consumption. Proteins related to oxidative stress response, glycogen synthesis, and the main carbon metabolism were found in altered concentrations under oscillatory cultivation conditions. (Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012760). Virtually no impact on growth or product formation was observed. We conclude that the reduced growth and product formation in scale-down cultivations when complex media was used is not caused by the accumulation of carboxylic acids.

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Carboxylic acid, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Oxygen oscillation, Scale down

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH
Institute of Bio- and Geosciences IBG-1: Biotechnology Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH 52425 Jülich Germany

### Submitter
Bianca Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Oldiges
Institute of Bio- and Geosciences IBG-1: Biotechnology Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH 52425 Jülich Germany


