### Accession
PXD021491

### Title
Molecular characterization of triple negative breast cancer formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded samples by DIA  proteomics

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all breast carcinomas and it is clinically characterized by an aggressive phenotype and bad prognosis. TNBC does not benefit from any targeted therapy, so further characterization is needed to define subgroups with potential therapeutic value. In this work, the proteomes of one hundred twenty-five formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples from patients diagnosed with triple negative breast cancer were analyzed by mass spectrometry using data-independent acquisition. Hierarchical clustering, probabilistic graphical models and Significance Analysis of Microarrays were used to characterize molecular groups. Additionally, a predictive signature related with relapse was defined. Two molecular groups with differences in several biological processes as glycolysis, translation and immune response, were defined in this cohort, and a prognostic signature based on the abundance of proteins RBM3 and NIPSNAP1 was defined. This predictor split the population into low-risk and high-risk groups. The differential processes identified between the two molecular groups may serve to design new therapeutic strategies in the future and the prognostic signature could be useful to identify a population at high-risk of relapse that could be directed to clinical trials.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples were reviewed by an experienced pathologist and only samples with at least 50% of tumor cells were selected for the study. FFPE sections were deparaffined in xylene and washed twice in ethanol. Protein extracts were eluted in 2% SDS and protein concentration was measured using MicroBCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide isolations were digested by trypsin and SDS was removed employing Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile. Isotopically labeled peptides were added to peptide mixes and used as internal standard for quantification. Peptide mixtures derived from the FFPE samples were analyzed using a DIA+ method in a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased to 22% buffer B and 78% A in 109 min and then to 35% buffer B and 65% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with an EASY-Spray nanosource with spray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode, with a full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 400–1,350 with detection in the Orbitrap (60K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 200,000. The isolation scheme used was the same as previously reported (20). A normalized collision energy of 28% +/-5% was used for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. MS2 scan range was set from 350 to 1850 m/z, with an AGC Target of 5.0e4 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The maximum injection time was set to 20 ms per segment, making a total of a maximum injection time of 60 ms per composite window. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 30K resolution. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were transformed to mzXML file format with msconvert from the ProteoWizard suite v3.0.9393. Converted mzXML were further analyzed using DIA Umpire v2.1.2 with the search engine Comet v2016.01 rev.0 with trypsin specificity, one allowed missed cleavage, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification (+15.9949), and carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification (+57.0214). Error tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.02 Da at MS2. The swissprot human protein database with reviewed entries and decoys was used as reference database (version April 2016). Peptides and proteins identifications were filtered at 1% FDR. Peptide quantitation was based on the sum of the six most intense fragment ions. The median of all the spiked heavy peptides was used for data normalization. Protein abundances were estimated from normalized peptide abundances using the MSstats software (v3.10.6). Two samples that exhibited less than 600 identified proteins were removed from the dataset for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Triple negative breast cancer accounts for 15%-20% of all breast carcinomas and is clinically characterized by an aggressive phenotype and poor prognosis. Triple negative tumors do not benefit from targeted therapies, so further characterization is needed to define subgroups with potential therapeutic value. In this work, the proteomes of 125 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples from patients diagnosed with non-metastatic triple negative breast cancer were analyzed using data-independent acquisition + in a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000. 1206 proteins were identified in at least 66% of the samples. Hierarchical clustering, probabilistic graphical models and Significance Analysis of Microarrays were combined to characterize proteomics-based molecular groups. Two molecular groups were defined with differences in biological processes such as glycolysis, translation and immune response. These two molecular groups showed also several differentially expressed proteins. This clinically homogenous dataset may serve to design new therapeutic strategies in the future.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Breast cancer, Dia, Dia+

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology & Pathology Lab, Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics-INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain Biomedical Research Networking Center on Oncology-CIBERONC, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain
University Pompeu Fabra

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Ángel Fresno Vara
Molecular Oncology & Pathology Lab, Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics-INGEMM, La Paz University Hospital-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain Biomedical Research Networking Center on Oncology-CIBERONC, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain


