### Accession
PXD014786

### Title
A proteomic approach for characterizing trastuzumab-emtansine modified for nuclear directed localization that enhances cytotoxicity identifies regulatory nuclear transport receptor.

### Description
We used the approved antibody-drug conjugate trastuzumab-emtansine and the HER2+ cell line SKBR3. We also used a novel technology termed cell accumulator (Accum) that enables mAbs to escape endosome entrapment and localize to the cell nucleus without abrogating antibody affinity or specificity to target antigens. Accum harbors a well-known nuclear localization signal (NLS) sequence recognized by the classic nuclear transportation receptor (NTR) complex alpha-importin/importin-beta. Accum-modification of T-DM1 resulted in a significant increase in cytotoxic potency. We sought to understand the mechanisms through which Accum-T-DM1 localized to the nucleus and increased tumor cell killing effectiveness.

### Sample Protocol
15 million SKBR3 cells were seeded in a 150 mm dish 24 h prior to experimentation. Cells were treated with 7.5 µg/mL of Tmab, T-DM1 or Accum-T-DM1 for 2 h at 37 °C. Cells were then washed twice with PBS at RT and then lysed with ice-cold RIPA buffer (Tris-HCl 50 mM, pH 7.5 at 25 °C, NaCl 150 mM, 1% v/v Triton X-100, 0.5% w/v sodium deoxycholate, PMSF 1 mM, NaF 5 mM). Lysates were passed 10 times through a 21-gauge needle and tubes centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 min to pellet insoluble cell debris. Supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and diluted at a 1:1 ratio in RIPA buffer. 25 µl of protein G-coated magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 10003D) were equilibrated by washing twice in RIPA buffer and then mixed with 1.5 mL of diluted cell lysate for 1 h at RT with inversion. Beads were isolated on a magnetic rack and washed four times in PBS. Beads from pull-downs were transferred to fresh tubes and washed five times with 20 mM NH4HCO3 in MS grade water. After the final wash, the beads were suspended in 100 µl of NH4HCO3 buffer in which they were subsequently reduced (10 mM DTT, 60°C, 30 min) alkylated (15mM IAA, 1h, RT in the dark) and quenched (15mM DTT FC, 10 min).On bead digestion was performed by adding 1 µg of MS-grade trypsin (Promega, V5280) to each tube and incubating at 37 °C with shaking overnight. Digestion was quenched by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were transferred to a new tube and beads were further washed with 60% ACN/0.1% FA in water. The supernatants were then pooled and then dried under vacuum. Peptides desalting was made using C18 tips which were wetted and equilibrated with 100% ACN and 0,1% TFA in water respectively. Peptides in 0,1% TFA in water were bound to the resin by pipetting up and down 10 times in a separate tube until the full volume of the digest went through and further washed with 0,1% TFA three times. Cleaned-up peptides were eluted with 1% FA/50% ACN, vacuum dried and resuspended in 1% FA. The trypsin-digested purified peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 2 μg of the sample in 1% formic acid (v:v) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 μm × 50 cm) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files from the performed HPLC-MS/MS were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1).  Specificity was set to trypsin, defined as cleavage after lysine or arginine not before proline, maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed, and peptides had to be at least 7 amino acids long. Variable amino acid modification included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Fixed modification included cysteine carbamidomethylation. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 7 ppm, and 20 ppm, respectively. Spectra were searched against the UniprotKB (Homo sapiens, 11/12/2018, 88,354 entries (28)) for protein identification with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Potential contaminants, reverse peptides, proteins only identified by sites, with fewer than two unique peptides, and duplicated proteins in the data matrix were excluded. The three replicates that exhibited the most internal reproducibility, to avoid artificial enrichment or impoverishment due to variation in sample processing, were selected for further analysis. Accum-specific interactors were determined with Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT). Spectral count obtained from MaxQuant were imputed into CRAPome. The I:III bait model had Accum set as bait and negative controls set as T-DM1, Tmab, and beads only. Primary (high-confidence) and secondary (medium confidence) SAINT score (STSc) thresholds were set at ≥0.9 and ≥0.5, respectively. SAINT analysis was also performed with a I:I:I:I model with Accum, Tmab, and T-DM1 as independent baits with beads-only as control. STSc cut-off was 0.9 and included CRAPome controls (CC405, 406, and 410). For the I:III model, a gene list was extracted from the SAINT results using the secondary threshold (STSc) 0.5 and inputted into GeneMANIA (GM; version 3.5.0 (30)) in Cytoscape (version 3.6.1). The SAINT analysis results were then incorporated into Cytoscape to determine the contribution of each protein clusters to the network. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed by GM to highlight the most enriched Gene Ontology terms (GO terms) and used to systematically attribute a “generic pathway” to each protein in the network according to their main function. Proteins that could not be attributed to a generic pathway through GM were manually searched in Uniprot Knowledgebase, Human Protein Atlas and Pubmed and assigned to their most significant function. For the I:I:I:I model, each individual gene list, obtained from the SAINT analysis, were generated with the primary threshold (STSc 0.9) and independently inputted into GM. The GSEA results were extracted and common pathways were assessed using the Bioinformatics & Evolutionary Genomics tool for Venn diagram (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/). Q-values obtained from GM were transformed for visualization purpose with the following equation: log(1/q-value). As the I:I:I:I model was only used to confirm the findings of the I:III model, generic pathways were only assigned using GM analysis results, without a manual search through databases.

### Publication Abstract
The next breakthrough for protein therapeutics is effective intracellular delivery and accumulation within target cells. Nuclear localization signal (NLS)-tagged therapeutics have been hindered by the lack of efficient nuclear localization due to endosome entrapment. Although development of strategies for tagging therapeutics with technologies capable of increased membrane penetration has resulted in proportional increased potency, nonspecific membrane penetration limits target specificity and, hence, widespread clinical success. There is a long-standing idea that nuclear localization of NLS-tagged agents occurs exclusively via classical nuclear transport. In the present study, we modified the antibody-drug conjugate trastuzumab-emtansine (T-DM1) with a classical NLS linked to cholic acid (cell accumulator [Accum]) that enables modified antibodies to escape endosome entrapment and increase nuclear localization efficiency without abrogating receptor targeting. In parallel, we developed a proteomics-based method to evaluate nuclear transport. Accum-modified T-DM1 significantly enhanced cytotoxic efficacy in the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive SKBR3 breast cancer system. We discovered that efficacy was dependent on the nonclassical importin-7. Our evaluation reveals that when multiple classical NLS tagging occurs, cationic charge build-up as opposed to sequence dominates and becomes a substrate for importin-7. This study results in an effective target cell-specific NLS therapeutic and a general approach to guide future NLS-based development initiatives.

### Keywords
Nano-lc-ms/ms, Protein-protein interaction, Affinity purification, Nuclear transport, Antibody-drug conjugate, Sk-br-3

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Nuclear Medicine and Radiobiology Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Université de Sherbrooke Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Vincent Lacasse

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Victor Leyton
Department of Nuclear Medicine and Radiobiology Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Université de Sherbrooke Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada


