### Accession
PXD028814

### Title
Platelet Proteomics to Understand the Pathophysiology of Immune Thrombocytopenia: Studies in Mouse Models

### Description
Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an autoimmune disease characterized by enhanced platelet clearance and defective platelet production. Diagnosis by exclusion and “trial-error” treatment strategies are common practice, and despite the advancement conferred by Thrombopoietin receptor agonists (TPO-RA´s), many patients remain refractory. While the existence of different pathophysiological entities is acknowledged, we are still far from stratifying and understanding ITP, a necessary step in order to provide personalized treatment options. We propose that the platelet proteome may give diagnostic and prognostic insights into the disease. As a proof of principle, we aimed to dissect the potential platelet proteome dynamics in the so-called passive and active pre-clinical ITP mouse models. To do that, we obtained the platelet proteome at the thrombocytopenic stage and upon platelet count recovery (reached naturally or upon IVIg-treatment, depending on the model). While most of the proteomic alterations were common to both ITP models, there were model-specific protein dynamics. Interestingly, we observed that not all proteomic alterations were restored when the platelet count has returned to normal. We discuss the biological processes associated with the proteome dynamics observed. Our results show that profiling the platelet proteome may have great potential to improve the management of ITP in humans.

### Sample Protocol
All blood samples were taken from the retro-orbital venous plexus or by cardiac puncture using EDTA- or CPDA-coated tubes. Mice were anesthetized with isofluorane and euthanized by cervical dislocation after blood collection. Platelet-rich plasma was separated by centrifuging the blood 15 minutes at 50g, and platelets were further washed for proteomic analysis. Platelets were lysed in 8M urea (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 100 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS)-HCl pH 8 (ThermoFisher Scientific). 5 μg protein was digested for 16 h at 37°C with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) in a ratio of 1:20 trypsin:protein, after standard disulfide bond reduction and alkylation procedure. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source; ThermoFisher Scientific), following standard procedures and settings. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.17.0) running on Linux. Searches were configured for label-free quantification (LFQ), with the options LFQ, match between runs and iBAQ, while the rest of the parameters were set to default. Peptides and proteins were identified using the Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus UniProt Swiss-Prot protein database (downloaded November 2020, 17,051 entries). The ‘proteinGroups.txt’ output table was further analyzed within the R environment (version 4.0.3) (R Project for Statistical Computing).

### Publication Abstract
Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an autoimmune disease characterized by enhanced platelet clearance and defective platelet production. Diagnosis by exclusion and trial-and-error treatment strategies is common practice, and despite the advancement in treatment options, many patients remain refractory. Although the existence of different pathophysiological entities is acknowledged, we are still far from stratifying and understanding ITP. To investigate, we sought to dissect the platelet proteome dynamics in so-called passive and active preclinical ITP mouse models, with which we propose to phenocopy respectively acute/newly diagnosed and persistent/chronic stages of ITP in humans. We obtained the platelet proteome at the thrombocytopenic stage and after platelet count recovery (reached naturally or by IVIg-treatment, depending on the model). Although most of the proteomic alterations were common to both ITP models, there were model-specific protein dynamics that accompanied and explained alterations in platelet aggregation responses, as measured in the passive ITP model. The expression dynamics observed in Syk may explain, extrapolated to humans and pending validation, the increased bleeding tendency of patients with ITP when treated with fostamatinib as third or later- as opposed to second line of treatment. We propose that the platelet proteome may give diagnostic and prognostic insights into ITP and that such studies should be pursued in humans.

### Keywords
Pre-clinical mouse models, Immune thrombocytopenia, Platelets, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Health Research Institute of the Principality of Asturias (ISPA)
- Platelet Research Lab, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain - Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands - Department of Medicine, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain

### Submitter
Patricia Martínez-Botía

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Gutiérrez
- Platelet Research Lab, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain - Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands - Department of Medicine, University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain


