### Accession
PXD035794

### Title
Biosynthesis of membrane-spanning ether lipids in Thermotoga maritima.

### Description
This study was conducted to identify the proteins involved in the synthesis of membrane-spanning ether lipids in Thermotoga maritima.

### Sample Protocol
T. maritima was grown in basal medium under anaerobic conditions, cultivated at 55ºC  (low) and at 80ºC (optimal) growth temperatures during the growth phases, and in 5 biological replicates. Samples were collected during early exponential phase (0.1 OD600), exponential (0.2 OD600) and at stationary phase (0.3 OD600)..The cell pellet was washed twice in 10mL of 50mM Tris HCl, pH 8, re-suspended in 100 µL buffer (50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0). Cells were lysed by sonication and 60 µg protein was loaded on a protein gel, run for 20 minutes and in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – Q-Exactive HFX  MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial membranes are composed of fatty acids (FAs) ester-linked to glycerol-3-phosphate, while archaea have membranes made of isoprenoid chains ether-linked to glycerol-1-phosphate. Many archaeal species organize their membrane as a monolayer of membrane-spanning lipids (MSLs). Exceptions to this "lipid divide" are the production by some bacterial species of (ether-bound) MSLs, formed by tail-to-tail condensation of FAs resulting in the formation of (iso) diabolic acids (DAs), which are the likely precursors of paleoclimatological relevant branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraether molecules. However, the enzymes responsible for their production are unknown. Here, we report the discovery of bacterial enzymes responsible for the condensation reaction of FAs and for ether bond formation and confirm that the building blocks of iso-DA are branched iso-FAs. Phylogenomic analyses of the key biosynthetic genes reveal a much wider diversity of potential MSL (ether)-producing bacteria than previously thought, with importantt implications for our understanding of the evolution of lipid membranes.

### Keywords
Ether lipids, Temperature, Thermotoga maritima, Lipid divide, Growth phase, Membrane-spanning lipids

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


