### Accession
PXD026546

### Title
An extracellular receptor tyrosine kinase motif orchestrating intracellular STAT activation

### Description
The ErbB4 receptor isoforms JM-a and JM-b differ within their extracellular juxtamembrane (eJM) domains. Here, ErbB4 isoforms are used as a model to address the effect of structural variation in the eJM domain of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) on downstream signaling. A specific JM-a-like sequence motif is discovered, and its presence or absence (in JM-b-like RTKs) in the eJM domains of several RTKs is demonstrated to dictate selective STAT activation. STAT5a activation by RTKs including the JM-a like motif is shown to involve interaction with oligosaccharides of N-glycosylated cell surface proteins such as β1 integrin, whereas STAT5b activation by JM-b is dependent on TYK2. ErbB4 JM-a- and JM-b-like RTKs are shown to associate with specific signaling complexes at different cell surface compartments using analyses of RTK interactomes and super-resolution imaging. These findings provide evidence for a conserved mechanism linking a ubiquitous extracellular motif in RTKs with selective intracellular STAT signaling

### Sample Protocol
For affinity enrichment, cells were starved overnight in serum-free medium, cross-linked as described above, and lysed with buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM NaF, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and a protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher  Scientific). Thirty μl of protein G magnetic beads was incubated with 32 μg of normal mouse IgG and 32 μg of normal rabbit IgG for 1 hour at 4 ⁰C, and washed 3 times with 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS.  Five mg of protein lysate was precleared with 10 μl of G-protein magnetic bead and normal IgG mixture for 1 hour 4 ⁰C. Fifty μl of a mixture of G-protein magnetic beads and crosslinked anti-ErbB4 antibody was added to the precleared protein lysate and incubated overnight at 4 ⁰C. The beads were washed 7 times with 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS and eluted by heating in 2x Laemmli sample buffer for 5 minutes at 100 ⁰C. The samples eluted in Laemmli buffer were analyzed with SDS-PAGE and Coomassie or PageBlue staining. The samples analyzed with PageBlue were fixed overnight in 25% isopropanol and 10% acetic acid mixture prior to staining. Protein bands were excised from the stained SDS-PAGE gel, destained, dried, alkylated, and trypsin-digested for 18 hours at 37 ⁰C. The peptides were extracted and dried using speed vac.   The mass spectrometry analyses were performed in the Turku Proteomics Facility at Turku Bioscience (University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University). All of the dried peptides samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before analysis with mass spectrometers. The peptides of the first experiment were analyzed with a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLCII; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Mass spectrometry data were acquired automatically using Thermo Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The peptides of the second, third and fourth experiment were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were loaded on an in-house packed 100 μm × 2 cm precolumn packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch) using 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 75 μm × 15 cm analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads. All separations were performed using a 40 minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The gradient ranged from 6% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to 36% buffer B in 30 minutes. Buffer B concentration was ramped up to 100% in 5 minutes, and 100% buffer B was run 5 minutes for washout. The DDA method consisted of a full MS scan (120,000 resolution, 3E6 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 300 to 1750 m/z, profile mode), followed by data-dependent MS/MS acquisitions on the top 20 most intense precursor ions (15,000 resolution, 5E4 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 2.0 m/z isolation window, normalized collision energy = 27, centroid mode).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with Metamorpheus (version 0.0.312) against human proteome. Proteomes contained known post-translational modifications (downloaded from Uniprot at 10.1.2021). Mass spectrometry files were calibrated, possible post-translational modifications were searched, and peptides and proteins were identified, and quantified using FlashLFQ algorithm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463) was set as a constant modification and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. All other possible modifications were set using G-DPM search in Metamorpheus. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM level. Peptides were accepted with search engine score above 5. The mass-spectrometry interactome data was normalized to the sum of LFQ intensities in every sample fraction and the normalized intensity of each sample fraction were summed to derive the total protein intensity in each sample for each protein. The total protein intensity of each protein in each experiment was additionally median normalized to correct for total abundance differences across experiments. An empirical probability density function was fitted to the total sum of intensities in each experiment of each protein in the vector control sample with an epanechnikov Kernel and the corresponding P-value for JM-a and JM-b condition were estimated from the resulting cumulative density function. The P-values were FDR-corrected for multiple testing error. Proteins with an average pseudolog2 fold change above 0.5 against the vector control and adjusted P ≤ 0.05 were considered significant interactors for JM-a and JM-b conditions.

### Publication Abstract
The ErbB4 receptor isoforms JM-a and JM-b differ within their extracellular juxtamembrane (eJM) domains. Here, ErbB4 isoforms are used as a model to address the effect of structural variation in the eJM domain of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) on downstream signaling. A specific JM-a-like sequence motif is discovered, and its presence or absence (in JM-b-like RTKs) in the eJM domains of several RTKs is demonstrated to dictate selective STAT activation. STAT5a activation by RTKs including the JM-a like motif is shown to involve interaction with oligosaccharides of N-glycosylated cell surface proteins such as &#x3b2;1 integrin, whereas STAT5b activation by JM-b is dependent on TYK2. ErbB4 JM-a- and JM-b-like RTKs are shown to associate with specific signaling complexes at different cell surface compartments using analyses of RTK interactomes and super-resolution imaging. These findings provide evidence for a conserved mechanism linking a ubiquitous extracellular motif in RTKs with selective intracellular STAT signaling.

### Keywords
Stat signaling, Jm-a, Erbb4, Receptor tyrosine kinase, Rtk, Jm-b

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience
University of Turku
Medicity Research Laboratories and Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland. Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland. Department of Oncology, Turku University Hospital, 20521 Turku, Finland.

### Submitter
Johannes Merilahti

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Elenius
Medicity Research Laboratories and Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland. Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland. Department of Oncology, Turku University Hospital, 20521 Turku, Finland.


