### Accession
PXD040147

### Title
Identification of proteins differentially associated with SARS CoV-2 subgenomic RNAs

### Description
We characterize the specific protein interactomes of 3 SARS sgRNAs (S, N, and ORF8) as well as the gRNA at two time points, 8- and 24- hours. These two timepoints were selected to capture early viral infection when RNA synthesis is just beginning, and viral replication is being established, as well as a later stage where protein synthesis and virion packaging is occurring. We identified over 500 proteins associated with one or more of the viral RNAs. These include both host and viral proteins that have been previously shown to bind to SARS-CoV-2 RNAs and novel (not previously identified) protein interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Huh-7 cells transduced to express ACE2 and TMPRSS2 infected with SARS-CoV-2 then were subjected to in vivo formaldehyde cross-linking to covalently stabilize RNA–protein and protein–protein interactions 8- or 24-hours post infection. After cell lysis, biotinylated capture oligonucleotides, designed to be complementary to the target RNA(s) gRNA, S RNA, N RNA, and ORF8 RNA, facilitate the capture of the target RNA–protein complexes. The oligonucleotide–target hybrids are isolated using streptavidin-coated magnetic beads and then released using a toehold-mediated release strategy. The proteins associated with the RNA target(s) are then purified, digested with a protease, and analyzed using an HPLC-ESI-MS/MS system consisting of a high-performance liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity, Waters) set in line with an electrospray ionization (ESI) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were analyzed with the free and open-source search software program MetaMorpheus taking default settings against the reviewed Swiss-Prot human XML (canonical) database and a SARS-CoV-2 Database.  In addition, all samples were searched with the built-in Metamorpheus database of common contaminants. A 1% FDR for both peptides and proteins was applied. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed for protein identification and quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Host RNA binding proteins recognize viral RNA and play key roles in virus replication and antiviral defense mechanisms. SARS-CoV-2 generates a series of tiered subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs), each encoding distinct viral protein(s) that regulate different aspects of viral replication. Here, for the first time, we demonstrate the successful isolation of SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA and three distinct sgRNAs (N, S, and ORF8) from a single population of infected cells and characterize their protein interactomes. Over 500 protein interactors (including 260 previously unknown) were identified as associated with one or more target RNA at either of two time points. These included protein interactors unique to a single RNA pool and others present in multiple pools, highlighting our ability to discriminate between distinct viral RNA interactomes despite high sequence similarity. The interactomes indicated viral associations with cell response pathways including regulation of cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules and posttranscriptional gene silencing. We validated the significance of five protein interactors predicted to exhibit antiviral activity (APOBEC3F, TRIM71, PPP1CC, LIN28B, and MSI2) using siRNA knockdowns, with each knockdown yielding increases in viral production. This study describes new technology for studying SARS-CoV-2 and reveals a wealth of new viral RNA-associated host factors of potential functional significance to infection.

### Keywords
Interactome, Viral, Rna binding proteins, N rna, Rna-protein interactions, Hybridization, Sars cov-2, Orf8 rna, Rna metabolism, Proteomics, S rna, Mass spectrometry, Grna

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Isabella Whitworth

### Lab Head
Dr Identification of proteins differentially associated with SARS CoV-2 subgenomic RNAs
Department of Chemistry University of Wisconsin-Madison


