### Accession
PXD031121

### Title
Comparison of the recognition capacity of Acanthamoeba castellanii and murine macrophages the fungal cell wall

### Description
Identification of high affinity receptors for mannosylated fungal cell wall residues expressed on the surface of amoebas and macrophages and was determinatedetermined the relative importance of these pathways in the antifungal response,s comparing the phagocytic models.

### Sample Protocol
Extracts, containing Ac biotinylated surface proteins with β-1,3-glucan affinity, was incubated with 100 μg of streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher) for 30 min at RT with shaking. Beads were washed five times with PBS and magnetic capturing, and dried in a speed vac (Epperdorf, Germany) [20]. The magnetic beads were suspended in 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea, added of 1 M HEPES to final concentration of 100 mM in solution, followed by 100 mM dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 1 h at 30 °C. Alkylation was performed with 400 mM iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and tubes incubated at RT in the dark for 30 min. After, 175 μL of ultrapure water (TEDIA, USA) and 100 ng/mL sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in 0.1 M of acetic acid were added to a final concentration of 0.1 ng/mL, and tubes incubated overnight at 37 °C. Then, 2 μL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, samples cleaned up (micro Spin Column, Harvard Apparatus) and dried in a speed vac. Tryptic peptide were dissolved in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA and approximately 4 μL of the mixture was loaded onto an in‐house packed column (15 cm × 75 μm) filled with 3 μm ReproSil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using the NanoLC-Ultra nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies). Samples were injected in a nano-LC–MS/MS system consisting of an EASY II-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystem) coupled to a nanoESI LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two µg of peptides were loaded to a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm) packed inhouse with C-18 ReproSil 5 μm resin (Dr. Maisch) and a New Objective PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm) packed with Reprosil-pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). For each sample, peptides elution used a linear gradient of solvent solution ACN 95%, 0.1% TFA from 5% to 20% for 85 min, 20-40% for 22 min, 40-95% for 5 min and 95% for 8 min, using 250 nL/min as flow rate. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive mode top 10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. MS1 scan was acquired in an Orbitrap analyzer set for a 350-1800 m/z range, 60000 resolution (at m/z 400) with a minimal signal required of 10000, isolation width of 2.0. The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at 30 normalized collision energy (NCE) with a dynamic exclusion of 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were processed using the peptides search engine BSI PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) for peptide identification. The considered parent mass error tolerance and fragment mass error tolerance were both set to 0.6 Da and 0.5 Da, with precursor mass search type monoisotopic. The maximum missed tryptic cleavages was set to two, and one non‐specific cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylating was set as fixed modification (MW = 57.02 Da) and as variable modifications, methionine oxidation (MW = 15.99 Da) and lysine Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin conjugation (MW = 339.16 Da) were allowed. The Ac database used was downloaded from www.uniprot.org and contained 14,944 proteins as for February 2021. The considered false discovery rate was set to 1%. All processed data and spectra generated by software were compared with raw data spectra and manually checked. An output of de novo peptides was obtained from the Peaks X software and analyzed in the De Novo Sequencing (PepExplorer) of the PatternLab for Proteomics (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org). The PepExplorer was set up against the same target-decoy sequence database of Ac as described above, according to instructions informed elsewhere [35], with a set of parameters that were adjusted to optimize the analysis process and most stringent comparison parameters, including the Reverse Decoy Label insertion, minimal identity of 0.5, a minimum peptide size of 6 amino acids and a De novo score cut off of 90. Upon analysis, the dynamic report showed a list of identified proteins and the matching peptides based on sequence alignments that were compared among samples for the determination of proteins with affinity to β-1,3-glucan affinity. Only protein hits that presented two or more different peptides identified, were considered as valid, with the presence of peptides with at least five amino acid residues sequenced consecutively in the series Y-, or B- or by complementary form. Detected proteins with domains with recognized affinity to β-1,3-glucan were classified according to Legentil et al. [67] and InterPro (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) into 7 main groups and used to construct the Table 1. Besides, protein transmembrane domains were mapped using the Transmembrane Hidden Markov Model (TMHMM server v. 2.0; http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/) and the PSI-blast based secondary structure PREDiction (PSIPRED 4.0; http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acanthamoeba, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Federal Flumunense University
Instituto Biomédico, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia – MIP, Universidade Federal Fluminense

### Submitter
Allan Guimaraes

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Guimaraes
Instituto Biomédico, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia – MIP, Universidade Federal Fluminense


