### Accession
PXD038113

### Title
Proteomic profiling reveals distinct phases to the restoration of chromatin following DNA replication

### Description
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative MS-based proteomics coupled to Nascent Chromatin Capture, we provide time resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes of mid-S replicated regions. This shows that most proteins regain access within the first 15 minutes after the passage of the fork. In contrast, 25% of the identified proteins do not, and this delay cannot be inferred from their known function, physicochemical properties, or nuclear abundance. A sample treated with nocodazole to block the cell cycle progression. The comparison between a normal cell cycle progression and a nocodazole treated sample shows that the reassociation onto chromatin of proteins with a delayed restoration can be regulated by the cell cycle progression and/or the post-replication time. In addition, we provide evidence that DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodellers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory. Data available in this entry are related with the supplementary table 5 from our manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
Nascent Chromatin Capture protocol was performed in HeLa S3 cells as described by Alabert et al. 2014. We performed the pull-down of labelled DNA in mid-S phase in nascent chromatin, 2h later (late S-phase), 5h (G2/M phase), 10h (early G1 phase) and 14h later (late G1 phase). The sample treated with nocodazole was labelled in mid S-phase and nocodazole was added 2h later for 12 hours. Samples were crosslinked, sonicated and the biotinated DNA was pull-downed. NCC samples were prepared using SP3 protocol for TMT labelling as described in (Hughes et al., 2014). In brief, protein samples were mixed with SP3 beads (1: 10) and digested with trypsin (1: 50, trypsin: protein). Equal amounts (100 μg) of each peptide sample were dried and dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB buffer. TMT labelling of each sample were followed by the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) manual. The TMT labelled peptide samples were further fractionated using offline high-pH reverse-phase (RP) chromatography, as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019). The 24 fractions were subsequently dried and the peptides re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS system as previously described (Brenes et al., 2019) (Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatography System).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against Homo Sapiens database from Uniport (Swissport, January 2020) (Cox and Mann, 2011). The TMT quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 type with 10plex TMT (LOT: UH285228). Protein groups output table from MaxQuant was cleaned, filtered and median normalised with Perseus (1.6.7.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016) for subsequent analysis. Because NCC involves formaldehyde crosslinking, non-chromatin proteins could be captured. Filtering the datasets in silico using the interphase chromatin probability score developed by ChEP and machine learning (Kustatscher et al., 2014) did not affect the conclusions of our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin organization must be maintained during cell proliferation to preserve cellular identity and genome integrity. However, DNA replication results in transient displacement of DNA-bound proteins, and it is unclear how they regain access to newly replicated DNA. Using quantitative proteomics coupled to Nascent Chromatin Capture or isolation of Proteins on Nascent DNA, we provide time-resolved binding kinetics for thousands of proteins behind replisomes within euchromatin and heterochromatin in human cells. This shows that most proteins regain access within minutes to newly replicated DNA. In contrast, 25% of the identified proteins do not, and this delay cannot be inferred from their known function or nuclear abundance. Instead, chromatin organization and G1 phase entry affect their reassociation. Finally, DNA replication not only disrupts but also promotes recruitment of transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, providing a significant advance in understanding how DNA replication could contribute to programmed changes of cell memory.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Vanesa Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Constance Alabert
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


