### Accession
PXD037060

### Title
Enzymatic investigation of Spongospora subterranea zoospore attachment to roots of potato cultivars resistant or susceptible to powdery scab disease

### Description
For potato crops, host resistance is currently the most effective and sustainable tool to manage potato root and tuber diseases caused by the plasmodiophorid, Spongospora subterranea. Arguably, zoospore root attachment is the most critical phase of the pathogen infection, however, the mechanisms underlying zoospore root attachment remains unknown. This study investigated the potential role of root cell wall surface polysaccharides and proteins in zoospore root attachment in resistant and susceptible potato cultivars. We first compared the effects of enzymatic removal of root cell wall proteins, N-linked glycans or polysaccharides on S. subterranea attachment to root tissue of resistant and susceptible potato cultivars. Subsequently, mass spectrometry analysis of peptides released by trypsin shaving (TS) of root segments identified 1235 proteins, of which 262 were differentially abundant between the resistant and susceptible cultivars. In particular, proteins associated with glutathione metabolism and lignin biosynthesis were more abundant in the resistant cultivar. Comparison with whole-root proteomic analysis of the same resistant and susceptible cultivars led to identification of 226 proteins unique to the TS dataset, of which 188 were significantly different between cultivars. Among these, the pathogen defence-related cell wall protein stem 28 kDa glycoprotein and two major latex proteins were significantly less abundant in the resistant cultivar compared to the susceptible cultivar. A further major latex protein was detected at reduced levels in the resistant cultivar in both TS and whole-root proteomic datasets. In contrast, in the TS-specific dataset, three glutathione S-transferase proteins were more abundant in the resistant cultivar, while the protein glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase was significantly increased in both the TS and whole-root datasets. These results imply a particular role of major latex proteins and glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase in the regulation of host susceptibility to S. subterranea.

### Sample Protocol
A vial of 20 µg proteomics grade trypsin was dissolved in 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.8) to achieve a concentration of 0.2 mg/mL. Potato roots were collected from propagated plantlets and rinsed thoroughly with DDW. For each treatment, six primary roots from each individual plant of each cultivar were collected from propagated plantlets and rinsed thoroughly with DDW. This experiment was performed with three technical and biological replicates, respectively. A segment of the lower part of the root maturation region trimmed to a length of 20 mm was selected from each individual root (Yu et al., 2022a). Three plantlets of each cultivar were performed as biological replicates, thus providing a total of 18 root segments. Eighteen root segments were divided into two groups evenly. In each group, the root segments comprising each biological replicates were added into one of three 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. For trypsin shaving (TS) treatment, 45 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and 5 µL 0.2 mg/mL trypsin solution (final concentration of 20 µg/mL) was added into each tube in group 1, respectively, with 5 min of incubation at 37℃ (Sigma, NSW, Australia). Then, the TS experiment was repeated at 15-, 30-, and 60-min incubation at 37℃, respectively. C18 ZipTips (ZTC18S096; Merck) were used to prepare peptides released into solution following the TS treatment of potato roots for proteome analysis, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dehydrated through vacuum concentration and reconstituted in 12 mL HPLC loading buffer (2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0) using the Andromeda search engine to search MS/MS spectra against the Solanum tuberosum UniProt reference proteome (UP000011115) comprising 53,106 entries. With the exception that match-between-runs function was activated, default parameters for mass error tolerances, missed trypsin cleavages, fixed and variable modifications were used. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both peptide-spectrum matches and protein identification. Protein intensity values were imported into Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) for further analysis. Protein groups identified as potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site or by reverse database matching were removed and LFQ intensity values were log2–transformed. The proteins were filtered to include only those detected in a minimum of eight samples and remaining missing values were replaced with random intensity values for low-abundance proteins based on a normal distribution of protein abundances using default Perseus parameters.

### Publication Abstract
For potato crops, host resistance is currently the most effective and sustainable tool to manage diseases caused by the plasmodiophorid <i>Spongospora subterranea</i>. Arguably, zoospore root attachment is the most critical phase of infection; however, the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. This study investigated the potential role of root-surface cell-wall polysaccharides and proteins in cultivars resistant/susceptible to zoospore attachment. We first compared the effects of enzymatic removal of root cell-wall proteins, <i>N</i>-linked glycans and polysaccharides on <i>S. subterranea</i> attachment. Subsequent analysis of peptides released by trypsin shaving (TS) of root segments identified 262 proteins that were differentially abundant between cultivars. These were enriched in root-surface-derived peptides but also included intracellular proteins, e.g., proteins associated with glutathione metabolism and lignin biosynthesis, which were more abundant in the resistant cultivar. Comparison with whole-root proteomic analysis of the same cultivars identified 226 proteins specific to the TS dataset, of which 188 were significantly different. Among these, the pathogen-defence-related cell-wall protein stem 28 kDa glycoprotein and two major latex proteins were significantly less abundant in the resistant cultivar. A further major latex protein was reduced in the resistant cultivar in both the TS and whole-root datasets. In contrast, three glutathione <i>S</i>-transferase proteins were more abundant in the resistant cultivar (TS-specific), while the protein glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase was increased in both datasets. These results imply a particular role for major latex proteins and glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase in regulating zoospore binding to potato roots and susceptibility to <i>S. subterranea</i>.

### Keywords
Solanum tuberosum, Cell wall modification, Host resistance, Proteome, Spongospora subterranea, Trypsin shaving

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


