### Accession
PXD000152

### Title
Conservation of the extended substrate specificity profiles among homologous granzymes across species

### Description
Granzymes are a family of structurally related serine proteases involved in immunity. To date four out of five human granzymes have been assigned orthologues in mice; however for granzyme H, no clear murine orthologue has been suggested and its role in cytotoxicity remains controversial. In this study, we demonstrate that granzyme H is an inefficient cytotoxin. Besides analyzing the substrate specificity profile of granzyme H by means of substrate phage display, we assessed human granzyme H and mouse granzyme C cleavage susceptibility on a proteome-wide level. The extended specificity profiles of granzyme C and granzyme H (i.e. beyond P4-P4') match those previously observed for granzyme B. We demonstrate conservation of these extended specificity profiles among various granzymes since granzyme B cleavage susceptibility of an otherwise granzyme H/C specific cleavage site can be conferred simply by altering the P1-residue to aspartate, the preferred P1-residue of granzyme B. Our results thus indicate a conserved, but hitherto generally underappreciated specificity-determining role of extended protease-substrate contacts in steering cleavage susceptibility.  Bio-IT: The spectra were searched with Mascot Daemon 2.2. The following search parameters were used. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 0.2 Da and peptide fragment mass tolerance at 0.1 Da; with the ESI-QUAD-TOF as selected instrument for peptide fragmentation rules for the Q-TOF Premier data. Endoproteinase semiArg-C/P (i.e., no restriction towards arginine-proline cleavage) was set as enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Variable modifications were pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine, pyrocarbamidomethyl formation of N-terminal alkylated cysteine, deamidation of asparagine, acetylation or tri-deuteroacetylation of the alpha-N-terminus. Fixed modifications were methionine oxidation (sulfoxide), carbamidomethyl for cysteine, tri-deuteroacetylation of lysine and for identifying heavy labelled peptides, [13C6] or [13C615N4]-arginine were additionally set as fixed modifications.  The spectra and identifications were stored in ms_lims

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Granzymes are structurally related serine proteases involved in cell death and immunity. To date four out of five human granzymes have assigned orthologs in mice; however for granzyme H, no murine ortholog has been suggested and its role in cytotoxicity remains controversial. Here, we demonstrate that, as is the case for granzyme C, human granzyme H is an inefficient cytotoxin that together with their similar pattern of GrB divergence and functional similarity strongly hint to their orthologous relationship. Besides analyzing the substrate specificity profile of granzyme H by substrate phage display, substrate cleavage susceptibility of human granzyme H and mouse granzyme C was assessed on a proteome-wide level. The extended specificity profiles of granzymes C and H (i.e. beyond cleavage positions P4-P4') match those previously observed for granzyme B. We demonstrate conservation of these extended specificity profiles among various granzymes as granzyme B cleavage susceptibility of an otherwise granzyme H/C specific cleavage site can simply be conferred by altering the P1-residue to aspartate, the preferred P1-residue of granzyme B. Our results thus indicate a conserved, but hitherto underappreciated specificity-determining role of extended protease-substrate contacts in steering cleavage susceptibility.

### Keywords
Granzyme c, Human, Lc-msms, Mouse, Granzyme h, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
Biochemistry

### Submitter
Pieter-Jan De Bock

### Lab Head


