### Accession
PXD001508

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of a mixed microbial communities extracted from biogas plant sludge

### Description
In this study, centrifugal fractionation has been applied for fractionation of two biogas sludge samples to analyze proteins extracted from (i) crude fibers, (ii) suspended microorganisms, and (iii) secreted proteins in the supernatant using a gel-based approach followed by LC-MS/MS identification.

### Sample Protocol
In detail, 50 mL of sludge sample was taken in two replicates from two different main fermenters of BGPs located near Magdeburg (Germany, Ebendorf (“E1”, “E2”) and Getec (“G1”, “G2”); see Supplementary Table S1 for process parameters) and was transported directly to the laboratory in airtight containers for subsequent analysis. Untreated (suffix “_U”) sludge of each sample was retained as a control (“E1_U”, “E2_U”; “G1_U”, “G2_U”). In a first step, fractionation centrifugation was applied for 3 min at 3,000 x g at 20°C to pelletize crude fibers and any associated microorganisms (suffix “_P3000”). Derived supernatants were submitted to a second centrifugation for 10 min at 16,400 x g at 20°C to separate suspended microorganisms in the pellet fraction (suffix “_P16400”) from extracellular or secreted proteins in the supernatant (“_S16400”). The respective notations of all fractions are summarized in Supplementary Figure S1. In a second step, cell disruption in a ball mill with simultaneous phenol extraction of proteins, subsequent protein precipitation using 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and washing steps using ice-cold 80% acetone and 70% ethanol were performed according to Heyer and Kohrs et al. [6]. The protein content of the S16400 fractions was directly measured using an amido black assay, whereas the precipitated proteins of the other fractions were suspended in 7 M urea/2 M thiourea buffer containing 0.01 g mL-1 DTT before protein staining with amido black. For subsequent analysis by 1D SDS-PAGE 100 µg of protein were precipitated by acetone. Dried pellets were rinsed in 40 µL SDS sample buffer, and loaded on a 1.5 mm thick gel (see [6] for detailed description). Finally, gels were stained overnight using colloidal Coomassie blue dye. Complete PAGE lanes were cut off and chopped vertically into ten equal pieces. All chemicals listed below were of LC-MS grade. Devices and columns for LC-MS/MS analysis were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Bremen, Germany). In-gel reduction with DTT was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide and final digestion was performed using trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) in an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37°C [6]. Peptides were extracted, dried and suspended in 11 µL chromatographic liquid phase A (97.95% water, 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA) of which 5 µL were injected into the LC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless LC system). Isocratic loading of diluted peptides on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap100 C18 µ-pre-column, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm inner diameter, 5 mm length) was performed with a flow rate of 7 µL min-1 chromatographic liquid phase A. Afterwards chromatographic separation took place on a RP column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLCnano, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 150 mm length) at 40°C and a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. A binary A/B-solvent gradient was applied starting at 4% of phase B for 4 min, running on with a linear increase to 55% B within 120 min (A: 97.9% water, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; B: 80% ACN, 10% trifluorethanol, 9.9% water, 0.1% formic acid). Eluting peptides were directly submitted to an online coupled OrbiTrap Elite hybrid ion trap-orbitrap MS equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source and distal coated silica tips (SilicaTip Emitters, FS360-20-10-D-20, New Objective, MA, USA). Precursor ions were scanned in the orbital trap in positive mode at a resolution of 30,000 and a m/z range of 350-2,000. The 20 most intense precursors were submitted for CID fragmentation and scanned in the linear trap with a mass range and scan rate referred to as “normal” parameter settings.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were exported as Mascot Generic Format using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) without any post processing. Spectra were searched using the MASCOT 2.5 search engine (Matrix Science, London, England) against three BGP metagenomes (Supplementary Table S2) jointly concatenated to UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (state 2014/10/23) with the following parameters: trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±0.03 Da precursor and ±0.4 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 1 13C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions. Resulting MASCOT DAT files containing peptide and protein identifications were finally uploaded to the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software [7] (see https://code.google.com/p/meta-proteome-analyzer/ for download and supporting material) with a FDR of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
With the development of high resolving mass spectrometers, metaproteomics evolved as a powerful tool to elucidate metabolic activity of microbial communities derived from full-scale biogas plants. Due to the vast complexity of these microbiomes, application of suitable fractionation methods are indispensable, but often turn out to be time and cost intense, depending on the method used for protein separation. In this study, centrifugal fractionation has been applied for fractionation of two biogas sludge samples to analyze proteins extracted from (i) crude fibers, (ii) suspended microorganisms, and (iii) secreted proteins in the supernatant using a gel-based approach followed by LC-MS/MS identification. This fast and easy method turned out to be beneficial to both the quality of SDS-PAGE and the identification of peptides and proteins compared to untreated samples. Additionally, a high functional metabolic pathway coverage was achieved by combining protein hits found exclusively in distinct fractions. Sample preparation using centrifugal fractionation influenced significantly the number and the types of proteins identified in the microbial metaproteomes. Thereby, comparing results from different proteomic or genomic studies, the impact of sample preparation should be considered. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001508 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001508).

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Microbial communities, Metabolism, Differential centrifugation, Biogas plant

### Affiliations
Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Kohrs

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Dirk Benndorf
Bioprocess Engineering, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, D-39106 Magdeburg, Germany


