### Accession
PXD008453

### Title
Proteins used by the predatory yeast Saccharomycopsis schoenii as it attacks and kills the prey cell Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Saccahromycopsis schoenii belongs to a genus of yeasts that have the ability to attack and kill other yeast and fungi. De novo genomic sequencing and genome assembly suggests that S. schoenii might belong to the CTG clade. To examine whether it translated CTG codons to leucine (standard codon usage) or serine (alternative codon usage), we analysed its proteome during growth on full media. To see if translation is changed during nutritional stress or during predation on a prey cell (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), we analysed and quantified its proteome during these conditions compared to its proteomic expression in full media.

### Sample Protocol
S. schoenii and S. cerevisiae cells were initially cultured to log phase in YPD (full media). Three samples where then prepared and 1*10E8 cells per species were seeded as follows: 1. S. schoenii alone on YPD agar, 2. S. schoenii alone on SD media (minimal media), 3. S. schoenii co-cultured with S. cerevisiae on SD agar. After 3 hours at 30°C, cells were flushed off, washed with PBS twice, spun down, supernatant removed and pellet flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were shipped to Phylogene, Bernis, France for subsequent processing and analysis.  Sample preparation: Yeast proteins were extracted using anionic detergent, extract was sonicated and boiled sequentially. Extracted proteins were purified by ultrafiltration, reduced, alkylated and digested (Trypsin) onto filter. Peptides were desalted by C18 SPE and their concentration measured by BCA method.  LC-MS/MS “Shotgun Proteomics”: Peptides were analysed by nano-chromatography coupled with high resolution accurate mass spectrometer. The instrument was configured to generate the maximum information during chromatography run.

### Data Protocol
Proteins identification: Peptides / Proteins were identified with Sequest algorithm against both sequences databases (from standard and alternative codon usage). Proteins relative quantification: The XIC (extract ion chromatogram) of peptides were generated using a mass extraction window of 5 ppm and retention time windows of 2 minutes. The areas of each peptide are determined and normalized on total area sum for all peptides. The fold changes (area of sample X /area of reference sample) were calculated, and a t-test was performed to evaluate the statistical significance of fold changes. Two comparisons were done: one per test sample, both (Sample 2 and 3) vs reference sample (Sample 1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Starvation, Translation, Yeast, Lc-msms, Shotgun proteomics, Predation, Necrotrophy, Ctg clade, Pathogen, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Illumina, Saccharomycopsis

### Affiliations
Carlsberg Research Laboratory
Research Group of Microbiology (MICR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Klara Junker

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen Wendland
Research Group of Microbiology (MICR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium


