### Accession
PXD043494

### Title
Puromycin acetyltransferase-mediated cell-specific labeling of de novo synthesized proteins, part I

### Description
Puromycin and its derivative O-propargyl puromycin (OPP) enable detection of nascent proteins. Use of these metabolic labels in complex mixtures of cells leads to indiscriminate tagging of nascent proteomes independent of cell type. Here we have used puromycin N-acetyltransferase (PAT), for cell-specific metabolic labelling with puromycin or OPP. This approach, which we named Puromycin Inactivation for Cell-Selective proteome Labelling (PICSL), is based on efficient inactivation of puromycin or OPP in cells expressing PAT and detection of translation in other cell types. We performed two mass spectrometry experiments using cell-specific expression of PAT, metabolic labeling of cells with OPP and streptavidin pulldown of biotinylated de novo synthesized proteins. In the first proof-of-principle experiment (part I) we mixed human (HEK293) and mouse (Neuro2a) cells and labeled them with OPP, comparing this with another sample where HEK293 cells expressed PAT. We show specific reduction of human-specific peptides in de novo synthesized proteome in HEK-PAT cells. In the second experiment (part II), we used a primary co-culture of rat cortical neurons (expressing PAT in some samples) and glia, performed OPP labeling and pulldown of de novo synthesized proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For isolation of tagged NSPs, cells were treated with 20 µM OPP or DMSO for 2 h, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in click lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, pH 7.5, 2 mM PMSF and EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific). OPP-labeled proteins were then tagged with biotin by click chemistry, following Terenzio et al. 2018 (39), with minor modifications. Reactions were carried out at RT for 2 h, under gentle rotation, in the presence of 1% SDS, 0.1 mM Biotin-PEG3-Azide (for Western blot, Click Chemistry Tools, AZ104-5; Cayman Chemicals, Cat. #23419) or Dde-Biotin-Picolyl-Azide (for mass spectrometry Click Chemistry Tools, 1186-5), 0.1mM THTPA, 1 mM TCEP and 1 mM CuSO4. Click-conjugated proteins were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone, overnight at -20°C, pellets washed with ice-cold methanol and resuspended in PBS-1% SDS-1X protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). For streptavidin pulldowns, equal amounts of protein (200-300 µg) were incubated with 20-30 µL of Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo Scientific, 88817) in PBS-0.2% SDS-1% NP-40 for 2 h, at RT with gentle rotation. Beads were then washed twice with PBS-0.2% SDS-1% NP-40 for 10 min at 4°C, three times with PBS-6M urea-0.1% NP-40 for 30 min at 4°C, once with PBS-0.2% SDS-1% NP-40 for 10 min at 4°C and once with PBS for 1-2 min at RT. For samples to be used for mass spectrometry, elution was achieved by treatment with 2% hydrazine (Sigma) 2X for 1 h at RT with gentle shaking, while in samples used for Western blotting elution was done with 1X Laemmli buffer for 5 min at 95°C.  Pull-down samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid deoxycholate (TCA-DOC) precipitation (40) overnight. Protein pellets were solubilized in 20 µL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 20 mM methylamine buffer. Protein reduction was performed with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) by incubating 1 h at room temperature (RT). Protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM chloroacetamide by incubating 1 h at RT in the dark. Next, protease LysC (Wako) was added to an enzyme:substrate ratio (E:S) of 1:50 (200 ng) and the samples were incubated for 4 h at 25oC. Samples were then diluted five times with 100 mM ABC, dimethylated porcine trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was added to 1:50 E:S ratio and incubated overnight at 25oC. After digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a concentration of 1% and desalted on in-house made C18 material StageTips (41). Samples were reconstituted in 0.5% TFA and peptide concentrations were determined with a Pierce colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 µg of peptides were then subjected to LC/MS/MS analysis.  Samples were injected to an Ultimate 3500 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a 0.3 × 5 mm trap-column (5 µm C18 particles, Dionex) and an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm x 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective). Peptides were eluted at 250 nl/min with a 8-40% B 60 min gradient (buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, buffer A: 0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (MS) using a nano-electrospray source (spray voltage of 2.5 kV). The MS was operated with a top-20 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=60 000 at 200 m/z was followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 20 most intense ions (z: +2 to +5) at R=15 000 with 1.6 m/z isolation windows. MS and MS/MS ion target values were 3e6 and 1e5 with 50 and 15 ms injection times, respectively. Peptide match was set to preferred and exclusion of isotopes turned on. Dynamic exclusion was limited to 25 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package (version 2.0.3.0) (42). Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Homo sapiens or Mus musculus reference proteome databases using the tryptic digestion rule (cleavages after lysine and arginine without proline restriction). Only identifications with at least 1 peptide ≥ 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was also enabled. LFQ ratio count (i.e., number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 1. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. Only unique peptides (with or without variable modifications) were used for protein quantification. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
Puromycin and its derivative O-propargyl puromycin (OPP) have recently found widespread use in detecting nascent proteins. Use of these metabolic labels in complex mixtures of cells leads to indiscriminate tagging of nascent proteomes independent of cell type. Here, we show how a widely used mammalian selection marker, puromycin N-acetyltransferase, can be repurposed for cell-specific metabolic labeling. This approach, which we named puromycin inactivation for cell-selective proteome labeling (PICSL), is based on efficient inactivation of puromycin or OPP in cells expressing puromycin N-acetyltransferase and detection of translation in other cell types. Using cocultures of neurons and glial cells from the rat brain cortex, we show the application of PICSL for puromycin immunostaining, Western blot, and mass spectrometric identification of nascent proteins. By combining PICSL and OPP-mediated proteomics, cell type-enriched proteins can be identified based on reduced OPP labeling in the cell type of interest.

### Keywords
Opp-id, Shotgun proteomics, Streptavidin pulldown, Neuro2a, Hek

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology Tallinn University of Technology Estonia
Tallinn University of Technology

### Submitter
Indrek Koppel

### Lab Head
Dr Indrek Koppel
Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology Tallinn University of Technology Estonia


