### Accession
PXD008403

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of Arabidopsis flg22 treated nuclear samples

### Description
To study the effect of microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP) treatment (flg22) on the phosphorylation of nuclear proteins, we treated Arabidopsis plants with flg22 and after isolation of nuclear proteins, we enriched for phosphopeptides and then carried out LC-MS/MS analyses. We used statistical analysis tools to identify differentially phosphorylated proteins in response to MAMP treatment in the mock and treated samples.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plants were ground in a mortar with liquid nitrogen and were resuspended in extraction buffer #1 containing 0.4 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 15 mM β-glycerophosphate, 15 mM 4-nitrophenyl phosphate). After 15 min incubation on ice and filtration using a Miracloth, the samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 3,400 g at 4°C and the supernatants were discarded. The pellets were resuspended in extraction buffer #2 containing 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After 10 min incubation on ice, the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 g at 4°C and the pellets were resuspended in extraction buffer #3 containing 1.7 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM MgCl2, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.15% (v/v) Triton X-100, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The resuspended pellets were loaded on the same volume of extraction buffer #3 and centrifuged for 30 min at 16,000 g at 4°C. The previous step was repeated a second time. The obtained nuclei were then resuspended in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The samples were incubated for 30 min at 4°C and were centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 g at 4°C. The supernatants were collected as chromatin proteins and processed for LC-MS/MS.  Briefly, samples were resuspended in 100 µL of buffer containing 1 M urea in 100 mM TriEthylAmmonium Bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5. Proteins were then reduced by addition of 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h and then alkylated by addition of 20 mM Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) and incubated at ambient temperature for 15 min. Proteolysis was performed by adding trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and overnight incubation at 37°C. Proteolytic peptide samples were then acidified with AA to reach a pH of about 3 and desalted on C18 microspin columns. They were eluted from the C18 phase with 100 µL of 60% (v/v) ACN and 3% (v/v) AA to which 100 µL of water were added, to reach a composition of 30% (v/v) ACN and 1.5% (v/v) AA that is compatible with phosphopeptide enrichment on the IMAC resin.  Binding of phosphopeptides to IMAC beads was achieved by incubation on a rotating wheel at 15 rpm at RT for 2 h. Subsequently, the IMAC resin was pelleted to collect the supernatant or flow-through (IMAC FT). The IMAC resin was then washed three times with 200 µL of solution 1 (2 min incubation each time) and once with 200 µL of ultra-pure water. The IMAC resin was finally placed on a spin column and incubated for 5 min in 50 µL of 400 mM ammonium hydroxide to elute phosphopeptides. After centrifuging, the IMAC eluate was mixed with 10 µL of 10% (v/v) AA to reach a pH of about 6 to 7. IMAC eluates were dried completely in a speed-vac and stored at -80°C until analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Dual Gradient Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were loaded onto a C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 mm length x 300 µm I.D., 5 µm particle size, 100 Å porosity, Dionex). After desalting for 5 min with buffer A (water:ACN:formic acid, 95:5:0.1, v/v/v), peptide separation was carried out on a C18 capillary column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 15 cm length x 75 µm I.D. x 3 µm particle size, 100 Å porosity, Dionex) with a gradient starting at 100% buffer A, ramping to 70% (v/v) buffer B (water:ACN:formic acid, 20:80:0.1, v/v/v) over 60 min, then to 100% buffer B over 2 min (held 10 min), and finally decreased to 100% buffer A in 3 min. The LC eluent was sprayed into the MS instrument with a glass emitter tip (Pico-tip, FS360-50-15-CE-20-C10.5, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. For IMAC FTs, FTMS spectra were acquired over the mass range m/z 400 to 1400 to reach a resolution of 30,000; six MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap on the five ions giving rise to the highest signals in the preceding FTMS preview scan. For IMAC eluates, after an FTMS preview scan, six MSA (MultiStage Activation) spectra were acquired. Neutral loss masses specified for MSA fragmentation were 32.67, 49, 65.33 and 98 Da. Ionic species bearing one or ≥4 charges were excluded from fragmentation; dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 45 s, with an exclusion mass width of +/- 5 ppm. The lock mass option using as reference the ion at m/z 445.1200 was activated to ensure more accurate mass measurements in FTMS mode. The automatic gain control (AGC) allowed accumulating up to 106 ions for FTMS spectra and 104 ions for ITMSn spectra. Maximum injection time was set to 500 ms for FTMS spectra and 100 ms for ITMSn spectra.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap instrument were processed using the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) as interface. Database searches were performed with the Mascot server v2.2.07 while specifying the following parameters: database TAIR10 (release 2010/12/14, 35386 sequences); enzymatic specificity: trypsin with two allowed missed cleavages; fixed modification of cysteine residues (Methylthio(C)); possible phosphorylation of S, T and Y residues; 5 ppm tolerance on precursor masses and 0.6 Da tolerance on fragment ions. Fragment types taken into account were those specified in the configuration ‘ESI-trap’ of Mascot. The data was then processed using FragMixer, an in-house developed computational tool that validates phosphosite positioning proposed by the database search engine Mascot using the Mascot Delta scores (MD-scores) [6]. It is publically available and can be downloaded from http://proteomics.fr/FragMixer. FragMixer was used so as to filter identified sequences at an estimated 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR), and to limit the False Localization Rate (FLR) of phosphosites to about 5% (MD-score threshold 4.

### Publication Abstract
In many eukaryotic systems during immune responses, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) link cytoplasmic signaling to chromatin events by targeting transcription factors, chromatin remodeling complexes, and the RNA polymerase machinery. So far, knowledge on these events is scarce in plants and no attempts have been made to focus on phosphorylation events of chromatin-associated proteins. Here we carried out chromatin phosphoproteomics upon elicitor-induced activation of <i>Arabidopsis</i> The events in WT were compared with those in <i>mpk3</i>, <i>mpk4</i>, and <i>mpk6</i> mutant plants to decipher specific MAPK targets. Our study highlights distinct signaling networks involving MPK3, MPK4, and MPK6 in chromatin organization and modification, as well as in RNA transcription and processing. Among the chromatin targets, we characterized the AT-hook motif containing nuclear localized (AHL) DNA-binding protein AHL13 as a substrate of immune MAPKs. <i>AHL13</i> knockout mutant plants are compromised in pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-induced reactive oxygen species production, expression of defense genes, and PAMP-triggered immunity. Transcriptome analysis revealed that <i>AHL13</i> regulates key factors of jasmonic acid biosynthesis and signaling and affects immunity toward <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> and <i>Botrytis cinerea</i> pathogens. Mutational analysis of the phosphorylation sites of AHL13 demonstrated that phosphorylation regulates AHL13 protein stability and thereby its immune functions.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Desert Agriculture Initiative 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal 23955-6900 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
KAUST

### Submitter
Naganand Rayapuram

### Lab Head
Dr Heribert Hirt
Desert Agriculture Initiative 4700 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal 23955-6900 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


