### Accession
PXD023086

### Title
African swine fever virus ubiquitinconjugating enzyme interacts with host translation machinery to regulate the host protein synthesis

### Description
African Swine Fever virus (ASFV) causes one of the most relevant emerging diseases affecting swine, now extended through three continents. The virus has a large coding capacity to deploy an arsenal of molecules antagonizing the host functions. In the present work, we have studied the only known E2 viral-conjugating enzyme, UBCv1 that is encoded by the I215L gene of ASFV. SILAC quantitative proteomics was used toidentify and characterize novel UBCv1-host interactors. The analysis revealed interaction with the 40S ribosomal protein RPS23, the cap-dependent translation machinery initiation factor eIF4E, and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cullin 4B. Our data show that during ASFV infection, UBCv1 was able to bind to eIF4E, independent from the cap-dependent complex. Our results provide novel insights into the function of the viral UBCv1 in hijacking cellular components that impact the mTORC signalling pathway, the regulation of the host translation machinery, and the cellular protein expression during the ASFV lifecycle. The people involved in this project are:  Lucia Barrado-Gil, Covadonga Alonso and Carlos Maluquer de Motes.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293T cells were transfected with pcDNA4/TO, pcDNA4/TO-UBCv1, or pcDNA4/TO257 UBCv1C85A using polyethylenimine (PEI) or Lipofectamine 2000 (LF2000) transfection reagent and following manufacturer’s instructions. After 24 h, cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and lysed with IP buffer (10% glycerol, 10 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 0.1% Triton-X100, and proteases/phosphatases inhibitors [Roche]). After centrifugation (15,000 x g for 20 min), supernatants were incubated with Flag M2 resin (Sigma Aldrich) at 4°C for 16 h. After 3 washes with ice-cold IP buffer, beads were boiled and analyzed by WB.  SILAC quantitative proteomics was performed as previously described (Odon et al., 2018) with minor differences. HEK293T cells were cultured for at least 5 times in Arg/Lys-free MEM supplemented with Pen/Strep, dialyzed FCS, and either unlabelled or stable isotope-labeled forms of Arg and Lys (DC Biosciences). Cells were transfected with 10 μg of pcDNA/TO-3XFlag-UBCv1 using PEI and harvested 24 h later in PBS supplemented with 0.5 % NP-40 (Sigma) and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). The lysates were incubated 20 min in ice and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. Cleared lysates were normalized for total amount protein using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce) and subjected to Flag immunoprecipitation as described above. Denatured eluates were combined on a 1:1 ratio and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit (Digilab UK). The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). All spectra were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 279 300 000 and a max injection time of 100 ms. Precursors were filtered using an Intensity Range of 1E4 to 1E20 and according to charge state (to include charge states 2-6) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40 s +/- 10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.4 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 20 000, max injection time of 40 ms, and CID collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo 289 Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded 29/06/17; 140,000 entries) 290 plus the ASFV I215 protein sequence using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance 291 was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included 292 carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine 293 (+15.9949 Da) and SILAC labels (+6.02 Da (R) or +10.008 Da (R) and +4.025 Da (K) or + 8.014 Da 294 (K)) as variable modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 295 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data 296 were filtered to satisfy a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR). Contaminants, reverse database hits and hits 297 corresponding to one single peptide were removed. Protein ratios were calculated and converted into 298 their log2. Putative interaction partners were selected when their ratios were above the cut-off (mean 299 + 1.96 SD) and had been identified in at least two of the three replicates unless otherwise indicated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Asfv; ubiquitin conjugating enzyme; host translation

### Affiliations
University of Surrey
Department of Microbial Sciences School of Biosciences and Medicine University of Surrey

### Submitter
Carlos Maluquer de Motes

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Maluquer de Motes
Department of Microbial Sciences School of Biosciences and Medicine University of Surrey


