### Accession
PXD008581

### Title
Angiogenic patterning by STEEL, an endothelial-enriched long noncoding RNAAngiogenic patterning by STEEL, an endothelial-enriched long noncoding RNA

### Description
Endothelial cell (EC)-enriched protein coding genes, such as endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), define quintessential EC-specific physiologic functions. It is not clear whether long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) also define cardiovascular cell-type specific phenotypes, especially in the vascular endothelium. Here, we report the existence of a set of EC-enriched lncRNAs and define a role for STEEL (spliced transcript – endothelial enriched lncRNA) in angiogenic potential, macrovascular/microvascular identity and shear stress responsiveness. STEEL is expressed from the terminus of the HOXD locus and is transcribed antisense to HOXD transcription factors. STEEL RNA increases the number and integrity of de novo perfused microvessels in an in vivo model and augments angiogenesis in vitro. The STEEL RNA is polyadenylated, nuclear-enriched and has microvascular predominance. Functionally, STEEL regulates a number of genes in diverse endothelial cells. Of interest, STEEL upregulates both eNOS and the transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2), and is subject to feedback inhibition by both eNOS and shear-augmented KLF2. Mechanistically, STEEL upregulation of eNOS and KLF2 is transcriptionally mediated, in part, via interaction of chromatin-associated STEEL with the poly-ADP ribosylase, PARP1. For instance, STEEL recruits PARP1 to the KLF2 promoter. This work identifies a role for EC-enriched lncRNAs in the phenotypic adaptation of ECs to both body position and hemodynamic forces, and establishes a newer role for lncRNAs in the transcriptional regulation of EC identity.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 μm ID column with RSLC 2 μm C18 packing material (EASY-Spray, Thermo-Fisher, Odense, Denmark) with an integrated emitter. The peptides were eluted into a Q-Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA) using an Easy-Spray nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher, Odense Denmark) with a 1 hr. gradient from 0% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode with 1 MS followed by 10 MS/MS spectra. The MS was acquired with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, a target of 1 x 106 ions and a maximum scan time of 120 ms. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a target of 1 X 106 ions and a maximum scan time of 120 ms using a relative collision energy of 27%. A fixed first mass of 80 Da and a dynamic exclusion time of 15 seconds was used for the MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Xcalibur version 2.2. PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON Canada; version 7.0 (2014-03-21)). PEAKS Studio was set up to search the Uniprot-Human-May132014 database (7000 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the Uniprot-Human_May13-2014 database (unknown version, 46448 entries) also assuming trypsin. PEAKS Studio and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and phospho of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial cell (EC)-enriched protein coding genes, such as endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), define quintessential EC-specific physiologic functions. It is not clear whether long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) also define cardiovascular cell type-specific phenotypes, especially in the vascular endothelium. Here, we report the existence of a set of EC-enriched lncRNAs and define a role for <i>s</i>pliced-<i>t</i>ranscript <i>e</i>ndothelial-<i>e</i>nriched lncRNA (STEEL) in angiogenic potential, macrovascular/microvascular identity, and shear stress responsiveness. STEEL is expressed from the terminus of the HOXD locus and is transcribed antisense to HOXD transcription factors. STEEL RNA increases the number and integrity of de novo perfused microvessels in an in vivo model and augments angiogenesis in vitro. The STEEL RNA is polyadenylated, nuclear enriched, and has microvascular predominance. Functionally, STEEL regulates a number of genes in diverse ECs. Of interest, STEEL up-regulates both eNOS and the transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2), and is subject to feedback inhibition by both eNOS and shear-augmented KLF2. Mechanistically, STEEL up-regulation of eNOS and KLF2 is transcriptionally mediated, in part, via interaction of chromatin-associated STEEL with the poly-ADP ribosylase, PARP1. For instance, STEEL recruits PARP1 to the KLF2 promoter. This work identifies a role for EC-enriched lncRNAs in the phenotypic adaptation of ECs to both body position and hemodynamic forces and establishes a newer role for lncRNAs in the transcriptional regulation of EC identity.

### Keywords
Gene regulations, Long noncoding rna, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Philip A. Marsden
Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto


