### Accession
PXD004876

### Title
Characterization of genetic loss-of-function of Fus in zebrafish

### Description
The RNA-binding protein FUS is implicated in transcription, alternative splicing of neuronal genes and DNA repair. Mutations in FUS have been linked to human neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). We genetically disrupted fus in zebrafish (Danio rerio) using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. The fus knockout animals are fertile and did not show any distinctive phenotype. Mutation of fus induces mild changes in gene expression on the transcriptome and proteome level in the adult brain. We observed a significant influence of genetic background on gene expression and 3’UTR usage, which could mask the effects of loss of Fus. Unlike published fus morphants, maternal zygotic fus mutants do not show motoneuronal degeneration and exhibit normal locomotor activity.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation and measurement was done as described (Bluhm et al., Proteomics 2016), except a 50 cm C18 column and a 240 minute LC gradient was used.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) against the supplied Uniprot zebrafish database (39,559 entries) with standard settings, except LFQ values were based on unique peptides. For data analysis, information about identified peptides was extracted from the evidence table. On the protein level, the mean LFQ values were calculated for each condition (WT, fus-/-) from the protein groups file and plotted as a scatterplot in R using the ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA-binding protein FUS is implicated in transcription, alternative splicing of neuronal genes and DNA repair. Mutations in FUS have been linked to human neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). We genetically disrupted fus in zebrafish (Danio rerio) using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. The fus knockout animals are fertile and did not show any distinctive phenotype. Mutation of fus induces mild changes in gene expression on the transcriptome and proteome level in the adult brain. We observed a significant influence of genetic background on gene expression and 3'UTR usage, which could mask the effects of loss of Fus. Unlike published fus morphants, maternal zygotic fus mutants do not show motoneuronal degeneration and exhibit normal locomotor activity.

### Keywords
Fus protein, Crispr, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


