### Accession
PXD025704

### Title
Proteomic response to drought and Phytophthora cinnamomi in Quercus ilex.

### Description
Biotic and abiotic stresses are predicted to be the main drivers of forest tree decline and mortality in a climatic change scenario. It occurs, for example, in Quercus ilex, the main component of the Mediterranean forest, becoming a major environmental, economic and social concern. The decline syndrome is the result of factors interrelated in time and space. Breeding, through variability and elite genotype selection, is the only plausible strategy for forest management and conservation in nondomesticated, orphan species as is the case of the genus Quercus. By using a shotgun proteomics approach, the effect and the responses to combined drought stress and pathogen (Phytophthora cinnamomi) have been analyzed in two Holm oak populations with contrasting responses to each individual stress. Proteomics data are correlated with that of plant survival, damage symptoms, leaf chemical composition and physiological phenotypes (water content and photosynthetic activity). Changes in the protein profile depended on the population, stress, and time, with some consistent upaccumulated proteins related to synthesis, primary and secondary metabolism, and cell wall are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Q. ilex leaves proteins were extracted using TCA-Phenol protocol extraction (Wang et al., 2006). The extracted proteins (80 µg of protein of three biological replicates per treatment) from Se and Al populations were subjected to SDS-PAGE in a 12% acrylamide gel Mini-PROTEAN (8.6 x 6.7 cm) (Bio‐Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The gel was run at 80 V and stopped when bromophenol blue advanced 0.5 cm into the resolving gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. The resulting band was removed with a scalpel, cut into pieces smaller than 1 mm³ individually and transferred to 1.5 ml tubes where digestion was performed with trypsin (12.5 ng µl−1) (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (Castillejo et al., 2015). Peptides were desalinated using a C18 resin microcolumn, eluted with AcN 70%/ TFA 0.1% and dried in speed-vac. The resulting peptides were resuspended in AcN 4% (v/v)/ formic acid 0.25% (v/v) (López-Hidalgo et al., 2018; Romero-Rodriguez et al., 2019). The peptides were charged to 0.4 µg/µl by injection into the one-dimensional nano flow LC-MS/MS system (liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (Gomez-Gálvez et al., (2020). A monolithic C18 Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) of 15 cm long and 75 µm internal diameter was used. Peptide separation was performed at 40ºC for all runs. The mobile phase of buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and buffer B was composed of 90% AcN / 0.1% formic acid. The samples were separated with a gradient of 5 to 35% to 400nL/min in 180 min. LC was coupled to MS using an ESI source. MS analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The sample was sprayed by electrospray at 1.3 kV and a temperature of 180ºC with a 10 µm needle. The scan was carried out with coverage of 400 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 30K. Each full MS scan was followed by ten dependent MS/MS scans, in which the ten most abundant peptide molecular ions were dynamically selected during 150 s. Ions with unassigned charge, charge +1 and higher than +3 were excluded for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software v. 1.6.3.4 (https://www.maxquant.org/). The MS2 spectra were searched in the Quercus_Database (from the translation of Q. ilex transcriptome, Guerrero-Sanchez et al., 2017, 2019) with the SEQUEST algorithm. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme and a maximum of two miss cleavages were set for all searches. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance fixed to 0.8 Da and +2 charge states or great were used. Identification confidence was set to a 5% Q value, a minimum score of 2 and proteins with 2 or more peptides matched were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Climate change, Phytophthora cinnamomi, Oak decline, Quercus ilex, Drought.

### Affiliations
Universidad de Córdoba. Departamento de Bioquimica y biología molecular. Grupo Bioquimica, proteómica y biología de sistemas vegetal y agroforestal
Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology. Departament of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. University of Cordoba. Spain

### Submitter
Bonoso San Eufrasio Martínez

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús V. Jorrín Novo
Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology. Departament of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. University of Cordoba. Spain


