### Accession
PXD037795

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from Trypanosoma cruzi-dendritic cell interaction show modulatory properties and confer resistance to lethal infection as a cell-free based therapy strategy

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) include a heterogeneous group of particles. Microvesicles and exosomes are the most characterised vesicles. They can be distinguished by their size, morphology, origin and molecular composition. To date, increasing studies demonstrate that EVs mediates intercellular communication. EVs reach considerable interest in the scientific community due to their role in diverse processes including antigen-presentation, stimulation of anti-tumoral immune responses, tolerogenic or inflammatory effects. In pathogens, EVs shedding is well described in fungus, bacteria, protozoan parasites and helminths. For Trypanosoma cruzi EVs liberation and protein composition was previously described. Dendritic cells (DCs) are key players promoting the immune response against pathogens and also maintaining self-tolerance. In previous reports we have demonstrate that T. cruzi downregulates DCs immunogenicity in vitro and in vivo. Here we analyze EVs from the in vitro interaction between blood circulating tripomastigotes (Tp) and bone-marrow-derived DCs. We found that Tp incremented the number and the size of EVs in cultures with DCs. EVs displayed some exosome markers and intracellular RNA. Protein analysis demonstrated that the parasite changes the protein-EV profile of DCs. We observed that EVs from the interaction of Tp-DCs were easily captured by unstimulated-DCs in comparison with EVs from DCs cultured without the parasite, and also modify the activation status of LPS-stimulated DCs. Noteworthy, we found protection in animal treated with EVs DCs+Tp and challenged with T. cruzi lethal infection. Our goal is to go deep into the molecular characterization of EVs from the DCs-Tp interaction, in order to identify mediators for therapeutic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
The digestion was stopped with TFA (1% final concentration), a double extraction with ACN was done and all the peptide solutions and dried in a rotatory evaporator. Samples were re suspended with 2% ACN; 0.1% TFA. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS):  5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 350 mx0.5mm ; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µl/min during  5 min.  The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75 umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a35% B in A for 45 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Samples were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Up to 50 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The system sensitivity was controlled with 2 fmol of 6 proteins (LC Packings)

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (version 4.5.1, revision 2768; Paragon™ Algorithm 4.5.1.0, 2765; Sciex) .  ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof  wiff files. The Paragon algorithm (Shilov, I. V., S. L. Seymour, et al. (2007). "The Paragon Algorithm, a next generation search engine that uses sequence temperature values and feature probabilities to identify peptides from tandem mass spectra." Mol Cell Proteomics 6(9): 1638-55) of ProteinPilot v 4.5 was used to search the NCBI complete database  with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to through.   The protein grouping was done by Pro group algorithm:  A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro Group is guided entirely by observed peptides only. Since the observed peptides are actually determined from experimentally acquired spectra, the grouping can be considered to be guided by usage of spectra. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell free therapy, Extracellular vesicles (evs), Dendritic cells, Immunotherapy, T. cruzi

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Carolina V. Poncini
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina


