### Accession
PXD036989

### Title
jellyfish detritus degrading microbiome

### Description
Jellyfish blooms represent a significant, but largely overlooked, source of labile organic matter (jelly-OM) in the ocean, characterized by high protein content with a low C:N ratio. The bloom-decay cycle of jellyfish in coastal waters are important vehicles for carbon export to the ocean’s interior. To accurately incorporate them into biogeochemical models, the interactions between microbes and jelly-OM have yet to be fully characterized. We conducted jelly-OM enrichment experiments to simulate the scenario experienced by the coastal microbiome after the decay of a jellyfish bloom. We combined metagenomics, endo- and exo-metaproteomic approaches to obtain a mechanistic understanding on the metabolic network operated by the jelly-OM degrading bacterial consortium.

### Sample Protocol
For analyses of endo-metaproteomes, biomass was collected onto 0.22 µm pore size hydrophilic PVDF, Durapore® (Millipore) filters. For the coastal endo-metaproteome 4L of the bacterial inoculum was collected prior to the start of the experiments. For the endo-metaproteome of the jelly-OM degrading microbial community, 500 mL were collected from each jellyfish treatment (J1, J2 and J3) at the peak of prokaryotic abundance (at 32h) in Experiment 1 and 1L at the decay phase (at 84h) in Experiment 2. For the endo-metaproteome of the control treatments, 2L were collected from each flask (C1, C2 and C3) at the peak of the bacterial abundance (at 32h) and 3L at the decay phase (at 84h).The 0.2 µm filtrate from each replicate was also collected for exo-metaproteome analysis. The filtrate was concentrated using a VivaFlow 200 with 30,000 Da and 5,000 Da Molecular Weight Cut-Off (MWCO) to collect the high molecular weight (30,000 Da – 0.2 µm) and the low molecular weight (5,000 Da – 30,000 Da) fraction, respectively. The high and low molecular weight fraction were further concentrated to 250 µL using an Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter 30,000 Da MWCO and 3,000 Da MWCO Unit (Merck-Millipore). NuPAGE sample reducing agent (Invitrogen) was added to samples to reach 1X final concentration.

### Data Protocol
he protein pellet of each sample was digested using the filter-aided in-solution trypsin digestion method (1:100, w/w)(6). The peptides were sequenced on a Q-Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) after desalting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Exoproteomics, Jellyfish, Metaproteomics, Detritus, Microbes

### Affiliations
University of Vienna

### Submitter
ZIhao Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Zihao Zhao
University of Vienna


