### Accession
PXD027119

### Title
AD and FTLD model mouse, brain, Phosphoproteome

### Description
Using a high-end mass spectrometry, we screened phosphoproteins and phosphopeptides in five types of Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse models (5xFAD, APP-tg, PS1-tg, PS2-tg and  APP-KI) and four types of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) mouse models(CHMP2B-KI, PGRN-KI, VCP-KI and TDP43-KI) at multiple time points (1, 3 and 6 months).

### Sample Protocol
APP-KI mice possess a single human APP gene with the Swedish (KM670/671NL), Arctic (E693G), and Beyreuther/Iberian (I716F) mutations.  Knock-in mice harboring the heterozygous PGRN R504X mutation were constructed by insertion of a Neo cassette provided by Unitech (Chiba, Japan) into C57BL/6J mice. The targeting vector was generated from two constructs. (Construct 1) A PCR product of a 6.5 kbp NotI–XhoI fragment containing the R504X mutation, amplified from a BAC clone (ID: RP23-311P1 or RP23-137J17), was subcloned into vector pBS-DTA (Unitech). (Construct 2) A PCR product of a 3.0 kbp ClaI–XhoI fragment was subcloned into vector pBS-LNL(−) containing the Neo cassette. The BamHI (Blunt)–XhoI fragment from Construct 2 was subcloned between the XhoI (Blunt) and SalI sites of Construct 1, and the resultant plasmid was used as the targeting vector. After linearization with SwaI, the fragment was electroporated into a C57BL/6J mouse ES clone. Genotyping of ES clones was performed by PCR using the following primers: 5′-CGTGCAATCCATCTTGTTCAAT-3′ (forward), 5′- CATGACCTAACTCAATGCATACCAC-3′ (reverse). Positive clones were sub- jected to Southern blot analysis. The 5′ and 3′ probes for Southern blots were generated as follows: 5′-probe, 5′-CTGTGTCTCACTAGAAGCATAAGCA-3′ (forward), 5′-ACTAGATTGGGAAAGACAGTGAATC-3′ (reverse); 3′-probe, 5′- AATTCCAATCCTGTGTGGTCATAG-3′ (forward), 5′-CCACTTTCTTTCT CCCTTACCCTA-3′ (reverse). Neomycin probes were generated using the fol- lowing primers: 5′-GAACAAGATGGATTGCACGCAGGTTCTCCG-3′ (forward), 5′-GTAGCCAACGCTATGTCCTGATAG-3′ (reverse). The Neo cassette, present in the F1 mice, was removed by crossing with CAC-Cre mice. For construction of targeting vector for VCPT262A-KI mouse, PCR product of 5.4 kb NotI-XhoI fragment amplified from Bac clone (ID: RP23-111G9 or RP23-124L1) was subcloned into PspOMI-XhoI of pBS-DTA. Similarly, 2.9 kb BamHI-NotI fragment was amplified from the same Bac clone, subcloned into pBS-LNL(-) that possesses Neo cassette (loxP-Neo-loxP). 4.5 kb fragment (1.6 kb Neo cassette + 2.9 kb fragment) was cleaved out by NotI. 0.8 kb XhoI-SmaI fragment with T262A mutation was amplified by PCR from the same Bac clone and digested with XhoI and SmaI. The 0.8kb and 4.5 kb fragments were subcloned into XhoI-NotI sites of targeting vector. After linearization of targeting vector with NotI, the fragment was electroporated into C57BL/6J background ES cells. VCPT262A-KI mice were discriminated from non-transgenic littermate by PCR using primers 5’-ATATGCTCTCACTGTATGGTATTGC-3’ and 5’-TCCAGATGAGCTTAGAAGATTAGAA-3’ that amplify DNA fragment containing LoxP sequence.  　　For construction of targeting vector of CHMP2B Q165X-KI mouse, PCR product of 5.7 kb ClaI-SalI fragment amplified from Bac clone (ID: RP23-13H5 or RP23-273E18) was subcloned into ClaI-SalI of pBS-DTA (Unitech, Chiba, Japan). 3.0 kb SacII-NotI fragment was amplified from the Bac clone and subcloned into pBS-LNL(+) that possesses Neo cassette (loxP-Neo-loxP). SacII-NotI, and 4.6 kb fragment (1.6 kb Neo cassette + 3.0 kb fragment) was subcloned into SacII-ClaI sites of targeting vector. CHMP2BQ165X-KI mice were discriminated from non-transgenic littermate by PCR using primers 5’-TGGATTTTATTTATGTCTGAATGTG-3’ and 5’-ATAAGCAACTTCACAAGGCATCTTA-3’ that amplify DNA fragment containing LoxP sequence. 　　For construction of targeting vector of TDP43N267S-KI mouse, 5.9 kb ClaI-SalI fragment amplified from Bac clone (ID: RP23-364M1 or RP23-331P21) and subcloned into ClaI-SalI of pBS-TK (Unitech, Chiba, Japan). 2.7 kb SacII-NotI fragment was amplified from the Bac clone and subcloned into pA-LNL(+) that possesses Neo cassette (loxP-Neo-loxP). 4.3 kb fragment (1.6 kb Neo cassette + 2.7 kb fragment) was subcloned into SacII-ClaI sites of targeting vector. TDP43N267S-KI mice were discriminated from non-transgenic littermate by PCR using primers 5’-ACAGTTGGGTGTGATAGCAGGTACT-3’ and 5’-TCGAGAATTACAGGAATGTATCATC-3’ that amplify DNA fragment containing LoxP sequence.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrum data of peptides were acquired and analyzed by Analyst TF (version 1.5, AB SCIEX, MA, USA). Using the results we retrieved corresponding proteins from public database of mouse protein sequences (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org on June 22, 2010) by Protein Pilot (version 4, AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA A) that employs Paragon algorithm. Tolerance for the search of peptides by Protein Pilot was set to 0.05 Da for the MS and 0.10 Da for the MS/MS analyses, respectively. “Phosphorylation emphasis” was set at sample description, and “biological modifications” was set at processing specification of Protein Pilot. The confidence score was used to evaluate the quality of identified peptides, and the deduced proteins were grouped by Pro Group algorithm (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) to exclude redundancy. The threshold for protein detection was set at 95% confidence in Protein Pilot, and proteins with more than 95% confidence were accepted as identified proteins.     Quantification of peptides was performed through analysis of iTRAQ reporter groups in MS/MS spectrum that are generated upon fragmentation in the mass spectrometer. In quantification of peptides, bias correction that assumes the total signal amount of each iTRAQ should be equal was employed to normalize signals of different iTRAQ reporters. After bias correction, the ratio between reporter signals in KI mice and that of control mice (peptide ratio) was calculated.     These results in peptide ratios were imported to Excel files from summaries of ProteinPilot for further data analyses. Quantity of a phosphopeptide fragment was calculated as the geometric mean of signal intensities of multiple MS/MS fragments including the phosphorylation site. Difference between KI mouse group and control group was calculated using Welch's test and then evaluated by post-hoc Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple gene mutations cause familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) while no single gene mutations exists in sporadic FTLD. Various proteins aggregate in variable regions of the brain, leading to multiple pathological and clinical prototypes. The heterogeneity of FTLD could be one of the reasons preventing development of disease-modifying therapy. We newly develop a mathematical method to analyze chronological changes of PPI networks with sequential big data from comprehensive phosphoproteome of four FTLD knock-in (KI) mouse models (PGRN<sup>R504X</sup>-KI, TDP43<sup>N267S</sup>-KI, VCP<sup>T262A</sup>-KI and CHMP2B<sup>Q165X</sup>-KI mice) together with four transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and with APP<sup>KM670/671NL</sup>-KI mice at multiple time points. The new method reveals the common core pathological network across FTLD and AD, which is shared by mouse models and human postmortem brains. Based on the prediction, we performed therapeutic intervention of the FTLD models, and confirmed amelioration of pathologies and symptoms of four FTLD mouse models by interruption of the core molecule HMGB1, verifying the new mathematical method to predict dynamic molecular networks.

### Keywords
Ad, Mouse, Ftld, Ftd, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Tokyo Medical and Dental University
Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research institute and Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan

### Submitter
Hidenori Homma

### Lab Head
Dr Hitoshi Okazawa
Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research institute and Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan


