### Accession
PXD030838

### Title
Deep proteome analysis of mouse brains from wild-type, LPS-induced, and drug-treated mice groups

### Description
We studied the effect of bacterial Lipopolysaccharides on inducing neuroinflammation in mice. In addition, we investigated the effect of novel LAT1-utilizing anti-inflammatory derivatives on reversing this LPS-induced neuroinflammation status. Thus, we performed deep proteome analysis of mouse brains after treatment with vehicle, LPS, and LPS with LAT1-utilizing derivatives. The objective is to follow the different inflammatory biomarkers in the mouse brain and explain the inflammatory process after the LPS treatment with and without the LAT1-utilizing prodrugs.

### Sample Protocol
The mice brains were homogenized using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, pH 7.6) followed by filter-aided sample processing protocol. The digested peptides were cleaned up and separated on two columns (trapping and separation column) and analyzed using nanoElute system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) connected to timsTOF Pro spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) following the diaPASEF mode. The MS data were acquired in DIA mode with a base method m/z range of 100-1700 and 1/k0 range of 0.6-1.6 V×s×cm2. The mass range was defined as m/z 400-1000 precursor range with equal windows size of 26 Th (incl. 1 Th overlaps) using two steps each PASEF scan and cycle time of 100 ms locked to 100% duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by DIA-NN software (version 1.8) using the library-free DIA analysis mode and adjusted by the six GPF experiments. The MS/MS spectra, ion mobility (IM), and retention time (RT) were predicted by the DIA-NN algorithm using the cRAP contaminant database (cRAP_universal_181122) and Uniprot reference proteome database (UP000000589_10090). The output_pg_matrix file with normalized maxLFQ intensities was used for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lat1, Neuroinflammation, Proteome, Diapasef

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Finland
Head of Core Facility, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

### Submitter
Ahmed Montaser

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Head of Core Facility, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.


