### Accession
PXD003728

### Title
Bubalus bubalis seminal plasma

### Description
The domestic buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) has presented an important role in the livestock industry, contributing to milk and meat production worldwide, especially in developing countries. However, little is known about its reproductive particularities. Studies regarding protein composition of buffalo SP are still limited and a complete mapping of buffalo SP proteins is still lacking in the literature. Hence, a comprehensive study of SP proteome is of great importance to better understand the mechanisms involved in male reproduction and to optimize the reproductive biotechnologies of farm animal species. Therefore, the aim of this study is to describe for the first time the Bubalus bubalis seminal plasma proteome using a label free shotgun HDMS approach. This type of analysis is interesting since it yields a high number of detected proteins, generating a dataset that is useful for further characterizing the buffalo SP.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared by mixing 200µl of each sample with 400µl of lysis buffer (42% urea, 15% thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 12,5mM Tris-HCl pH 7,5 and 1,5% dithiothreitol) containing 1% of a protease inhibitor mix (GE Healthcare, UK). The samples were incubated on ice for 15 minutes and centrifuged (20000 x g, 40 minutes, 4°C). The supernatant was collected, loaded into a Vivaspin 500 column (MWCO 3000) (GE Healthcare, UK), concentrated and washed three times with 50mM NH4HCO3. After washing the concentrated samples were collected, quantified (Qubit, Thermo Fisher, UK) and had their concentration ajusted to 2µg/µl. For tryptic digestion, 50µl (100µg) of each protein extract was mixed with 10µl of 50mM NH4HCO3 plus 25µl of 0,2% RapiGest SF (Waters, USA) and heated for 15 minutes at 80°C. Following this incubation 2,5µl of 100mM dithiothreitol were added and the sample was heated for 30 minutes at 60°C. Afterwards 2,5µl of 300mM iodoacetamine were added and the samples were kept at room temperature for 30 minutes. Then 5µg of trypsin (Promega, USA) were added and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. On the next day 10µl of 5% TFA were added, the samples were incubated for 90 minutes at 37°C and then centrifuged (20000 x g, 30 minutes, 6°C). After the centrifugation the supernatants were transfered to Total Recovery Vials (Waters, USA) and kept at -80°C until analysis. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation) coupled to a Synapt G2Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). Qualitative bidimensional nanoUPLC tandem nanoESI-HDMSE (multiplexed DIA - data-independent acquisition) experiments were conducted using both a 1-h reverse-phase gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) and a 450 nL.min-1 nanoACQUITY UPLC 2D Technology system. Mass spectrometric analysis of tryptic peptides was performed using a mass spectrometer equipped with a T-Wave-IMS device in MSE and UDMSE modes [12]. MSE and UDMSE raw data of samples were processed with the software ProteinLynx Global Server - PLGS version 3.0.2 (Waters), with the following settings: maximum of 1 missed cleavage by trypsin, a fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (cysteine) and variable modification: oxidation (M). Protein identification was considered valid only when the following criteria were met: false discovery rate of 4% and proteins identified by only one or two matched spectrum/peptide were also removed.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification: MSE and UDMSE [Distler, U. et al. Nature Methods, 2014, 11, 1696-1719] raw data were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 3.0.2 (Waters). Data were lock mass calibrated post acquisition. Database searching were performed using the following parameters: database, RefSeq Bubalus bubalis assembly dataset (Acession number: GCF_000471725.1, 41449 entries, 2015-12-10); peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic (typically <10 ppm and <20 ppm, respectively [Li, et al. Proteomics, 2009, 9, 1696-1719]); maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications, oxidation at Met; false positive rate (protein level), 4%. The criteria of protein identification were set as; at least three peptide matches per protein, one fragment ion matches per peptide and at least three fragment ion matches per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The study aimed to describe the Bubalus bubalis seminal plasma proteome using a label-free shotgun UDMS<sup>E</sup> approach. A total of 859 nonredundant proteins were identified across five biological replicates with stringent identification. Proteins specifically related to sperm maturation and protection, capacitation, fertilization and metabolic activity were detected in the buffalo seminal fluid. In conclusion, we provide a comprehensive proteomic profile of buffalo seminal plasma, which establishes a foundation for further studies designed to understand regulation of sperm function and discovery of novel biomarkers for fertility. MS data are available in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003728.

### Keywords
Label free shotgun lc msms, Seminal plasma, Bubalus bubalis, Buffaloes

### Affiliations
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Federal University of Minas Gerais
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases
Federal University of Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique César Pereira Figueiredo
National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases, Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Federal University of Minas Gerais


