### Accession
PXD024014

### Title
Integrated proteomics and transcriptomics analysis identifies novel cell surface markers of HIV latency

### Description
Background: The cellular reservoir of latent HIV infection remains the main barrier to cure this virus. Elimination of this reservoir would be possible, if molecular identity of latently infected cells were fully elucidated. Biomarkers proposed previously were able to capture only a relatively small fraction of all reservoir cells. In the present study, we set out to conduct comprehensive molecular profiling, at the protein and RNA levels, of CD4+ T cells latently infected with HIV in vitro, using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), respectively. Protein-based methods such as quantitative proteomic profiling using LC-MS may be more beneficial due to direct transferability of results to antibody-based approaches to capture latently infected cells. Integrated analysis of proteomic and transcriptomic data adds a level of validation and increases confidence in identified biomarkers. Flow cytometry and integrated HIV DNA assay were further used to enrich for latently infected cells with antibodies against selected biomarker proteins. Results: Using quantitative proteomics, we identified a total of 10,886 proteins (peptide level FDR < 0.05), of which 673 were up- and 780 down-regulated in latently infected compared to mock-infected cells in vitro (p < 0.05). Among these proteins, 21 were dysregulated at the RNA level in the same direction. Pathway analysis identified p53, mTOR, Wnt and NOTCH signaling, demonstrating that our in vitro model reflects known mechanisms of latency establishment and maintenance. Comparison of identified proteins with other proteomics studies revealed that identified molecular signatures of latency depend on technology and cell types used; however, a subset of proteins were identified both in the present, and at least one other study. Antibodies against selected protein markers, CEACAM1 and PLXNB2, could enrich for latently infected cells from mixed cell population 3-10 fold (5.8 fold average, p < 0.001). Conclusion: Two new molecules, CEACAM1 and PLXNB2, were identified as biomarkers for HIV latency. However, the level of enrichment for latently infected cells compared to biomarkers proposed previously was not improved. These results are consistent with the idea that each proposed biomarker defines only a subset of latently infected cells, and that a combined biomarker will be required to capture or target the latent HIV reservoir represented by different cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell samples were dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulphate and subjected to pulsed probe sonication (Misonix, Farmingdale, NY, USA). Lysates were centrifuged (16,000 g, 10 min, 4oC), and supernatants were measured for protein content using infrared spectroscopy (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Lysates were then reduced, alkylated and subjected to trypsin proteolysis. Peptides were labelled using the eight-plex iTRAQ reagent kit and analysed using multi-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry as reported previously by the authors (35-39).

### Data Protocol
Unprocessed raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy searching against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database comprised of 20,159 entries (release date January 2015), allowing for up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, a minimum peptide length of six and a maximum of two variable (one equal) modifications of: iTRAQ 8-plex (Y), oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), or phosphorylation (S, T, Y). Methylthio (C) and iTRAQ (K, Y and N-terminus) were set as fixed modifications. FDR at the peptide level was set at <0.05. Percent co-isolation excluding peptides from quantitation was set at 50. Reporter ion ratios from unique peptides only were taken into consideration for the quantitation of the respective protein. The iTRAQ ratios of proteins were median-normalized and log2 transformed

### Publication Abstract
Elimination of the latent HIV cell reservoir may be possible, if the molecular identity of latently infected cells were fully elucidated. We conducted comprehensive molecular profiling, at the protein and RNA levels, of primary T cells latently infected with HIV in vitro. Isobaric labelling quantitative proteomics and RNA sequencing identified 1453 proteins and 618 genes, altered in latently infected cells compared to mock-infected controls (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). Biomarker selection was based on results from integrated data analysis. Relative enrichment for latently infected cells was monitored using flow cytometric sorting and the HIV integrant assay. Antibodies against selected proteins, encoded by CEACAM1 and PLXNB2, enabled enrichment of latently infected cells from cell mixtures by 3-10 fold (5.8 average, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), comparable to levels obtained with biomarkers reported previously. Individual biomarkers are likely linked to subsets of latently infected cells, and an extended antibody panel will be required to inclusively target the latent HIV reservoir.

### Keywords
Ceacam1, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Primary cd4+ t cells, Hiv latency, Biomarkers, Proteome, Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, Plxnb2

### Affiliations
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.
Caltech

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Caltech


