### Accession
PXD038612

### Title
Discovery of a druggable copper-signaling pathway that drives inflammation

### Description
Quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics in MDM during inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
This experiment was carried out using primary monocytes obtained from peripheral blood samples of 8 independent human donors (Etablissement Français du Sang). Pan monocytes were isolated by negative magnetic sorting using microbeads according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-096-537), and cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11554516), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Eurobio Scientific, CVFSVF00-01) and treated with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF, Miltenyi Biotec, 130-093-866, 100 ng/mL) to induce differentiation into monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM). At day 5 of differentiation, non-activated MDM (naMDM) were treated with lipopolysaccharides (LPS, InvivoGen, tlrl-3pelps, 100 ng/mL, 24 h) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma, Miltenyi Biotec, 130-096-484, 20 ng/mL, 24 h) to generate activated MDM (aMDM). Whole cell extracts were collected by scraping after incubation with 10 mM PBS-EDTA at 37 ºC. After centrifugation at 1500 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, cells were washed twice with ice-cold 1× PBS and lysed using lysis buffer (8M urea, 200 mM NH4HCO3, cOmplete) for 1 h at 4 ºC on a rotary wheel. After centrifugation at 20000 × g at 4 ºC for 20 min, supernatants that contained proteins were used for the global proteome analysis. In brief, the global proteome was quantitatively analyzed with a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a label-free approach.  About 10 μg of total protein cell lysate were reduced by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 57 °C for 1 h and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted in 100mM NH4HCO3 to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega CAT#: V5071) at a ratio of 1/50. Samples were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 40:60 MeCN/H2O with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were dried in a Speedvac and reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.3% TFA prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The identity of proteins was established from UniProt human canonical database using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.3 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms; PMID: 17610305) For the False Discovery Rate (FDR) calculation we used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and it was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.21 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with up to two missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl modifications were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation is a complex physiological process triggered in response to harmful stimuli<sup>1</sup>. It involves cells of the immune system capable of clearing sources of injury and damaged tissues. Excessive inflammation can occur as a result of infection and is a hallmark of several diseases<sup>2-4</sup>. The molecular bases underlying inflammatory responses are not fully understood. Here we show that the cell surface glycoprotein CD44, which marks the acquisition of distinct cell phenotypes in the context of development, immunity and cancer progression, mediates the uptake of metals including copper. We identify a pool of chemically reactive copper(II) in mitochondria of inflammatory macrophages that catalyses NAD(H) redox cycling by activating hydrogen peroxide. Maintenance of NAD<sup>+</sup> enables metabolic and epigenetic programming towards the inflammatory state. Targeting mitochondrial copper(II) with supformin (LCC-12), a rationally&#xa0;designed dimer of metformin, induces a reduction of the NAD(H) pool, leading to metabolic and epigenetic states that oppose macrophage activation. LCC-12 interferes with cell plasticity in other settings and reduces inflammation in mouse models of bacterial and viral infections. Our work highlights the central role of copper as a regulator of cell plasticity and unveils a therapeutic strategy based on metabolic reprogramming and the control of epigenetic cell states.

### Keywords
Inflammation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


