### Accession
PXD008419

### Title
Correction of cognitive deficits in mouse models of Down syndrome by pharmacological inhibitor of DYRK1A

### Description
Down Syndrome (DS) results from the trisomy of human chromosome 21 (HSA21). It is still the most frequent intellectual disability, affecting 1 newborn per 700 births. Among candidate genes explaining intellectual disabilities seen in DS patients, the dual specificity tyrosine-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A, DYRK1A, is located in the DS critical region of chromosome 21. DYRK1A has become a major screening target for the development of selective and potent pharmacological inhibitors. We here investigated the effects of a relatively selective DYRK1A inhibitor, Leucettine 41 (hereafter L41) in three different trisomic mouse models with increasing genetic complexity, Tg(Dyrk1a), Ts65Dn and Dp1Yey. Leucettines are derived from the marine sponge alkaloid Leucettamine B.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 0.5M TEAB 0.05% SDS and suibjected to tip sonication and centrifugation. Protein content was measured using nanodrop. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and subjected to trypsin proteolysis. Peptides were iTRAQ labeled and subjected to offline C8 chromatography and online C18 chromatography hyphenated with tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submited to PD 1.4 for target decoy search

### Publication Abstract
Growing evidence supports the implication of DYRK1A in the development of cognitive deficits seen in Down syndrome (DS) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). We here demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of brain DYRK1A is able to correct recognition memory deficits in three DS mouse models with increasing genetic complexity [Tg(<i>Dyrk1a</i>), Ts65Dn, Dp1Yey], all expressing an extra copy of <i>Dyrk1a</i> Overexpressed DYRK1A accumulates in the cytoplasm and at the synapse. Treatment of the three DS models with the pharmacological DYRK1A inhibitor leucettine L41 leads to normalization of DYRK1A activity and corrects the novel object cognitive impairment observed in these models. Brain functional magnetic resonance imaging reveals that this cognitive improvement is paralleled by functional connectivity remodelling of core brain areas involved in learning/memory processes. The impact of <i>Dyrk1a</i> trisomy and L41 treatment on brain phosphoproteins was investigated by a quantitative phosphoproteomics method, revealing the implication of synaptic (synapsin 1) and cytoskeletal components involved in synaptic response and axonal organization. These results encourage the development of DYRK1A inhibitors as drug candidates to treat cognitive deficits associated with DS and AD.

### Keywords
Leucettine, Synapsin, Dyrk1a, Down syndrome, Kinase inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D Garbis
University of Southampton


