### Accession
PXD014515

### Title
Blood contamination in CSF and its impact on quantitative analysis of alpha-synuclein

### Description
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is important for diagnosis of neurological diseases. Specific proteins, which are released from the CNS can be quantitatively monitored. Especially, in the field of neurodegenerative diseases abnormal protein abundance is an important biomarker. However, the quality of the CSF sample is a key factor for the analytic outcome. In this study we evaluated the effect of blood contamination in CSF with respect to protein biomarker identification. We compared three distinct measures: semiquantitative Combur10-Test® strips for urinary hemoglobin, a specific hemoglobin ELISA and bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics for the determination of the general blood contamination level.  In parallel, we studied the impact of blood contamination on the detectability of alpha-synuclein (aSyn), a highly abundant protein in blood/erythrocytes and potential biomarker for Parkinson’s disease. Based on our results we identified other markers for blood contamination beyond hemoglobin and defined a grading system for blood levels in CSF samples including a lower limit of tolerable blood contamination for mass spectrometry-based biomarker studies and suggest the Combur10-Test® as a cost-effective test for simple and fast determination of blood contaminations in CSF.

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution digested 20 µL CSF was mixed with 50 µL 0.1 % Rapigest™ (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration 5 mM) and heated at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by cooling down at room temperature for 10 min. Alkylation was performed with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (final concentration) and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Tryptic digestion (trypsin in 10 mM HCl and 50 mM NH4HCO3) overnight at 37°C in a thermomixer was performed with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50. Digestion was stopped by adding 10 % TFA solution (to a pH < 2) and samples were incubated for 45 minutes at 37°C. Centrifugation was performed at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant was transferred into a new Eppendorf tube. The peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  Protein identification was performed by using Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thermo raw files were imported and matched against UniProt/Swiss-Prot using human taxonomy (released 2016_11, 552,884 sequences entries in the whole database and 20,121 for human) using Mascot search algorithm (ver. 2.5.1) (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). The database search was performed with the following parameters: Mass tolerance 5 ppm for precursor and 20 mmu for fragment ions, Missed cleavages: 1, Modifications: methionine oxidation as dynamic and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed, FDR threshold: <1 %. Label-free quantification was performed by using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported in the software and all runs were matched to the most suitable run among them (by automatic selection). Afterwards, the software generated a list of features including the m/z values of all measured peptides at a given retention time. The following filters were used at feature level: allowed charge state in the range 2+ and 5+, reject the features with two or less isotopes. The raw abundances of each feature were automatically normalized in order to correct experimental variations. Quantified features were then matched to peptide and protein identification by importing the search results generated by proteome discoverer (see protein identification). Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is important for diagnosis of neurological diseases. Especially for neurodegenerative diseases, abnormal protein abundance in CSF is an important biomarker. However, the quality of CSF is a key factor for the analytic outcome. Any external contamination has tremendous impact on the analysis and the reliability of the results. In this study, we evaluated the effect of blood contamination in CSF with respect to protein biomarker identification. We compared three distinct measures: Combur10-Test<sup>&#xae;</sup> strips, a specific hemoglobin ELISA, and bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics for the determination of the general blood contamination level. In parallel, we studied the impact of blood contamination on the detectability of alpha-synuclein (aSyn), a highly abundant protein in blood/erythrocytes and a potential biomarker for Parkinson's disease. Comparable results were achieved, with all three approaches enabling detection of blood levels in CSF down to 0.001%. We found higher aSyn levels with increasing blood contamination, highlighting the difficulty of authentic quantification of this protein in CSF. Based on our results, we identified other markers for blood contamination beyond hemoglobin and defined a grading system for blood levels in CSF samples, including a lower limit of tolerable blood contamination for MS-based biomarker studies.

### Keywords
Quantification, Blood contamination, Urine strip, Bottom-up mass spectrometry, Cerebrospinal fluid, Alpha-synuclein, Elisa

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Germany

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Germany


