### Accession
PXD000541

### Title
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis of Escherichia coli during exposure an abrupt downshift in water activity

### Description
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis was used to examine time-dependent changes in proteome of E. coli O157:H7 strain Sakai upon an abrupt downshift in water activity (aw) (i.e., from aw 0.993 to aw 0.967) at a constant temperature of 35°C. Bacterial cells were harvested before hyperosmotic shift, and 0 (i.e. immediately after the shift), 30, 80, and 310 min after the shift. It also should be noted that these time points were chosen with the aims to characterize the physiology of E. coli during dynamic changes in growth kinetics induced by an abrupt downshift in water activity. Specifically, the samples taken at time 0 and 30 min were obtained during the period in which the loss of cell culturability was observed, whereas the samples at time 80 and 310 min respectively reflected the physiological state of E. coli during the ‘recovery’ period and during growth after the shift.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The present study was undertaken to investigate growth kinetics and time-dependent change in global expression of Escherichia coli O157&#x2236;H7 Sakai upon an abrupt downshift in water activity (aw). Based on viable count data, shifting E. coli from aw 0.993 to aw 0.985 or less caused an apparent loss, then recovery, of culturability. Exponential growth then resumed at a rate characteristic for the aw imposed. To understand the responses of this pathogen to abrupt osmotic stress, we employed an integrated genomic and proteomic approach to characterize its cellular response during exposure to a rapid downshift but still within the growth range from aw 0.993 to aw 0.967. Of particular interest, genes and proteins with cell envelope-related functions were induced during the initial loss and subsequent recovery of culturability. This implies that cells undergo remodeling of their envelope composition, enabling them to adapt to osmotic stress. Growth at low aw, however, involved up-regulating additional genes and proteins, which are involved in the biosynthesis of specific amino acids, and carbohydrate catabolism and energy generation. This suggests their important role in facilitating growth under such stress. Finally, we highlighted the ability of E. coli to activate multiple stress responses by transiently inducing the RpoE and RpoH regulons to control protein misfolding, while simultaneously activating the master stress regulator RpoS to mediate long-term adaptation to hyperosmolality. This investigation extends our understanding of the potential mechanisms used by pathogenic E. coli to adapt, survive and grow under osmotic stress, which could potentially be exploited to aid the selection and/or development of novel strategies to inactivate this pathogen.

### Keywords
2d-lc/ms/ms, Water activity stress, Physiology, Stress response, E. coli

### Affiliations
Food Safety Centre

### Submitter
Chawalit Kocharunchitt

### Lab Head


