### Accession
PXD019917

### Title
Identification of proteins exhibiting TgDegP2-responsive thermal stability

### Description
To broadly explore artemisinin susceptibility in apicomplexan parasites, we used genome-scale CRISPR screens recently developed for Toxoplasma gondii to discover sensitizing and desensitizing mutations. From these screens, we identified the mitochondrial protease DegP2, which appeared gDegP2-responsive thermal stability in a pathway leading to decreased DHA susceptibility. To identify proteins exhibiting DegP2-responsive thermal stability

### Sample Protocol
A volume corresponding to 50 µg of protein from the 37°C heavy and light SILAC sample was combined, for 100 µg total. Equivalent volumes from the remaining temperatures were similarly pooled. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 10 minutes at 55°C and were alkylated with 15 mM MMTS for 10 minutes at room temperature. The samples were desalted and cleared of detergent using the SP3 protocol(Hughes et al. 2019). Proteins were digested at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted and quantified using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay, and 50 µg of peptides from the 37°C sample and the equivalent volume from the remaining temperatures were labeled with TMT10plex at a 1:2 peptide:tag ratio according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled peptides from one treatment condition were pooled and desalted with a SepPak Light (Waters), eluted in 40% acetonitrile/0.1% acetic acid, and lyophilized. Peptides were fractionated offline via reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography using Shimadzu LC-20AD pumps and a 10 cm x 2.1 mm column packed with 2.6 µm Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 media (Phenomenex). The gradient was isocratic 1% A buffer (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in water) for 1 minute at 150 µl/min with increasing B buffer (100% acetonitrile) concentrations to 16.7% B at 20.5 min, 30% B at 31 min and 45% B at 36 min. Fractions were collected with a FRC-10A fraction collector, and 15 samples were lyophilized for analysis. Each fraction was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer in positive ion mode connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid as Solvent A and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid as Solvent B (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at 3 µl/min on a gradient of 6 to 21% B for 41 minutes, 21 to 36% B for 20 minutes, 36 to 50% B for 10 minutes, and 50 to 100% B over 15 minutes. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode with a scan range of 375 to 1400 m/z, resolution of 120,000, maximum fill time of 50 ms, and AGC target of 3E6 with a 15-second dynamic exclusion window. Precursors were isolated with 0.8 m/z window and fragmented with a NCE of 32. The top 20 MS2 spectra were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1500 m/z with a resolution of 45,000, AGC target of 1E5, maximum fill time of 120 ms, and first fixed mass of 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists and protein IDs were generated in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB-45 protein database (ToxoDB.org). The search included the following post-translational modifications for light samples: dynamic Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y), dynamic Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), dynamic Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (Any N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (K), and static Methylthio / +45.988 Da (C); and the following post-translational modifications for heavy samples: dynamic Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y), dynamic Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), dynamic Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus), dynamic TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (Any N-Terminus), dynamic Lys8-TMT6plex / +237.177 Da (N-Terminus), static Lys8-TMT6plex / +237.177 Da (K), static Label:13C(6)15N(4) / +10.008 Da (R) and static Methylthio / +45.988 Da (C). Reporter ion intensities and ratios were quantified for unique peptides with a strict 1% FDR, co-isolation threshold of 50%, and S/N of 5.

### Publication Abstract
Artemisinins have revolutionized the treatment of Plasmodium falciparum malaria; however, resistance threatens to undermine global control efforts. To broadly explore artemisinin susceptibility in apicomplexan parasites, we employ genome-scale CRISPR screens recently developed for Toxoplasma gondii to discover sensitizing and desensitizing mutations. Using a sublethal concentration of dihydroartemisinin (DHA), we uncover the putative transporter Tmem14c whose disruption increases DHA susceptibility. Screens performed under high doses of DHA provide evidence that mitochondrial metabolism can modulate resistance. We show that disrupting a top candidate from the screens, the mitochondrial protease DegP2, lowers porphyrin levels and decreases DHA susceptibility, without significantly altering parasite fitness in culture. Deleting the homologous gene in P. falciparum, PfDegP, similarly lowers heme levels and DHA susceptibility. These results expose the vulnerability of heme metabolism to genetic perturbations that can lead to increased survival in the presence of DHA.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Thermal proteome profiling, Artemisinin susceptibility, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA


