### Accession
PXD023841

### Title
SUMO Proteomics Analyses Identify Protein Inhibitor of Activated STAT-Mediated Regulatory Networks Involved in Cell Cycle and Cell Proliferation

### Description
Protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) are E3 SUMO ligases playing important roles in protein stability and signaling transduction pathways. PIAS proteins are overexpressed in the triple-negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, and PIAS knockout (KO) results in a reduction in cell proliferation and cell arrest in S phase. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying PIAS functions in cell proliferation and cell cycle remain largely unknown. Here, we used quantitative SUMO proteomics to explore the regulatory role of PIAS SUMO E3 ligases upon CRISPR/Cas9 KO of individual PIAS. A total of 1422 sites were identified, and around 10% of SUMO sites were regulated following KO of one or more PIAS genes. We identified protein substrates that were either specific to individual PIAS ligase or regulated by several PIAS ligases. Ki-67 and TOP2A, which are involved in cell proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, are SUMOylated at several lysine residues by all PIAS ligases, suggesting a level of redundancy between these proteins. Confocal microscopy and biochemical experiments revealed that SUMOylation regulated TOP2A protein stability, while this modification is involved in the recruitment of Ki-67 nucleolar proteins containing SUMO interacting motif. These results provide novel insights into both the redundant and specific regulatory mechanisms of cell proliferation and cell cycle mediated by PIAS SUMO E3 ligases.

### Sample Protocol
PIAS gene knockout in HEK293 SUMO3m cell lines were performed by CRISPR/Cas9-based gene knockout technology. The parental HEK293-SUMO3m cells were cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with light (0Lys, 0Arg) amino acids. HEK293-SUMO3m-KO-CTL cells were grown in DMEM containing medium (4Lys, 6Arg), and different PIAS KO cells were separately grown in DMEM containing heavy (8Lys, 10Arg) isotopic forms of lysine and arginine for at least 6 passages to ensure full labelling. For each triple SILAC experiment, only the light channel was treated with 10mM MG132 for 16h to increase protein SUMOylation. The MG132-treated light channel serves as a signal booster for the other channels to trigger MS/MS of SUMOylated peptides. The number of cells combined from each channel was using the ratio of L: M: H = 1 : 4: 4, and the combined cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, lysed in NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer (6 M Guanidinium HCl, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, 5 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=8) and sonicated. For each biological replicate, 9 mg of total cell extract (TCE) were incubated with 360 μL of NiNTA beads (Qiagen) at 4 °C for 16h. The beads were subsequently washed once with 12 mL of NiNTA denaturing incubation buffer, five times with 12 mL of NiNTA denaturing washing buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM imidazole, 5 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 20 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=6.3) and twice with 10 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein quantification on beads was conducted using micro Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Protein digestion on beads was carried out using a ratio 1:20 sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega): protein extract in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C overnight. MagReSyn® Protein A magnetic beads (RESYN BIOSCIENCES) were equilibrated with anti-K(NQTGG) antibody at a ratio of  1:2 (v/w) for 1 h at 4 °C in PBS and then washed 3 times with 200 mM triethanolamine pH=8.3. For antibody/beads crosslinking, 10 μL of 5 mM DMP in 200 mM triethanolamine pH=8.3 was added per μl of bead slurry and incubated with inversion for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched for 30 minutes by adding 1 M Tris-HCl pH=8 to a final concentration 50 mM. Prior to immunoisolation, three washes with ice-cold PBS were applied on crosslinked beads. The desalted peptides were resuspended in 1 ml PBS containing cross-linked anti-K-NQTGG at a ratio of 1:2 (w/w). The peptides/beads were incubated for 1 h at 4 °C, followed with three washes of 1 mL of 1 × ice-cold PBS, once with 1 mL of 0.1 × ice-cold PBS, and last wash with cold MilliQ H2O. The enriched SUMO peptides were eluted from the beads using 200 μL of 0.2% formic acid in water three times  and dried down by Speed Vac. SUMO peptides were subsequently fractionated by Strong cation exchange (SCX) stage tips. These tips were conditioned with acetonitrile. SUMO peptides were redissolved in water containing 15% acetonitrile (ACN and 0.2% formic acid (FA) and loaded onto the conditioned SCX stage tip. Loaded peptides were washed once with an SCX wash buffer (10 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN, and 0.5% FA). Sequential peptide fractionation was performed using a series of SCX elution buffers with increasing concentration of ammonium acetate (125, 175, 250, 350, 750, 1500 mM ammonium acetate in 20% ACN, 0.5% FA). All the eluted fractions were dried down by Speed Vac and subject to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10 and searched against UniProt/SwissProt human proteome database (http://www.uniprot.org/) released on June 2019). The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was set to 3. The fixed modification was set using Carbamidomethylation (C) and acetylation (Protein N term), oxidation (M), deamination (NQ), and NQTGG (K) were set as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature was enabled to correlate identification and quantitation results across different runs. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide, protein, and site identification. Only the SUMO sites with a localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were kept.

### Publication Abstract
Protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) proteins are E3 SUMO ligases playing important roles in protein stability and signaling transduction pathways. PIAS proteins are overexpressed in the triple-negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, and PIAS knockout (KO) results in a reduction in cell proliferation and cell arrest in the S phase. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying PIAS functions in cell proliferation and cell cycle remain largely unknown. Here, we used quantitative SUMO proteomics to explore the regulatory role of PIAS SUMO E3 ligases upon CRISPR/Cas9 KO of individual PIAS. A total of 1422 sites were identified, and around 10% of SUMO sites were regulated following KO of one or more PIAS genes. We identified protein substrates that were either specific to individual PIAS ligase or regulated by several PIAS ligases. Ki-67 and TOP2A, which are involved in cell proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, are SUMOylated at several lysine residues by all PIAS ligases, suggesting a level of redundancy between these proteins. Confocal microscopy and biochemical experiments revealed that SUMOylation regulated TOP2A protein stability, while this modification is involved in the recruitment of Ki-67 nucleolar proteins containing the SUMO interacting motif. These results provide novel insights into both the redundant and specific regulatory mechanisms of cell proliferation and cell cycle mediated by PIAS SUMO E3 ligases.

### Keywords
Hek293 sumo3m lc-ms/ms pias sumo e3 ligase proteomics

### Affiliations
1 Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 2 Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
University of Montreal

### Submitter
Chongyang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
1 Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 2 Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.


