### Accession
PXD004318

### Title
Swine intestinal epithelial cells, LC-ESI-MS/MS

### Description
We compared intestinal epithelial protein profiles between piglets receiving either the diet containing 1.66% leucine or the diet containg 2.44% leucine using a proteomics technique, termed isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction from piglet intestinal epithelial cells 2. iTRAQ labeling and strong cation exchange fractionation 3. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2. Proteins were identified using the Mascot search enhine run against the Uniprot database for Sus scrofa. For protein identification, a mass of tolerance of 20 ppm was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.05 Da for fragmented ions, with an allowance for one missed cleavage event in the tryptic digests. For reduce the possibility of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20）at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis were counted as identified.

### Publication Abstract
Leucine serves not only as a substrate for protein synthesis, but also as a signal molecule involved in protein metabolism. However, whether the levels of cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), which have damaging effects on cellular DNA, proteins, and lipids, are regulated by leucine is still unclear. Here, we report that leucine supplementation reduces ROS levels in intestinal epithelial cells of weaned piglets. A proteomics analysis revealed that leucine supplementation induces an energy metabolism switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) towards glycolysis. The leucine-induced ROS reduction and the energy metabolism switch were further validated in cultured cells. Mechanistically, our data revealed that leucine-induced ROS reduction actually depends on the energy metabolism switch from OXPHOS towards glycolysis through the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)- hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1&#x3b1;) pathway. These findings reveal a vital regulatory role of leucine as the signal molecule involved in an energy metabolism switch in mammals.

### Keywords
Swine, Lc-esi-ms/ms, Intestianl epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China.

### Submitter
jun hu

### Lab Head
Dr Xianghua Yan
College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China.


