### Accession
PXD024143

### Title
A Mid-Holocene reindeer antler from Regstrup, Sjælland, Denmark

### Description
A small, shed antler fragment of a reindeer from Sjælland, Denmark has been dated to the Mid-Holocene, ca., 4700 cal B.C. Reindeer was an important component of the Lateglacial fauna in Denmark, and the species survived for ca. 1400 years into the Holocene. However, we consider it highly unlikely that this species inhabited Denmark during the Mid-Holocene, when dense forests characterized the vegetation and summer temperatures were somewhat higher than at present. We suggest that the reindeer antler came to Sjælland from Norway or Sweden as a result of trade, perhaps involving flint.

### Sample Protocol
For extraction and digestion, we sampled approximately 15 mg of bone powder from the antler. Protein extraction was performed as described by Jensen et al. (2020; extraction 1).  An extraction control was processed in parallel to the sample. Briefly, 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma) was added to the sample followed by incubation at ambient temperature for 16 h, after this time the sample was centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was removed and discarded. The purpose of this pretreatment was to reduce surface contamination. Subsequently, proteins were extracted by the addition of 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubation at 65℃ for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 10,000 xg for 10 minutes, the supernatant was removed and quantified using the BCA assay (Thermo Fischer) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A volume equivalent to 20 µg of protein was placed into a fresh protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) to which 0.4 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added. The digestion was allowed to proceed at 37℃ for 18 hours. The digestion was terminated by the acidification of the samples to <pH 2 using 10% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma Aldrich). After acidification the sample was centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes. Peptide purification was performed using C18 reverse-phase resin ZipTips (PierceTM) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides were eluted with 50 µl of 50% acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma Aldrich)/0.1% TFA (vol/vol).  For LC-MS/MS a volume containing approximately 2 µg of protein was placed in separate wells on a new 96-well plate and topped up to 30 µL using 40% (ACN) and 0.1% FA. The sample and a blank were then vacuum centrifuged to approximately 3 µL and resuspended with 10 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% (ACN) and 5 µL of sample analysed by LC-MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS parameters were the same as previously used for palaeoproteomic samples (Jensen et al. 2020; Mackie et al. 2018), in short: MS1: 120 k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 60 k resolution, top 10 mode, maximum IT 118 ms, minimum scan target 3E3, normalized collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z.    Jensen, T.Z.T., Mackie, M., Taurozzi, A.J., Lanigan, L.T., Gundelach, C., Olsen, J., Sørensen, S.A., Collins, M.J., Sørensen, M. and Schroeder, H., 2020. The biomolecular characterization of a finger ring contextually dated to the emergence of the Early Neolithic from Syltholm, Denmark. Royal Society Open Science 7, 191172. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.191172  Mackie, M., Rüther, P., Samodova, D., Di’Gianvincenzo, F., Granzotto, C., Lyon, D., Peggie, D.A., Howard, H., Harrison, L., Jensen, L.J., Olsen, J.V. and Cappellini, E., 2018. Palaeoproteomic profiling of conservation layers on a 14th Century Italian wall painting. Angewandte Chemie 57, 7369-7374. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201713020

### Data Protocol
We used MaxQuant (v.1.6.3.4) to search the generated Thermo RAW files. We prepared a FASTA database containing published collagen type I alpha 1 and alpha 2 (COL1ɑ1 and COL1ɑ2) sequence data from reindeer, red deer (Cervus elaphus), elk (Alces alces) and roe deer (Capreolus capreolus). MaxQuant settings were as follows: Digestion mode was set to specific for Trypsin. Variable modifications were: oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln ->pyro-Glu, Glu ->pyro-Glu, and Hydroxyproline. Fixed modifications were: Carbamidomethyl (C). The remaining settings were set to the program defaults, apart from Min. score for unmodified and modified peptides searches, which were both set to 60.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ertebølle culture, Trade, Stone age, Rangifer tarandus, Denmark, Lc-ms/ms, Reindeer

### Affiliations
The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


