### Accession
PXD007598

### Title
Global analysis of protein degradation rates in primary rodent skin fibroblasts

### Description
Within individual species and cell types, the range of protein turnover rates can span multiple orders of magnitude. However, it is not known if turnover kinetics of individual proteins are highly conserved or if they have evolved to meet the physiological demands of individual species. We have conducted systematic analyses of proteome turnover kinetics in primary dermal fibroblasts isolated from eight different rodent species. Our results demonstrate that protein turnover rates are generally well conserved across species but gradually deviate as a function of evolutionary distance.

### Sample Protocol
Dermal fibroblasts were cultured to contact-inhibition and labeled with L-arginine:HCl (13C6) and L-lysine:HCL (13C6). After 0, 2, 4, and 6 days of labeling cells were harvested. Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, and 50 mM HEPES (pH 9.0) and were subjected to sonication using a high-energy sonicator. Subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using 50 ug of total protein from each culture. Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed with 5 mM TCEP, and protein alkylation was performed with 10 mM IAA. DTT was added to 1 mM to quench IAA and samples were diluted to less than 1M urea with 50 mM HEPES. To derive tryptic peptides, 1 ug of trypsin was added and the samples were incubated at 37C overnight. To quench trypsin, formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%. To increase proteome coverage, high-pH fractionation was conducted on extracts prior to LC-MS/MS using the Pierce High-pH Reverse-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Alternatively, for mouse replicates, extracts were fractionated using homemade C18 spin columns. Eight different elution buffers were made in 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile added. All fractions were then dried down and re-suspended in 20 ul of 0.1% TFA. Peptide extracts were injected onto homemade C18 columns with 1.8 um beads, using an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. For the elution gradient, 0.1% formic acid in water was used as solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile was used as Solvent B. For samples that were pre-fractionated with Pierce High-pH fractionation columns, the gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 8% over 5 minutes, then increased to 30% Bover 68 minutes, until finally increasing to 70% B over 3 minutes. The gradient was held at 70% B for 3 minutes until returning to 0% B over 2 minutes, then was held there for 8 minutes to re-equilibrate the column. For samples the were pre-fractionated using homemade C18 spin columns, optimized LC gradients were used for each fraction. For fractions 1 and 2, the gradient went from 2%-20% over 71 minutes. For fractions 3 and 4, the gradient went from 3%-30% over 71 minutes. For fractions 5 and 6, the gradient went from 8%-30% over 71 minutes .For fractions 7 and 8, the gradient went from 11%-35% over 71 minutes. For all methods, the gradient was ramped up to 70% B after the peptide separation and was held there for 3 minutes, and then  returned to 0% B over 2 minutes and held there for 8 minutes to re-equilibrate the column. The total run for all methods was 90 minutes. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with a full MS1 scan followed by 20 data-dependent MS2 scans. The full scan was doe over a range of 400-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 50ms. The MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum ejection time of 55 ms. The isolation width was 1.5 m/z, with an offset of 0.3 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
MS2 data for all samples were searched against the M. musculus Uniprot database (downloaded 6/7/2017) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. SILAC peptide and protein quantification were performed with MaxQuant using the default parameter settings. For each peptide, heavy to light (H/L) SILAC ratio was determined by MaxQuant using a model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that the corresponding peptide spectral matches were detected. The H/L ratio for each peptide, obtained MaxQuant outputs, was subsequently converted to fraction labeled (H/(H+L)) measurements. To obtain degradation rate constants for each peptide, plots of fraction labeled as a function of time were fitted to a single exponential function using least square fitting.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Proteostasis, Quantitative proteomics, Dynamic stable isotope labeling in cell culture (silac), Protein turnover

### Affiliations
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory
Department of Biologyy, University of Rochester, NY, USA University of Rochester  Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Department of Biologyy, University of Rochester, NY, USA University of Rochester  Mass Spectrometry Resource Laboratory, NY, USA


