### Accession
PXD009810

### Title
Sex-dependent variation of pumpkin (Cucurbita maxima cv Big Max) nectar and nectaries as determined by proteomics and metabolomics

### Description
Cucurbita maxima c.v. Big Max is a monoecious plant with separate male and female flowers which utilizes nectar as a floral reward for the attraction of bees to the flowers. Maintenance of this mutualism with bees is essential for the reproductive success in this economically valuable crop. In this study, the sex-dependent variation in composition of male and female nectar and the nectaries were defined using a combination of GC-MS based metabolomics and LC-MS/MS based proteomics. Nectar proteins were detected non-quantitatively using LC-MS/MS coupled to Orbitrap. The male and female nectary proteomes were quantified using iTRAQ labeled peptides which were fractioned and concatenated prior to detection using LC-MS/MS coupled to Orbitrap.   The nectar proteome consists of 46 proteins, of which 70% overlap between nectar types. Only two proteins are unique to female nectar, and 10 are specific to male nectar. Nectarins (nectar proteins) commonly alter nectar carbohydrates. In our datasets, significant differences in carbohydrate abundance, specifically galactose and sucrose, may be explained by the unique presence of galactinol--sucrose galactosyltransferase 2 (functioning in galactose metabolism) and invertase (catalyzes the hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose and fructose) in the nectar of female and male flowers respectively.  The nectary proteome contained 339 identifiable proteins, 71% of which were descriptively annotatable by homology to Plantae. The abundance of 45 proteins differs significantly between male and female nectaries. GO slim analysis revealed a high abundance of proteins related to transport, protein metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, response to stress, and amino acid metabolism. Comparisons of relative protein abundance revealed that 45 proteins displayed differential expression between male and female nectaries (p-value <0.05); 20 of these proteins were more abundant in male nectaries and 25 were more abundant in female nectaries. GO enrichment of nectary proteins with increased female abundances indicate that female-enriched GO terms are associated with proteins functioning as plasma membrane proton pumps and central metabolism. Proteins associated with male nectary-enriched GO terms were related to cinnamic acid biosynthesis and neutralization of superoxide radicals and hydrogen peroxide.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 min at 37°C), and cysteine sulfhydryls were alkylated with iodoacetamide (30 min at 37°C in darkness).  2 μg of trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample and digested at 37°C for 16 hr.  The samples were de-salted on a Waters HLB Oasis column, speed vac concentrated and then stored at -80°C prior to LCMS analysis.  The peptide mixtures were rehydrated to 50µL with 2% Acetonitrile/Water/2% Formic acid with 6µL separated by on-line reversed phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC II system with a reversed-phase pre-column Magic C-18AQ (100µm I.D., 2 cm length, 5µm, 100Å,, Michrom BioResources Inc, Auburn, CA) pre-column and a reversed phase nano-analytical column Magic C-18AQ (75µm I.D., 15 cm length, 5µm, 100Å, Michrom BioResources Inc, Auburn, CA) both in-house prepared, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The chromatography system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex  source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Solvents were A: 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid; B: 90% Acetonitrile, 0.1%Formic acid.  After a 249 bar (~ 5µL) pre-column equilibration and 249 bar( ~ 8µL) nanocolumn equilibration, samples were separated by a 90 minute gradient  (0 min: 5%B;  90 min: 30%B; 2 min: 100%B; 8 min: 100%B). The LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) parameters were as follows:  Nano-electrospray ion source with spray voltage 2.5 kV, capillary temperature 250 ℃.  Survey MS1 scan m/z range 400-2000 profile mode, resolution 30,000 @400m/z with AGC target 1E6, and one microscan with maximum inject time 200 ms. Lock mass Siloxane 445.120024 for internal calibration with preview mode for FTMS master scans: on, injection waveforms: on, monoisotopic precursor selection: on; rejection of charge state:1.  The ten most intense ions charge state 2-4 exceeding 50,000 counts were selected for a ion trap collision induced dissociation (CID)  (IT MSMS fragmentation scans 2-11) and detection in centroid mode.  Dynamic exclusion settings were: repeat count: 1; repeat duration: 0 seconds; exclusion list size: 500; exclusion duration: 30 seconds with a 10ppm mass window.  The CID activation isolation window was: 2 Da; AGC target: 1E3; maximum inject time: 100 ms; activation time: 0.1 ms; activation Q: 0.250; and CID collision energy 30%.   Common human keratin and porcine trypsin peptide masses were excluded from MSMS selection during the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were created by XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software and analysed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.228 software suite (Thermo Scientific).  Parameters for the Spectrum Selection to generate peak lists of the CID spectra (activation type: CID; s/n cut-off: 1.5; total intensity threshold: 0; minimum peak count: 1; precursor mass: 350-5000 Da) The  peak lists were submitted to an in-house Mascot 2.4.1 server against the Uniprot_Trembl trembl_130912 (41,451,118 sequences; 13,208,986,710 residues) search as follows:  precursor tolerance 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da; Trypsin enzyme 1 missed cleavages; FT-ICR instrument type; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications: Deamidated (N,Q), and Oxidation (M).  Percolator settings:  Max delta Cn 0.05; Target FDR strict 0.01, Target FDR relaxed 0.05 with validation based on q-Value.   Statistical analyses of the Proteome Discover result files were performed with the Scaffold Q+S software package (Proteome Software, Inc, Portland, OR). DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Proteome Discoverer version 2.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 1.4.1.14). Mascot was set up to search Uniprot-Swissprot (20161219, 262096 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_01_4752_2 UniSwissProt") assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, Uniprot-Swissprot (20161219, 262173 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_02_30155371 UniSwissProt") also assuming trypsin, Uniprot-Swissprot (20161219, 262181 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_03_Bracteal UniSwissProt") also assuming trypsin, Uniprot_Trembl (20130912, 944487 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_01_4752_2-01") also assuming trypsin, Uniprot_Trembl (20130912, 946189 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_02_30155371") also assuming trypsin and Uniprot_Trembl (20130912, 946345 entries) (only "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_03_Bracteal") also assuming trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 8.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine (only samples "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_01_4752_2-01", "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_02_30155371" and "20160601_REC-1575_Sample_03_Bracteal") was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Nectar is a floral reward that sustains mutualisms with pollinators, which in turn, improves fruit set. While it is known that nectar is a chemically complex solution, extensive identification and quantification of this complexity has been lacking. <i>Cucurbita maxima</i> cv. Big Max, like many cucurbits, is monoecious with separate male and female flowers. Attraction of bees to the flowers through the reward of nectar is essential for reproductive success in this economically valuable crop. In this study, the sex-dependent variation in composition of male and female nectar and the nectaries were defined using a combination of GC-MS based metabolomics and LC-MS/MS based proteomics. Metabolomics analysis of nectar detected 88 metabolites, of which 40 were positively identified, and includes sugars, sugar alcohols, aromatics, diols, organic acids, and amino acids. There are differences in 29 metabolites between male and female nectar. The nectar proteome consists of 45 proteins, of which 70% overlap between nectar types. Only two proteins are unique to female nectar, and 10 are specific to male nectar. The nectary proteome data, accessible at ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009810, contained 339 identifiable proteins, 71% of which were descriptively annotatable by homology to Plantae. The abundance of 45 proteins differs significantly between male and female nectaries, as determined by iTRAQ labeling. This rich dataset significantly expands the known complexity of nectar composition, supports the hypothesis of H+-driven nectar solute export, and provides genetic and chemical targets to understand plant-pollinator interactions.

### Keywords
Nectar, Cucurbita, Pumpkin, Nectary, Floral sex

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry Biophysics and Molecular Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
Iowa State University

### Submitter
Elizabeth Chatt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Basil J. Nikolau
Department of Biochemistry Biophysics and Molecular Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA


