### Accession
PXD021401

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Profiling of Cervicovaginal Fluid from Pregnant Women with Term and Preterm Birth

### Description
Preterm birth (PTB) is one of major causes of perinatal mortality and neonatal morbidity, but knowledge of its complex etiology is still limited. Here we present cervicovaginal fluid (CVF) protein profiles of pregnant women who subsequently delivered at spontaneous preterm or term, aiming to identify differentially expressed CVF proteins in PTB and term birth. The CVF proteome of women who sequentially delivered at preterm and term was analyzed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) coupled with two-dimensional nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-nLC-MS/MS). We compared the CVF proteome of PTB (n=5) and control subjects (term birth, n=7) using pooled control CVF (term birth, n=20) as spike-in standard. We identified 1294 CVF proteins, of which 605 were newly identified proteins. Of 990 proteins quantified in both PTB and term birth, 52 proteins were significantly up/down-regulated in PTB compared to term birth. The differentially expressed proteins were functionally associated to immune response, endopeptidase inhibitors and structural constituent of cytoskeleton. Taken together, our study provide quantitative CVF proteome profiles of pregnant women who ultimately delivered at preterm and term. These promising results could help to improve the understanding of PTB etiology and to discover biomarkers for asymptomatic PTB.

### Sample Protocol
The pooled control CVF sample as a reference standard was prepared from 20 term birth individual subjects by taking of equal amount of CVF protein in each sample. Equal amount of proteins from 5 PTB individual CVF samples were also pooled into one tube. A 25 μg of protein in each samples was used for proteomic analysis. Proteins were denatured with 6 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in dark. The remaining IAA was reacted with the excess L-cysteine for 30 min at room temperature. The mixtures were then diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, digested with trypsin (1:50, w/w) for 18 h at 37 ℃. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB cartridge (Waters, Milford, U.S.A.) and dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator. The iTRAQ labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction. For the quantitative profiling of CVF proteome from PTB group (Experiment 1), the iTRAQ reagents were used to label peptides as follows; pooled control CVF sample was labeled with 114 tag, pooled PTB CVF sample was labeled with 115 tag and five individual PTB CVF samples were labeled with 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121 tags, respectively. After reaction for 2 h at room temperature, the resulting peptides were combined, desalted on Oasis HLB cartridge and dried. For the quantitative profiling of CVF proteome from control group (Experiment 2), pooled control CVF sample and 7 control individual CVF samples (term birth, random selection) were labeled with following iTRAQ reagents: 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118 and 119 tag for 7 control individual CVF samples and 121 tag for pooled control CVF sample.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were searched using MaxQuant search engine 1.6.1.0 against the uniprot human database (Jan 3, 2018 release) for protein identification and iTRAQ quantification. Two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance value was set to 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for main search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was set as fixed modifications and variable modifications were selected as follows: iTRAQ modification of N-terminal residue (+304.205 Da), iTRAQ modification of lysine (+304.205 Da), acetylation of N-terminal residue (+42.011 Da) and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da). Protein identification was accepted at false discovery rate (FDR) of protein and peptide less than 1%. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed using the Perseus software 1.5.8.5. Identifications from the reverse decoy database and identified by site only were excluded. The iTRAQ ratios were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median. The differentially expressed proteins were determined with a fold-change cut off of 1.5. For statistical analysis, two sample student’s t-test analysis was performed and the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was subsequently applied to control for multiple testing. The method of Benjamini-Hochberg was performed using R Statistics (version 4.0.2, The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). A Benjamini-Hochberg adjust p-value of lower than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Preterm birth, Quantitative proteomics, Cervicovaginal fluid

### Affiliations
267, Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Center for Bioanalysis, Division of Chemical and Medical Metrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, Daejeon, 34113, Korea

### Submitter
Youn Eun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Dukjin Kang
Center for Bioanalysis, Division of Chemical and Medical Metrology, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science, Daejeon, 34113, Korea


