### Accession
PXD011826

### Title
Identification and characterization of Acanthamoeba cyst wall proteins

### Description
Acanthamoeba castellanii, cause of keratitis and blindness, is an emerging pathogen because of its association with contact lens use. The cyst wall contributes to pathogenesis as cysts are resistant to sterilizing reagents in lens solutions and to antibiotics applied to the eye.  Here we used structured illumination microscopy (SIM) and probes for sugar polymers to show that purified cyst walls of A. castellanii retain endocyst and ectocyst layers and conical structures (ostioles) that connect them. Mass spectrometry showed candidate cyst wall proteins (CWPs) are dominated by three families of lectins (named here Luke, Leo, and Jonah), because each binds to microcrystalline cellulose +/- chitin. Luke lectins contain two or three carbohydrate-binding modules (CBM49), which were first identified in a tomato cellulase. Leo lectins have two unique domains with eight cysteines each (8-Cys) +/- a Thr-, Lys-, and His-rich spacer. Jonah lectins contain one or three choice-of-anchor A (CAA) domains previously of unknown function. Representative members of each family were tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and expressed under their own promoters in transfected parasites. A representative Jonah lectin with one CAA domain is made early during encystation and localizes to the ectocyst layer. In contrast, Leo and Luke lectins are made later and localize to the endocyst layer and ostioles. Probes for CWPs (anti-GFP antibodies) and for sugar polymers (maltose-binding protein-fusions with CWPs) suggest Jonah lectin and sugar polymers to which it binds are accessible in the ectocyst layer, while Luke and Leo lectins and sugar polymers to which they bind are mostly inaccessible in the ectocyst layer and ostioles. In summary, these results show the most abundant A. castellanii CWPs are three sets of lectins, which localize to either the ectocyst layer (Jonah) or endocyst layer and ostioles (Luke and Leo).

### Sample Protocol
Mature cysts after 3 to 10 days incubation on non-agar plates were washed in PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 25 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 10 mM MgCl2, 2% CHAPS, and 1X Roche protease inhibitor). Cysts in 500 µl lysis buffer were broken four times for 2 min each with 200 µl of 0.5 mm glass beads in a Mini-Beadbeater-16 (Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK). The cyst wall pellet broken in the bead beater was overlaid on gradient containing 2 ml each of 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% Percoll (top to bottom) and centrifuged for 20 min at 3,000 x g. The layer between 60% and 80% Percoll, where the broken cyst walls were located, was collected and washed in PBS. The cyst wall preparation was resuspended in 10 ml of PBS, placed in a syringe, and forced through a 25 mm diameter Whatman Nuclepore Track-Etched Membrane with 8 µm holes (Sigma-Aldrich). The cellular debris passed through the membranesand was discarded. The membrane was removed from the cassette, suspended in 5 ml of PBS, and vortexed to release cyst walls. The membrane was removed, and cyst walls were distributed in microfuge tubes and pelleted at 15,000 x g for 10 min. For mass spectrometry analysis broken cyst wall were dissolved into 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreithol (DTT) for 20 min at 60 °C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at RT and then digested with proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 37 °C.  Alternatively broken cyst walls either before or after digestion with trypsin were reconstituted in 1× reducing SDS/PAGE loading buffer and run on a 4–20% TGX gel (Bio-Rad). Bands stained by colloidal Coomassie were excised and washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3/ACN. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin/chymotrypsin digestion were performed in-gel. Tryptic peptides were dried and desalted using C18 ZipTip concentrators (EMD Millipore). Peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) and separated using a nanoAcquity-UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a 5-μm Symmetry C18 trap column (180 μm x 20mm) and a 1.7-μmBEH130 C18 analytical column (150 μm × 100mm).Samples were loaded onto the precolumn, washed for 4 min at a flow rate of 4 μL/min with100% Mobile Phase A (99% Water/1% ACN/0.1% FA) then they were eluted to the analytical column with a gradient of 2–40% mobile phase B delivered over 40 or 90 min at a flow rate of 0.5 μL /min. The analytical column was connected online to a QE or a QE-HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Triversa NanoMate (Advion) electrospray ionization (ESI) source, that was operated at 1.7 kV.  Data were acquired in automatic Data Dependent top 10 (QE) or top 20 (QE-HF) mode

### Data Protocol
Automated database searches were performed using the PEAKS software suite version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The search criteria were set as follows: trypsin/chymotrypsin as the enzyme with ≤ 3 missed cleavages and ≤ 1 non-specific cleavage, the error tolerances for the precursor of 5 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, Pyro-glu from glutamine and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine as variable modifications. The peptide match threshold (-10 logP) was set to 15 and only peptide with a minimum of2 unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acanthamoeba, Lectins, Cyst wall proteins

### Affiliations
Dept. of Molecular & Cell Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts
University of York

### Submitter
Angelo Lopez

### Lab Head
Dr John Crawford Samuelson
Dept. of Molecular & Cell Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts


