### Accession
PXD007905

### Title
Microplitis mediator venom protein LC-MSMS

### Description
Insects mount an innate immune response to defend against the foreign invading microorganisms and parasites. To be successful parasites, endoparasitoid wasps need to be able to suppress the immune responses of their hosts. This allows the wasp eggs to hatch and the larvae to develop inside the host. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the interaction between wasp and its host remains largely unknown. In this study, we identified the reprolysin type metalloprotease venom component MmV189, which was designated venom regulatory factor-1 (VRF1). VRF1 plays a critical role in the interaction between the wasp Microplitis mediator and its lepidopteran host Helicoverpa armigera (the cotton bollworm). Proteomics analysis based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) revealed that at least twelve wasp venom proteins were released into the host hemolymph, causing significant changes in 511 host proteins at 24 h post parasitization. Taking an approach of integrated transcriptome and proteome analysis, we identified 313 putative proteins from the wasp venom reservoirs, 25 of which belong to the family of metalloproteases. Proenzyme of VRF1 was firstly cleaved in the host hemolymph after parasitization and then entered the hemocytes. Additionally, depletion of VRF1 in M. mediator by dsRNA-mediated knockdown significantly reduced the percentage of cocoon formation. Furthermore, we showed possible binding of VRF1 to Dorsal, a H. armigera nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), using yeast two-hybrid and pull-down assays, and confirmed the cleavage of Dorsal by VRF1. Moreover, we found that VRF1 acts as a protease to process Dorsal in the host hemocytes and suppress the induction of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Taken together, our findings identify a novel mechanism by which a component of endoparasitoid wasp venom interferes with host immune signaling cascades.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed on 50 independently dissected venom apparatus and venom reservoirs. The samples were stored on ice in PBS, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 0.5 mM EDTA. Samples containing large amounts of venom proteins were centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min at 4°C to remove cells and tissue debris. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and mixed with Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 30 mM HEPES, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT) on ice. Sample proteins were resolved on 4–12% polyacrylamide gels. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue R-250. Venom apparatus gel lanes were separated into 15 slices and venom reservoir gel lanes were separated into 10 slices. Each slice was treated using trypsin to digest proteins in the gel. Tryptic fragments were solubilized in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A total of 10 μL supernatant was collected by infusion using the UltiMate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and applied to an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted onto a Venusil XBP C18 column (Agela Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Samples were loaded at 4 μL/min for 5 min, and then at 400 nL/min using 8–30% buffer B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 34 min, followed by 30–60% buffer B for 5 min, then 60–80% buffer B for 3 min, and maintained using 80% buffer B for 8 min, and finally returned to 5% for 2 min. The peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by MS/MS in a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) linked to the HPLC system. Intact peptides were detected using an orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 for the MS and MS/MS analyses, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Putative venom proteins had to correspond to at least two peptides. After obtaining information on the peptides, BLASTP was used to search the protein database, which was generated by translating the assembled M. mediator unigene sequences in six open reading frames.

### Publication Abstract
Endoparasitoid wasps deliver a variety of maternal factors, such as venom proteins, viruses, and virus-like particles, from their venom and calyx fluid into hosts and thereby regulate the hosts' immune response, metabolism and development. The endoparasitoid, Microplitis mediator, is used as an important biological agent for controlling the devastating pest Helicoverpa armigera. In this study, using an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis approach, we identified 75 putative venom proteins in M. mediator. The identified venom components were consistent with other known parasitoid wasps' venom proteins, including metalloproteases, serine protease inhibitors, and glycoside hydrolase family 18 enzymes. The metalloprotease and serpin family showed extensive gene duplications in venom apparatus. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) based quantitative proteomics revealed 521 proteins that were differentially expressed at 6&#x202f;h and 24&#x202f;h post-parasitism, including 10 wasp venom proteins that were released into the host hemolymph. Further analysis indicated that 511 differentially expressed proteins (DEP) from the host are primarily involved in the immune response, material metabolism, and extracellular matrix receptor interaction. Taken together, our results on parasitoid wasp venoms have the potential to enhance the application of endoparasitoid wasps for controlling insect pest.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Venom, Micrioplitis mediator

### Affiliations
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
lin zhe

### Lab Head
Dr zhen zou
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


