### Accession
PXD019945

### Title
Identification of candidate circulating glucocorticoid response biomarkers in humans using a proteomic approach

### Description
Glucocorticoids used in pharmacological doses for the treatment of a variety of medical conditions, and endogenous glucocorticoid excess – Cushing’s syndrome, may result in several adverse effects, but currently there is no clinically useful biomarker of glucocorticoid activity.  A three-phase protein biomarker discovery strategy was used. Proteomic biomarker discovery and qualification was conducted on the secretome of ex vivo-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated from 6 volunteers, incubated ± dexamethasone 100 ng/mL for 4h and 24h. Untargeted proteomics with label-free quantification (LFQ) was conducted to discover candidate proteins which were quantified using targeted proteomics by a custom multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) assay. Five proteins were selected for serum measurement by immunoassay in 20 healthy volunteers, with blood drawn at baseline and 12h after 4 mg oral dexamethasone.  Paired analysis of the discovery proteomics data (576 and 280 proteins for the 4h and 24h secretomes, respectively) generated a shortlist of candidates which were qualified using MRM-MS to obtain protein level intensity data for 39 proteins. In the validation cohort, 3/5 proteins were dexamethasone-responsive, two significantly decreased: lysozyme C (mean±SEM) – 101±5.5 vs 67±4.4 ng/mL, (P<0.0001); nucleophosmin-1 (median (interquartile range)) – 16.6 (14.4-18.4) vs 14.2 (11.1-17.4) ng/mL, (P<0.01), while high mobility group box 2 (mean±SEM) significantly increased – 819±34 vs 984±60 pg/mL (P<0.01).  Using an ex vivo proteomic approach in PBMC, we have identified and verified circulating glucocorticoid-responsive proteins which may have potential as serum biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were prepared from 6 healthy volunteers for acute and chronic glucocorticoid treatments, respectively. Ten milliliters of blood collected in EDTA was gently layered under 7 mL of Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and centrifuged at 500 g for 20 min without brake. The interphase containing PBMCs was collected using a transfer pipette and transferred to a fresh tube. Cells were washed twice by resuspending up to 50 mL with PBS and spinning at 500 g for 5 min. Cells were resuspended up to 25 mL with PBS and spun at 200 g for 10 min to remove platelets. Aliquots of 1x106 PBMCs in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) + 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) were exposed to 100 ng/mL dexamethasone for 4 or 24 hours, while the corresponding control 1x106 PBMCs were exposed to media without dexamethasone for the same duration. The treatment media were removed, and the cells were incubated with serum-free and dexamethasone-free media for 3 hours to collect secreted proteins (secretome). Secretome samples were concentrated, and protein concentration estimated by Bradford assay. Approximately 20 µg of secretome protein was processed by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method, and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive Plus Obitrap MS coupled with Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) with search engine Andromeda against SwissProt (Homo sapiens reference proteome ID UP000005640, June 2017) and contaminant database (MaxQuant; 247 entries). Differential expression analysis using label free quantitation (LFQ) was done by paired two-sample t-test comparing between glucocorticoid treatment and its respective control in Perseus and R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Dexamethasone, Proteomics, Pbmc, Glucocorticoid

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
300 Herston Road, Herston QLD 4006

### Submitter
Thomas Stoll

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle M. Hill
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane QLD 4006, Australia


