### Accession
PXD012559

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics to unravel the cellular response to chemical stressors with different modes of action

### Description
Cells activate various stress response pathways when exposed to chemicals that can damage cellular macromolecules and organelles. Whether different chemical stressors activate common and/or stressor-specific pathways and to what extent is largely unclear. Here, we used quantitative phosphoproteomics to compare the phosphorylation signaling cascades induced by four stressors with different modes of action: the DNA damaging agent: cisplatin (CDDP), the topoisomerase II inhibitor: etoposide (ETO), the pro-oxidant: diethyl maleate (DEM) and the immunosuppressant: cyclosporine A (CsA). We show that equitoxic doses of these stressors induce distinctive and complex phosphorylation signaling cascades. Our results reveal stressor-specific kinase motifs and pathways. CDDP activates the DNA damage response (DDR) predominantly through the replication-stress related Atr kinase, whereas ETO triggers the DDR through Atr as well as the DNA double stranded break associated Atm kinase. CsA shares with ETO, a strong activation of CK2 kinase and significant Atm phosphorylation but lacks prominent activation of the DDR. Congruent with their known modes of action, CsA-mediated signaling is related to down-regulation of pathways that control hematopoietic differentiation and immunity whereas oxidative stress is the most prominent initiator of DEM-modulated stress signaling. This study presents an unprecedented molecular insight into the activated phosphorylation signaling cascades after various types of stressors. 

### Sample Protocol
After reduction (for 25 min with 2.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C), alkylation ( for 15 min in dark with 7 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT)) and quenching (2.5 mM DTT for 15 min at RT), SILAC samples were diluted 8-fold (with 25 mM Tris (pH 8.1) -1 mM CaCl2) prior to trypsin digestion (100 µg trypsin (Promega) for 15 h at 37°C). Digested peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.4%, centrifuged (3,200 rpm for 5 min) and the supernatants containing tryptic peptides were loaded onto C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak Vac 1 ml, Waters). Digested peptides were then desalted (0.1% acetic acid), eluted (0.1% acetic acid (ACA) and 30% acetonitrile (ACN)) and lyophilized to complete dryness. Peptide samples were then fractionated using a 9.4 by 200-mm 5 µm particle polysulfoethyl A strong cation exchange (SCX) column (PolyLC) at 1 ml/min with a 70-min gradient from 0 to 75 mM KCl, with 350 mM KCl for 38 min in 5 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.65) and 30% acetonitrile. Eighteen fractions were collected initially and the last eight fractions were combined into four fractions during desalting leading to a total of 14 fractions which were again lyophilized to complete dryness. Prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, Titanium dioxide (TiO2) columns (TipTop 1-100 µl; Glycen Corporation) were prepared by prewashing them with elution buffer (15 mM NH4OH, pH 10.5), equilibration buffer (0.1% TFA) and buffer A (300 mg/ml lactic acid, 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Each of these fourteen fractions were then loaded on to the TiO2 columns after dissolving them in buffer A. Each of these columns containing the peptide samples were then washed with buffer A and followed by buffer B (80% ACN [v/v], 0.1% TFA [v/v]). Prior to phosphopeptide elution, Eppendorf tubes were prepared by adding equal volume (to that of the planned elution volume) of 2% TFA. Phosphopeptides from the columns were then directly eluted with elution buffer into the tubes containing 2% TFA. Phosphopeptides were subsequently loaded onto Stage Tip C18 column (Proxeon) that was pre-equilibrated with methanol, buffer B and 0.1% TFA. Next the phosphopeptides were desalted (0.1% TFA), eluted (buffer B), lyophilized to complete dryness and stored at -80°C until further use. Phosphopeptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA for downstream MS analysis. All enriched samples were analyzed by online LC-MS/MS on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) interfaced with a Q-Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. All peptides were auto-sampled and separated on a 15 cm column (75μm internal diameter) packed in-house with 3 μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Germany). Peptides were separated over 80 min by a linear gradient from 8% to 60% of ACN in 0.5% acetic at a flow rate of 500nL/min till 10% ACN, then 250 nL/min up to 50% ACN and then 500nL/min for the remaining gradient. Spray voltage was 2kV, S-lens RF level at 50%, heated capillary at 275 °C, no sheath or auxiliary gas flow. MS was performed in a data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode where the 12 most intense, multiply charged peaks were chosen for fragmentation after acquiring each full spectrum. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s to avoid picking peaks more than once. Full scans were acquired at a mass range of 300-1750 m/z with resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, with target 3×106 based on predictive AGC from the previous full scan, with a maximum fill time of 30ms. Fragmentation was performed using Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy 25%, and acquired with target set to 3×106, with max injection time of 120ms at 35,000 resolution with an isolation window of 2m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) (FDR < 0.01 at the protein, peptides and modifications levels) using the default settings with the following minor changes: SILAC triplet was activated (Light = default; Medium = Lys4; Arg8; Heavy = Lys8; Arg10). Acetylation (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (STY) were selected as variable modifications and Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as fixed modification. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was set and “match between runs” (MBR) was enabled with the default value. A reverse sequence database was used to identify proteins and peptides by the inbuilt Andromeda search engine using the Mouse Uniprot FASTA database (November 2016). Further downstream analyses were performed using Perseus (version 1.5.5.3), Microsoft Excel (2016) and Graphpad Prism (ver. 7); protein annotations were extracted from Gene Ontology (GO) and kinase-substrate relations were based on phosphositeplus database (June 2017) (phosphosite.org). Normalized SILAC ratios from the “phospho(STY)sites.txt” file were first loaded in Perseus, log2 transformed and the phosphosites were expanded into singly-, doubly- and multiply- phosphorylated sites. Next, the reverse hits and contaminants were filtered out and the dataset was filtered to include at least one valid value. We also removed “normalized H/M” SILAC ratios from the dataset which resulted in the identification of 15,898 phosphosites in total. For the purpose of performing hierarchical clustering of all the 15,898 phosphosites shown in Figure 3B, we z-scored the data. The non-z-scored dataset was then averaged, filtered to include only quantified values in all the four stressors resulting in 6,667 phosphosites and was used to perform PCA. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed on 15,898 phosphosites. For pairwise comparison of the phosphoproteome of the other stressors with that of cisplatin, we performed two-sample student’s t-tests. For all statistical tests, unless otherwise indicated, a permutation-based FDR was calculated with a cut-off set at 0.05. For pathway analysis, we used a combination of two criteria to identify stressor-responsive phosphosites being either significantly responding (ANOVA; FDR <0.05) or passing a fold-change threshold (> 1.5) totalling 7,883 phosphosites. These sites were subsequently analysed using the “Phosphorylation Analysis” module of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen) software. Significantly responding pathways were identified with a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value cut-off set at 0.01 and a Z-score cut-off set at 2. To identify key kinases and phosphatases upstream of the phosphorylation events, we used the “upstream analysis” module of IPA. We used a p-value cut-off set at 0.05 and a z-score of 2 as threshold value to call significant activation. Motif analysis was performed using the IceLogo web application (Colaert et al, 2009) using the sequences of the total phosphosites from either individual stressors or the entire phosphoproteome dataset as background depending on the analyses performed. Results were visualized as percentage difference (% difference) and a p-value of 0.05 was set as cut-off. 

### Publication Abstract
Damage to cellular macromolecules and organelles by chemical exposure evokes activation of various stress response pathways. To what extent different chemical stressors activate common and stressor-specific pathways is largely unknown. Here, we used quantitative phosphoproteomics to compare the signaling events induced by four stressors with different modes of action: the DNA damaging agent: cisplatin (CDDP), the topoisomerase II inhibitor: etoposide (ETO), the pro-oxidant: diethyl maleate (DEM) and the immunosuppressant: cyclosporine A (CsA) administered at an equitoxic dose to mouse embryonic stem cells. We observed major differences between the stressors in the number and identity of responsive phosphosites and the amplitude of phosphorylation. Kinase motif and pathway analyses indicated that the DNA damage response (DDR) activation by CDDP occurs predominantly through the replication-stress-related Atr kinase, whereas ETO triggers the DDR through Atr as well as the DNA double-strand-break-associated Atm kinase. CsA shares with ETO activation of CK2 kinase. Congruent with their known modes of action, CsA-mediated signaling is related to down-regulation of pathways that control hematopoietic differentiation and immunity, whereas oxidative stress is the most prominent initiator of DEM-modulated stress signaling. This study shows that even at equitoxic doses, different stressors induce distinctive and complex phosphorylation signaling cascades.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Rad51, Mdc1, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics, Diethylmaleate, Mescs, Etoposide, Topbp1, Biological, Cyclosporinea, Cisplatin, Signal transduction, Mouse, Lc-msms, Silac, Atm, Mass spectrometry, Atr

### Affiliations
DNA damage responses and cancer lab Department of Human Genetics Leiden University Medical Center Eithovenweg 20 2333ZC Leiden The Netherlands
Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Bharath Sampadi

### Lab Head
Dr Harry Vrieling
DNA damage responses and cancer lab Department of Human Genetics Leiden University Medical Center Eithovenweg 20 2333ZC Leiden The Netherlands


