### Accession
PXD005624

### Title
Fermentative Spirochaetes drive nutrient cycling by a subsurface microbial loop in hydrocarbon-contaminated habitats

### Description
Members of the bacterial phylum Spirochaetes are primarily studied for their commensal and pathogenic roles in animal hosts. However, Spirochaetes are also frequently detected in anoxic hydrocarbon-contaminated environments but their ecological role in such ecosystems has so far remained unclear. Here we provide a functional trait to these frequently detected organisms with an example of a sulfate-reducing, naphthalene-degrading enrichment culture consisting of a sulfate-reducing deltaproteobacterium Desulfobacterium naphthalenivorans and a novel spirochete Rectinema cohabitans. Using a combination of genomic, proteomic, and physiological studies we show that R. cohabitans grows by fermentation of organic compounds derived from biomass from dead cells (necromass). It recycles the derived electrons in the form of H2 to the sulfate-reducing D. naphthalenivorans, thereby supporting naphthalene degradation and forming a simple microbial loop. We provide metagenomic evidence that equivalent associations between Spirochaetes and hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms are of general importance in hydrocarbon- and organohalide-contaminated ecosystems. We propose that environmental Spirochaetes form a critical component of a microbial loop central to nutrient cycling in subsurface environments. This emphasizes the importance of necromass and H2-cycling in highly toxic contaminated subsurface habitats such as hydrocarbon-polluted aquifers.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction/alkylation and tryptic digestion: An aliquot corresponding to 25 µg total protein content was removed from each sample. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and dithiothreitol were added to a final concentration of 2% and 5 mM respectively. The protein solution was incubated at 90 °C for 5 min. After the samples had cooled down to room temperature, 20 mM iodoacetamide was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at ambient temperature. A chloroform/methanol precipitation was performed in order to remove the reducing and alkylating agents and to remove the SDS (Wessel and Flügge 1984). The obtained protein pellet was then dissolved in 25 µL of 8M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and extensively vortexed. The solutions were cleared by centrifugation and the supernatants transferred to 96 well plates (Eppendorf). To start the protein digestion we added 833 ng Lys C (1:30; Wako Laboratory Chemicals) and incubated the samples for 3 h at 37 °C. Next the samples were diluted to 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, supplemented with 1.0 M urea, and 1.25 µg sequencing grade Trypsin (1/20; Promega), and incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. On the next morning, the samples were acidified by adding formic acid (final 0.5% v/v). Sample clean-up for LC-MS: Acidified tryptic digests were desalted on custom-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al 2007). Approximately 15 µg of peptides (based on the initial protein concentration) were loaded to each to two disc StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution.  LC-MS/MS: Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) (Michalski et al 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 30 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition and in all other modi at 30 °C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra high performance liquid chromatography) grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 300 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 280 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS; Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 30 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID (collision-induced dissociation) collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant: RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) using the default settings (Cox and Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al 2014). MS/MS spectra data were searched against the in-house generated protein sequences of Desulfobacterium naphthalenivorans N47 (5297 entries) and Rectinema cohabilitans HM (2580 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of protein N-terminus (42 Da), Carbamylation (K) and Deamidation (NQ) as dynamic modification and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Data Analysis: Initial data analysis was performed by using the PERSEUS computational platform (version 1.5.5.3) (Tyanova et al 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Spirochaetes are frequently detected in anoxic hydrocarbon- and organohalide-polluted groundwater, but their role in such ecosystems has remained unclear. To address this, we studied a sulfate-reducing, naphthalene-degrading enrichment culture, mainly comprising the sulfate reducer Desulfobacterium N47 and the rod-shaped Spirochete Rectinema cohabitans HM. Genome sequencing and proteome analysis suggested that the Spirochete is an obligate fermenter that catabolizes proteins and carbohydrates, resulting in acetate, ethanol, and molecular hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>) production. Physiological experiments inferred that hydrogen is an important link between the two bacteria in the enrichment culture, with H<sub>2</sub> derived from fermentation by R. cohabitans used as reductant for sulfate reduction by Desulfobacterium N47. Differential proteomics and physiological experiments showed that R. cohabitans utilizes biomass (proteins and carbohydrates) released from dead cells of Desulfobacterium N47. Further comparative and community genome analyses indicated that other Rectinema phylotypes are widespread in contaminated environments and may perform a hydrogenogenic fermentative lifestyle similar to R. cohabitans. Together, these findings indicate that environmental Spirochaetes scavenge detrital biomass and in turn drive necromass recycling at anoxic hydrocarbon-contaminated sites and potentially other habitats.

### Keywords
Desulfobacterium naphthalenivorans, Rectinema cohabitans, Label free quantification ms

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


