### Accession
PXD040343

### Title
Comprehensive proteome analysis of propolis elucidates the origin and function of its proteins

### Description
Propolis is a resinous honeybee product, rich in polyphenolic compounds and with high economic value. Although extensive studies regarding the chemical composition of different propolis extracts have been carried out, the propolis proteome remained unknown. The present study aimed at characterizing the proteome of two geographically-distinct propolis originating from Belgium and Iran. Propolis extracts were analysed by SDS-PAGE followed by MALDI-TOF MS (mass spectrometry) and LC-ESI-MS. Our in-depth proteomic analysis led to the identification of honeybee venom and royal jelly proteins, and numerous plant-defense proteins in propolis, extending our understanding on the antimicrobial properties of this complex natural substance. The proteome of both propolis was mainly made up of proteins belonging to the poplar tree. The poplar PR-2 (β-1,3-glucanases) and PR-8 (acidic endochitinases) proteins were found to be the major components of both propolis extracts, while bee venom (Api m 1) and royal jelly allergens (MJRP 1 and 2) were only identified in the propolis from Belgium. Overall, our proteome analyses revealed that propolis extracts from Belgium and Iran shared a core protein composition originating from the poplar proteome. The majority of identified proteins are involved in the plant defense against pathogens, some belonging to well-known pathogenesis-related families.

### Sample Protocol
Propolis samples were collected from apiaries in Witry (Belgium) and Tabriz (Iran) and kept at 4°C until use. Protein extraction were done with twenty grams of Iranian and Belgian propolis samples by aceton precipitation protocol. Protein content was assayed using Bradford method. For ESI-LC-MS analysis, 20 µg of proteins from propolis extracts were loaded on a 1D gel. After a short migration, the proteins bands were reduced, alkylated then destained. Proteins were digested by trypsin during the night at 37°C. The extracted peptides were analyzed using a nanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to high-resolution MS TripleTOF® 6600.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were converted and processed with Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, UK) by searching against on NCBIp Other green plant released on 01/03/2021, (6,693,862 sequences), UniProt Arthropoda (6,110,540 sequences), Uniprot-Populus (121,635 sequences) and EST Poplar (2,535,186 sequences). The Mascot research parameters were set: a peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.3 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated threshold p value < 0.05, at least two significant sequences and one unique peptide per protein were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phospholipase; bee venom, Bee product, Propolis; proteomics, Honeybee; poplar

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP-HAU,  Bascharage, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Céline LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP-HAU,  Bascharage, Luxembourg


