### Accession
PXD001192

### Title
Regulation of microtubules by DIAPH3 loss influences amoeboid tumor cell sensitivity to taxanes

### Description
Diaphanous-related formin-3 (DIAPH3), a cytoskeletal regulator of the formin family, is lost at high frequency in metastatic breast and prostate cancers and has characteristics of a non-canonical metastasis suppressor. We previously demonstrated that DIAPH3 silencing evokes transition to an “amoeboid” phenotype, characterized by rapid motility, RhoA/ROCK and MEK/ERK pathway activation, dynamic membrane blebbing, and increased shedding of microvesicles. Here we report that low DIAPH3 mRNA expression correlates with reduced survival in multiple cancer patient cohorts. In line with induction of amoeboid behavior, traction force microscopy (TFM) revealed that polarized force generation, contractility, and response to substrate stiffness are reduced by DIAPH3 loss. Proteomic analyses revealed that DIAPH3 precipitates with tubulins, and reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation analyses revealed greater binding of DIAPH3 to MT polymers than soluble tubulin. DIAPH3 also bound to acetylated-tubulin (Ac-tubulin), suggesting association with a stable MT population. DIAPH3 silencing reduced Ac-tubulin and increased the cellular content of dynamic MT, as indicated by TFM and live cell imaging. DIAPH3 silencing also increased responsiveness to MT-disrupting agents. Treatment with the taxanes paclitaxel and docetaxel, and the non-taxane epothilone B, induced a greater change in Ac-tubulin when cells lacked DIAPH3. Intracellular accumulation of Oregon Green 488-paclitaxel was also increased by DIAPH3 loss, and accordingly, DIAPH3 silencing enhanced cytotoxicity by paclitaxel, docetaxel, or epothilone B. Gene expression profiles of breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapeutic regimens containing taxanes revealed an association of low DIAPH3 expression with improved relapse-free survival. Collectively, these results suggest that regulation of MT stability/dynamics by DIAPH3 enhances amoeboid tumor cell susceptibility to microtubule poisons. These findings have potential therapeutic implications.

### Sample Protocol
The principal goals of these studies were two-fold. First, we wished to identify the DIAPH3 interactome in U87 glioblastoma or DU145 prostate cancer cell lines. Second, we examined whether the interactome in DU145 changed under conditions in which microtubule architecture was preserved (25oC) or was disrupted due to cold-induced depolymerization (4oC).   Toward these ends, U87 cells stably expressing eGFP or eGFP-DIAPH3, were seeded in MEM + 10% fetal bovine serum at a density of 1.5 x 106 cells per 10 cm dish, in duplicate. After overnight attachment, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal, supplemented with 20 mM sodium fluoride, 20 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 200 μM PMSF and 60 mM -octylglucopyranoside). Clarified lysates (500 g / condition), brought to 1 ml with RIPA buffer, were incubated for 3 hours at 4oC with 2.5 g GFP antibody and Protein A/G agarose. After incubation, immuno-precipitates were washed 3 times with RIPA, residual volume removed with a syringe, and samples resuspended in 50l of 2x loading dye. Samples were frozen at -80oC until proteomic analyses.  Similarly, DU145 cells stably expressing eGFP or eGFP-DIAPH3 were seeded in DMEM high glucose + 10% fetal bovine serum at a density of 1.25 x 106 cells per 10cm dish, in triplicate. Cells and immunoprecipitates were processed as for U87, except for conditions requiring 25oC temperatures. For the latter, buffers were pre-warmed to, incubations performed, and bead centrifugation performed at 25oC. Samples immunoprecipitated at 4oC were incubated for 6h, and after processing were frozen at -80oC until proteomic analyses. The eluted proteins were briefly separated in a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and then in-gel reduced, alkylated, and tryptically digested essentially as previously described (PMID: 20426488). Tryptic peptides were extracted, concentrated in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientifc), and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid.  For each condition, 10 μL peptide solution was loaded onto a 2 cm Acclaim precolumn connected to a 25 cm EASY-Spray column (75 μm inner diameter, PepMap C18, 3 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific), and separated at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. A linear gradient of 2-35% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) in 50 min, 35-100% buffer B in 4 min, and 100% B in 6 min was applied. Peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The lock mass at m/z 445.120025 was applied to provide internal mass calibration. The survey scan was acquired in the obitrap with a resolution of 240,000 at m/z 400 Th. After each survey scan, up to 20 collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra were acquired in the rapid CID scan mode.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantitation, raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v 1.3.0.5) (PMID; 19029910), in combination with the Andromeda search engine (PMID: 21254760). The parameters were set as follows. Oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modification; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; Multiplicity was set as 1; Uniprot_Human database (released on 02/20/14, including 88647 sequences) was used for database searching; Re-quantifiy was unticked; Match between runs within 2 min, label-free quantitation with a ratio count of at least 1, iBAQ, and Calculate peak properties were ticked. False discovery rates for protein and peptide identifications were both set at 0.01. Identified proteins were quantitated based on their summed ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Taxanes are widely employed chemotherapies for patients with metastatic prostate and breast cancer. Here, we show that loss of Diaphanous-related formin-3 (DIAPH3), frequently associated with metastatic breast and prostate cancers, correlates with increased sensitivity to taxanes. DIAPH3 interacted with microtubules (MT), and its loss altered several parameters of MT dynamics as well as decreased polarized force generation, contractility, and response to substrate stiffness. Silencing of DIAPH3 increased the cytotoxic response to taxanes in prostate and breast cancer cell lines. Analysis of drug activity for tubulin-targeted agents in the NCI-60 cell line panel revealed a uniform positive correlation between reduced DIAPH3 expression and drug sensitivity. Low DIAPH3 expression correlated with improved relapse-free survival in breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapeutic regimens containing taxanes. Our results suggest that inhibition of MT stability arising from DIAPH3 downregulation enhances susceptibility to MT poisons, and that the DIAPH3 network potentially reports taxane sensitivity in human tumors.

### Keywords
Amoeboid, Chemotherapy, Microtubules, Metastasis, Taxanes, Label-free, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer, Formin

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Department of Surgery Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Department of Surgery Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


