### Accession
PXD043016

### Title
Nature Communications manuscript NCOMMS-22-26923A

### Description
Non-invasive electromechanical assessment during atrial fibrillation identifies underlying atrial myopathy alterations with early prognostic value. Nature Communications manuscript NCOMMS-22-26923A

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins from  biopsies were subjected to in-filter reduction and alkylation using iodoacetamide followed by trypsin digestion (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane-10K, PALL), and the resulting peptides were TMT-labeled following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides. Resulting tryptic peptides were injected onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano- column (75 μm I.D. and 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap), connected to a nEasy LC-1000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher, San José, CA, USA) and analyzed in a continuous acetonitrile gradient consisting of 8-31% B-solution (B=0.5% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 240 min, 50-90% B for 1 min. Subsequently, peptides were eluted from the RP nanocolumn at a flow rate of ~200 nL/min to an emitter nanospray needle for real-time ionization and MS analysis in a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 20 method. The raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using Uniprot database. The parameters selected for database searching were: trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 atomic mass unit (amu). MS/MS spectra were also queried against inverted databases constructed from the same target databases. Peptide identification from MS/MS data was performed using the probability ratio method1. False discovery rates (FDR) of 1% was used as a threshold for peptide identification. Quantitative information were extracted from TMT reporters ions in the MS/MS spectra, and protein abundance changes were analyzed using the WSPP model2 by applying the Generic Integration Algorithm3.

### Publication Abstract
Electromechanical characterization during atrial fibrillation (AF) remains a significant gap in the understanding of AF-related atrial myopathy. This study reports mechanistic insights into the electromechanical remodeling process associated with AF progression and further demonstrates its prognostic value in the clinic. In pigs, sequential electromechanical assessment during AF progression shows a progressive decrease in mechanical activity and early dissociation from its electrical counterpart. Atrial tissue samples from animals with AF reveal an abnormal increase in cardiomyocytes death and alterations in calcium handling proteins. High-throughput quantitative proteomics and immunoblotting analyses at different stages of AF progression identify downregulation of contractile proteins and progressive increase in atrial fibrosis. Moreover, advanced optical mapping techniques, applied to whole heart preparations during AF, demonstrate that AF-related remodeling decreases the frequency threshold for dissociation between transmembrane voltage signals and intracellular calcium transients compared to healthy controls. Single cell simulations of human atrial cardiomyocytes also confirm the experimental results. In patients, non-invasive assessment of the atrial electromechanical relationship further demonstrate that atrial electromechanical dissociation is an early prognostic indicator for acute and long-term rhythm control.

### Keywords
Lcms raw files

### Affiliations
CNIC

### Submitter
Enrique Calvo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Calvo
CNIC


