### Accession
PXD038787

### Title
CSF glycoproteomics reveals brain-specific changes in glyco-sylation in congenital disorders of glycosylation

### Description
In this project, CSF samples from healthy volunteers and patients diagnosed with congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) were analyzed with MS-based glycoproteomics to characterize the glycoproteome in the two cohorts. In order to identify highly truncated glycopeptides and glycopeptides that show the complete loss of glycosylation, we chose to not perform a glycopeptide enrichment. Using the high identification rate of the timsTOF Pro including PASEF fragmentation, we were able to detect over 800 unique glycopeptides. We show that changes in protein N-glycosylation of CDG patients can be different on brain-derived proteins compared to blood derived proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoproteins and proteins from 100 uL CSF were precipitated by adding 300 uL of cold ethanol. Precipitation was completed overnight at – 80 °C. The protein pellet was centrifuged for 15 min at 14.000 rpm and freed from the supernatant. Proteins were resuspended in 7.5 uL of 8 M urea and denatured by adding 7.5 uL of 100 mM DTT and incubation at room temperature for 30 min. Alkylation was done by adding 7.5 uL of 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and incubation at room temperature in the dark for another 30 min. The sample solution was diluted with 15 uL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and 2 uL of protease Lys-C (mass spec-trometry grade, Wako Chemicals) were added. The digest was performed for 3 hours at room temperature. Subsequently, 100 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and 2 uL (12.5 ng/μL sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) of trypsin were added. The tryptic digest was performed overnight at 37 °C. Inactivation of trypsin was done by heating the sample solution to 95 °C for 5 min.  Non-enriched peptides and glycopeptides were directly analysed by LC-MS/MS after tryptic digest in duplicate measurements. For that, 2 uL of sample solution was injected on a nano-LC system (nanoElute, Bruker) equipped with a reversed phased C18 column (0.075 x 150 mm, 1.9 um particle size, Bruker fifteen, Bruker). LC separation was done at 45 °C with a flow rate of 0.5 uL/min with a mobile phase of solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water and solvent B: 0.1% FA, 0.01% TFA in acetonitrile. The gradient was set as follows: 0 min, 3% B; 60 min, 42% B, 62 min, 80% B; 67 min, 80% B. Online MS measurement was done with an electrospray ioniza-tion trapped ion mobility – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (ESI-TIMS-QqTOF, timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonik) in positive ion mode. Prior to sample injection, mass and mobility calibration was performed using sodium formate clusters. A captive spray nanoflow source was used, equipped with nanoBooster (Bruker Dal-tonik) and acetonitrile as source gas dopant, set to a pressure of 0.20 bar. The source drying temperature was set to 180 °C. To reduce in-tims fragmentation of glycopeptide precursor, delta potentials were slightly adapted compared to standard proteomics settings. Delta potentials were set as follows: D1 = -20 V, D2 = -150 V, D3 = 110 V, D4 = 110 V, D5 = 0 V, and D6 = 55 V. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired between a mass range of 100 m/z and 4000 m/z with an acquisition rate of 10 Hz. Ions with a charge state of +2 and higher were selected for PASEF (parallel accumulation-serial fragmen-tation) acquisition by applying a polygon filter in m/z and mobility dimension excluding singly charged background ions. PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired until a target in-tensity of 100.000 a.u. was reached with a total cycle time of 1.80 s. Linear collision en-ergy stepping as a function of increased mobility from 0.6 to 2.0 1/K0 was used to acquire high collision energy spectra for peptide fragmentation (65 eV to 100 eV) and low colli-sion energy spectra for glycan fragmentation (45 eV to 65 eV). For the first step, a colli-sion RF of 1600 V, a transfer time of 100 us and a pre-pulse storage of 13 us was used for spectrum acquisition. For the second step, the collision RF was set to 1600 V, the transfer time to 80 us and the pre-pulse storage to 10 us.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptides were identified using MSFragger-Glyco (version MSFragger-3.1.1) with Fragpipe 15.0 and philosopher (version 3.6.0.). A higher-energy collision dis-sociation (HCD) offset search was used to identify glycopeptides based on glycan mass offsets and peptide backbone fragments. Diagnostic b- and y-ions for glycan fragmen-tation were specified to identify glycopeptide spectra and glycan mass offset of poten-tial N-glycan masses were defined. A list of used glycan mass offsets and diagnostic fragment ions can be found in the supplementary information (fragger.params). Glycan mass offsets were based on common human N-glycan masses as well as highly trun-cated glycans often seen in severe cases of CDG.[39,44,45,58] For identification of the peptide backbone, the reviewed human database including contaminants and decoys was used (Uniprot ID UP000005640, downloaded 2021-04-07). A mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as fixed modifi-cation and methionine oxidation, pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal gluta-mine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Further set-tings for glycopeptide identification can be found in the supplementary information (fragger.params and fragpipe_2021-07-13_14-45-01.config).  The protein sequence matches (psm.tsv) from MSFragger-Glyco were additionally filtered and only identifications with a delta mass of < 0.02 Da, a peptide prophet probability of > 0.95 and a hyperscore > 15 were accepted. The chemical composition of accepted glycopeptides was calculated and glycopeptides with unique peptide moiety, glycan moiety, other modifications and charge were used to compile a target list for target extraction. The retention time and mobility of glycopeptides with multiple spec-tral identifications was averaged.

### Publication Abstract
The glycosylation of proteins plays an important role in neurological development and disease. Glycoproteomic studies on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are a valuable tool to gain insight into brain glycosylation and its changes in disease. However, it is important to consider that most proteins in CSFs originate from the blood and enter the CSF across the blood-CSF barrier, thus not reflecting the glycosylation status of the brain. Here, we apply a glycoproteomics method to human CSF, focusing on differences between brain- and blood-derived proteins. To facilitate the analysis of the glycan site occupancy, we refrain from glycopeptide enrichment. In healthy individuals, we describe the presence of heterogeneous brain-type N-glycans on prostaglandin H2-D isomerase alongside the dominant plasma-type N-glycans for proteins such as transferrin or haptoglobin, showing the tissue specificity of protein glycosylation. We apply our methodology to patients diagnosed with various genetic glycosylation disorders who have neurological impairments. In patients with severe glycosylation alterations, we observe that heavily truncated glycans and a complete loss of glycans are more pronounced in brain-derived proteins. We speculate that a similar effect can be observed in other neurological diseases where a focus on brain-derived proteins in the CSF could be similarly beneficial to gain insight into disease-related changes.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Csf, Brain-type glycosylation

### Affiliations
VU Amsterdam, Division of BioAnalytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Melissa Baerenfaenger

### Lab Head
Dr Melissa Baerenfaenger
VU Amsterdam, Division of BioAnalytical Chemistry


