### Accession
PXD042584

### Title
CXMS BS3 Ras/BRAF/MEK/1433 complex

### Description
RAF-family kinases are activated by recruitment to the plasma membrane by GTP-bound RAS, where they initiate signaling through the MAP kinase cascade. Here we crosslinked (BS3), digested (trypsin), and analyzed via LC-MS/MS KRAS (human,  residues 1-169) bound to intact BRAF (human) in an autoinhibited state with MEK1 (human, ) and a 14-3-3 (SF9) dimer . Analysis of this KRAS/BRAF/MEK1/14-3-3 complex reveals both interprotein and intraprotein crosslinks.

### Sample Protocol
The KRAS(1-169)/BRAF autoinhibited complex (5 uM in 500 uL) was incubated in crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM TCEP, 10 uM ATP-gammaS , 2 uM GDC-0623, 10 uM GMP-PNP, 1 mM BS3) for 45 min at room temperature, and quenched by the addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) for 15 min. The cross-linked KRAS/BRAF/MEK1/14-3-3 complex was subjected to size-exclusion chromatography to remove unreacted BS3 and any aggregated or oligomerized complex. The complex was denatured in 8 M urea and subjected to reduction and carbamidomethylation with TCEP and iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (1:50 ratio of trypsin:protein) overnight at 32°C. Digestions were brought to 1% formic acid (FA) and peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and desalted over a C18 column. Digests were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (MeCN)/1% FA and analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated across a 55-min linear gradient of 7-22% MeCN in 1% FA, followed by 15 min to 45% MeCN over a 50-cm C18 column (ES803A, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and electrosprayed (2.15 kV, 300°C) into the mass spectrometer with an EasySpray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Precursor ion scans (300-2,000 m/z) were obtained in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution in profile (RF lens % = 30, Max IT = 100 ms, 1 microscan). Fragment ion scans were acquired in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution (1.6 m/z isolation window, HCD at 30% NCE, 5e4 AGC).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against KRAS, BRAF and MEK1 construct sequences, as well as endogenous Sf9 14-3-3 epsilon and gamma sequences for BS3 crosslinked peptides using both Protein Prospector Batch-Tag (https://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm) and pLink2 (http://pfind.org/software/pLink/). The Protein Prospector search parameters were as follows: delta mass of 5 ppm for precursors and 10 ppm for fragment ions, two missed cleavages by trypsin, oxidation of Met, carbamidomethylation of Cys, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and BS3 monolinked Lys. The pLink2 search parameters were as follows: delta mass of 5 ppm for precursors and 10 ppm for fragment ions, two missed cleavages by trypsin, oxidation of Met, carbamidomethylation of Cys, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr.

### Publication Abstract
RAF-family kinases are activated by recruitment to the plasma membrane by GTP-bound RAS, whereupon they initiate signaling through the MAP kinase cascade. Prior structural studies of KRAS with RAF have focused on the isolated RAS-binding and cysteine-rich domains of RAF (RBD and CRD, respectively), which interact directly with RAS. Here we describe cryo-EM structures of a KRAS bound to intact BRAF in an autoinhibited state with MEK1 and a 14-3-3 dimer. Analysis of this KRAS/BRAF/MEK1/14-3-3 complex reveals KRAS bound to the RAS-binding domain of BRAF, captured in two orientations. Core autoinhibitory interactions in the complex are unperturbed by binding of KRAS and in vitro activation studies confirm that KRAS binding is insufficient to activate BRAF, absent membrane recruitment. These structures illustrate the separability of binding and activation of BRAF by RAS and suggest stabilization of this pre-activation intermediate as an alternative therapeutic strategy to blocking binding of KRAS.

### Keywords
Human, 14-3-3, Sf9, Braf, Mek1, Kras, Cxms

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Anna Schmoker

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Eck
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute


