### Accession
PXD033696

### Title
MeCP2 heterochromatin organization is modulated by arginine methylation and serine phosphorylation

### Description
Rett syndrome is a human intellectual disability disorder that is associated with mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene. The
epigenetic reader MeCP2 binds to methylated cytosines on the DNA and regulates chromatin organization. We have shown
previously that MECP2 Rett syndrome missense mutations are impaired in chromatin binding and heterochromatin
reorganization. Here, we performed a proteomics analysis of post-translational modifications of MeCP2 isolated from adult mouse
brain. We show that MeCP2 carries various post-translational modifications, among them phosphorylation on S80 and S421, which
lead to minor changes in either heterochromatin binding kinetics or clustering. We found that MeCP2 is (di)methylated on several
arginines and that this modification alters heterochromatin organization. Interestingly, we identified the Rett syndrome mutation
site R106 as a dimethylation site. In addition, co-expression of protein arginine methyltransferases 1 and 6 lead to a decrease of
heterochromatin clustering. Altogether, we identified and validated novel modifications of MeCP2 in the brain and show that these
can modulate its ability to bind as well as reorganize heterochromatin, which may play a role in the pathology of Rett syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
To identify post-translational modifications on MeCP2, we first isolated nuclei from mouse brain tissue using a sucrose buffer in combination with ultracentrifugation as described before (Becker et al., 2016). Then, we enriched MeCP2 from mouse brain nuclei using its natural hepta-histidine tag localized in its C-terminal domain for protein pull down with Ni-IDA beads. Subsequently, the enriched proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE, in gel digested using trypsin and subjected to HPLC-coupled mass spectrometry analysis. The in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as described before (Cerletti et al., 2015). The HPLC-MS/MS measurement was performed with the setup described before (Cerletti et al., 2015). Briefly, an UPLC HSS T3 column and an UPLC Symmetry C18 trapping column for LC were used in combination with the nanoACQUITY gradient UPLC pump system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The LTQ Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode using Xcalibur software either in collision-induced dissociation (CID) TOP20 or in TOP10 with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and CID fragmentation for every precursor ion. For elution of the peptides a linear gradient from 5 – 30% for 60 min (CID TOP20) or 150 min (TOP10 HCD, CID) of buffer B (0.1 formic acid in acetonitrile, UPLC/MS grade) was applied, followed by a step gradient from 30 – 85% acetonitrile for 5 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) with Andromeda (Tyanova et al., 2016) algorithms searching against the complete UniProt database (UniProt Consortium, 2021) for Mus musculus. A maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages was accepted and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal pyroglutamate, lysine acetylation, lysine ubiquitination, lysine and arginine mono-methylation or di-methylation and serine/ threonine/ tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. To identify all methylation and dimethylation sites, the search was repeated including either only lysine/ arginine methylation or dimethylation. The MaxQuant search was run with default parameters having matching between runs enabled. 

### Publication Abstract
Rett syndrome is a human intellectual disability disorder that is associated with mutations in the X-linked <i>MECP2</i> gene. The epigenetic reader MeCP2 binds to methylated cytosines on the DNA and regulates chromatin organization. We have shown previously that <i>MECP2</i> Rett syndrome missense mutations are impaired in chromatin binding and heterochromatin reorganization. Here, we performed a proteomics analysis of post-translational modifications of MeCP2 isolated from adult mouse brain. We show that MeCP2 carries various post-translational modifications, among them phosphorylation on S80 and S421, which lead to minor changes in either heterochromatin binding kinetics or clustering. We found that MeCP2 is (di)methylated on several arginines and that this modification alters heterochromatin organization. Interestingly, we identified the Rett syndrome mutation site R106 as a dimethylation site. In addition, co-expression of protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMT)1 and PRMT6 lead to a decrease of heterochromatin clustering. Altogether, we identified and validated novel modifications of MeCP2 in the brain and show that these can modulate its ability to bind as well as reorganize heterochromatin, which may play a role in the pathology of Rett syndrome.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Epigenetics, Department of Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany

### Submitter
M. Cristina Cardoso

### Lab Head
Dr M. Cristina Cardoso
Cell Biology and Epigenetics, Department of Biology, Technical University of Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany


