### Accession
PXD005120

### Title
Huntingtin inclusions trigger cellular quiescence, deactivate apoptosis and lead to delayed necrosis

### Description
Two popular models for how mutant Huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) aggregation into inclusions relates to pathogenesis involve seemingly contradictory mechanisms. In one model, inclusions are adaptive by sequestering the proteotoxicity of soluble Httex1. In the other, inclusions compromise cellular activity from proteome co-aggregation. Via a biosensor of Httex1 conformation in mammalian cell models, we discovered a mechanism that explains this contradiction. Newly-formed inclusions are comprised of disordered Httex1 and ribonucleoproteins. As inclusions matured, Httex1 reconfigured into amyloid, and other glutamine-rich and prion-domain containing proteins were recruited. Soluble Httex1 caused a hyperpolarized mitochondrial membrane potential, increased reactive oxygen species and promoted apoptosis. Inclusion formation triggered a collapsed mitochondrial potential, cellular quiescence, and deactivated apoptosis. We propose a revised model where both soluble Httex1 and inclusions are toxic, yet inclusions impair programmed cell death arising from stalled cellular functioning. Hence cells live longer in a metabolically quiescent state and ultimately die by necrosis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were transfected with pT-REx-Httex1TC9-Cerulean and harvested 24 h post transfection by pelleting (200 g; 5 min; 24 ºC), snap-freezing, thawing and resuspension in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, 2 mM MgCl2, 1% (w/v) Triton X-100, pH 8.0 supplemented with cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail pills (Roche) and 20 Units/ml Benzonase (Novagen)). The lysate was subjected to flow cytometry sorting on a BD FACS Aria III instrument, and HBRi and PBRi inclusions were sorted as described in Fig S1 and treated as paired replicates. Sorted inclusions were pelleted (3,000 g; 5 min; 24 °C), washed in phosphate buffered saline 3 times, then dissolved in formic acid for 30 min at 37 ºC in a shaking microfuge tube incubator (250 rpm). The solution was neutralized with 3 M Tris and prepared for proteomic analysis using a Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon). Proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin at 24 ºC overnight. Resultant peptides were differentially labeled with 4 µl of 4% (vol/vol) formaldehyde –CH2O (light label) and 13CD2O (medium label) (HBRi – medium, PBRi – light). Samples were matched for total protein levels using bicinchoninic acid assay with bovine serum albumin as mass standard.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by ESI-LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) fitted with nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex). Further complete details on data acquisition are explained in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81; Thermo Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1) against the Swissprot Homo sapiens database (version 2015_07: Jun-24, 2015; 548872 entries). The search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance, 2 missed cleavages allowed. The following modifications were allowed: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Dimethyl (K), Dimethyl(N-Term) (N-term), Dimethyl:2H(4) (K), Dimethyl:2H(4) (N-term) (Variable); Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed).  The false discovery rate (FDR) maximum setting was set to 0.5 % for peptide identification (actual was 0.005 for each replicate) and 1% at the protein indentification. Peptide identifications were established with a 2 ppm mass precision and filtered for a minimum ion score of 30. Proteins were filtered for those that had at least two unique peptides in at least two replicates. The common contaminant, Keratin, was excluded from the dataset.  Quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1.0.81.

### Publication Abstract
Competing models exist in the literature for the relationship between mutant Huntingtin exon 1 (Httex1) inclusion formation and toxicity. In one, inclusions are adaptive by sequestering the proteotoxicity of soluble Httex1. In the other, inclusions compromise cellular activity as a result of proteome co-aggregation. Using a biosensor of Httex1 conformation in mammalian cell models, we discovered a mechanism that reconciles these competing models. Newly formed inclusions were composed of disordered Httex1 and ribonucleoproteins. As inclusions matured, Httex1 reconfigured into amyloid, and other glutamine-rich and prion domain-containing proteins were recruited. Soluble Httex1 caused a hyperpolarized mitochondrial membrane potential, increased reactive oxygen species, and promoted apoptosis. Inclusion formation triggered a collapsed mitochondrial potential, cellular quiescence, and deactivated apoptosis. We propose a revised model where sequestration of soluble Httex1 inclusions can remove the trigger for apoptosis but also co-aggregate other proteins, which curtails cellular metabolism and leads to a slow death by necrosis.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Inclusion, Huntingtin, Huntington's disease, Mechanism of death, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia

### Submitter
Mikhail Trubetskov

### Lab Head
Dr Danny M. Hatters
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; and Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010. Australia


