### Accession
PXD001803

### Title
PSI-PSII complexes - Two types of photosystem reaction centers (PSI and PSII) are physically connected each other in Arabidopsis. Excitation energy is transferred efficiently between the two closely interacting reaction centers.

### Description
Two types of photosystem reaction centers (PSI and PSII) are physically connected each other in Arabidopsis. Excitation energy is transferred efficiently between the two closely interacting reaction centers.

### Sample Protocol
large-pore clear-native PAGE was performed as described in “M. Yokono et al. Nat. Comm. 6 (2015) 6675”. There are 6 files that corresponding to w1~w5 and LHCII trimer bands. In brief, acrylamide gradient in separation gel was 3.5–12.5%, where the ratio of bisacrylamide to the total acrylamide was 3%. In sample gel, total acrylamide concentration was 3%, where the ratio of bisacrylamide to the total acrylamide was 20%. Gel buffer contained 0.5 M 6-aminocaproic acid and 50 mM BisTris/HCl. Acrylamide solution was casted at 4 °C, and polymerized at 30 °C. Anode buffer contained 50 mM BisTris/HCl. Cathode buffer contained 50 mM Tricine, 15 mM BisTris/HCl, and 0.05% sodium deoxycholate. pH of all buffers was adjusted to pH 7 at 4 °C. Electrophoresis was performed at 4 °C for ~4 hours.


### Data Protocol
Data was processed as described in “A. Takabayashi et al. SpringerPlus, 2 (2013) 1-10”. In brief, LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an LTQ ion-trap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Yokohama, Japan) coupled with an HPLC (AMR Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and a nano-spray electrospray ionization device (Michrom Bioresources Inc., CA, USA). For protein identification, raw files were converted to a Mascot generic file and searched with Mascot (Matrix Science) into the TAIR9 database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Photosystem, Spillover, Megacomplex, Psi-psii, Energy transfer

### Affiliations
Hokkaido University
Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University

### Submitter
Makio Yokono

### Lab Head
Dr Ayumi Tanaka
Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University


