### Accession
PXD047202

### Title
AP-2α pull down from E12.5 cortex

### Description
Identificatin of interaction partners of AP-2α via pull down from the cortex of E12.5 mice followed by quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos were obtained between stages E14-E16 of pregnancy, and the telencephalic vesicles were extracted and homogenized. The samples were loaded onto SDS-PAGE gels, reduced (DTT), and alkylated (CAA). Digestion was performed using trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted and purified using Stagetips. Eluted peptides were dried in vacuo, resuspended in 1% formic acid/4% acetonitrile, and stored at −20 °C before MS measurement. All samples were run on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-7% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 7-23% solvent B within 35.0 min, 23-32% solvent B within 5.0 min, 32-85% solvent B within 5.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 108 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8, (Tyanova et al, 2016a)) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse reference proteome containing isoforms (UP589, downloaded at 26.08.2020), including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled between replicates. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Follow-up analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al, 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuronal progenitors, Microtubules, Ap-2, Centrosome

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Affiliation: Center for Physiology & CECAD Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Kononenko
Affiliation: Center for Physiology & CECAD Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne


