### Accession
PXD033961

### Title
The hepatic BCKD complex interacts with apolipoprotein E in vivo and its enzyme activity is increased in APOE4 mice

### Description
APOE co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) in liver of APOE targeted replaecement mice followed by LC−MS was used to analyse APOE protein−protein interactions and to detect as yet unknown interactor proteins.

### Sample Protocol
To identify protein interactions with APOE, two proteomic analyses in two independent co-IP eluates from female APOE TR mouse liver were performed. The final washing steps of the IP samples were performed with decreasing NP40 concentrations (0.5-0.05 %) and additional wash steps with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM, pH 8). Afterwards the proteins were eluted from the beads with 0.5 % formic acid for 10 min at room temperature and eluates were stored at -80 °C until use. Briefly, the co-IP eluates were lyophilized to dryness, resuspended in 20 µL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 12 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (1h, 60° C), alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (30 min, 20° C), and digested with 0.5 µg of trypsin (overnight, 37° C). Samples  were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus MS. The samples were concentrated and washed for 5 min (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18, 10 mm × 300 μm, 3 μm, 100 Å) with 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min for 2 min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm, 100 Å). A flow rate of 0.3 µl/min using eluent A (0.05% FA) and eluent B (80% ACN, 0.04% FA) was used for separation over a gradient from 5% to 50% eluent B in 120 min, followed by an increase to 95% B in 5 min and 10 min of isocratic elution at 95% B. Spray voltage applied on a metal-coated PicoTip Emitter (10-μm tip size) was 1.6 kV, with a source temperature of 250°C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 350 and 2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The 10 most intense precursors with charge states >2+ were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 25 and at a resolution of 17,500. Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (15 s) was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discover 2.2.0.388. MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST search algorithm against a database containing common contaminants and the canonical murine and human databases (52,015 and 71,591 entries, respectively; UniProt Sept 2017). The data were searched with tryptic protease specificity allowing 2-missed cleavages. A MS1 tolerance of 15 ppm and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da were implemented. Oxidation (15.995 Da) of methionine residues was set as a variable modification along with protein N-terminal acetylation (42.011 Da) while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification (57.021 Da). Peptide spectrum matches were filtered to an FDR below 1%, protein group identifications were filtered to and FDR below 1%.  Label free quantification was performed using Minora feature detector.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apoe; co-immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM); Arbeitsgruppe Systematische Proteomforschung; Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel; Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM); Arbeitsgruppe Systematische Proteomforschung; Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel; Germany


