### Accession
PXD035225

### Title
Cohesin is involved in transcriptional repression of invasion-related genes

### Description
The most virulent human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, has a complex life cycle between its human host and mosquito vector. Each stage is driven by a specific transcriptional program, but with a relatively high ratio of genes to specific transcription factors, it is unclear how genes are activated or silenced at specific times. The P. falciparum genome is relatively euchromatic compared to the mammalian genome, except for specific genes that are uniquely heterochromatinized via HP1. There seems to be an association between gene activity and spatial organization; however, the molecular mechanisms behind genome organization are unclear. While P. falciparum lacks lamins and CTCF – key metazoan genome-organizing proteins – it does have all core components of the cohesin complex. In other eukaryotes, cohesin is involved in sister chromatid cohesion, transcription, and genome organization. To investigate the role of cohesin in P. falciparum, we combined genome editing, mass-spectrometry, chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq), and RNA sequencing to functionally characterize the cohesin subunit Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes protein 3 (SMC3). SMC3 knockdown in early stages of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) resulted in significant up-regulation of a subset of genes involved in erythrocyte egress and invasion, which are normally expressed at later stages. ChIP-seq of SMC3 revealed that over the IDC, enrichment at the promoter regions of these genes inversely correlates with their expression. These data suggest that SMC3 binding helps to repress specific genes until their appropriate time of expression, revealing a new mode of gene repression in P. falciparum.

### Sample Protocol
An SMC3-3HA-glms clone (n = 3 technical replicates) and wild-type culture (n = 3 technical replicates), as a negative control, were synchronized. Late stage parasites (1.5 × 109 parasites) were enriched using Percoll density gradient separation and then cross-linked with 1 mL 0.5 mM dithiobissuccinimidyl propionate (DSP; Thermo Fisher 22585) in DPBS for 60 min at 37°C (as in (Mesén-Ramírez et al., 2016)). Cross-linked parasites were centrifuged at 4,000 g for 5 min at 4°C, and the pellet was washed twice with DPBS at 4°C. The pellet was lysed with 10 volumes of RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher 78440) and 1 U/μL of Benzonase (Merck 71206). The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated with 25 μL of anti-HA Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher 88836) overnight with rotation at 4°C. Beads were collected with a magnet and washed five times with 1 mL RIPA buffer, then five times with 1 mL DPBS, and then once with 1 mL 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma 09830). The beads were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma D9779), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma I1149), and subjected to on-bead digestion using 1 μg of trypsin (Thermo Fisher 90059). The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ziptips (Merck ZTC04S096) and sent for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Fisher Easy-nLC1000) using an EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm (Thermo Fisher ES803A) over a 70-min gradient before nanoelectrospray using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were as follows: resolution of 60,000 across 350–1,500 m/z, AGC 1e5 (as in (Kensche et al., 2016)), and maximum injection time (IT) 150 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 15 precursor ions in each cycle with an NCE of 30 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s and maximum IT of 96 ms. Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher) with the SEQUEST search engine . The search parameters were as follows: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.8 Da fragment ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; and variable modifications were methionine oxidation, CAMthiopropanoyl on lysine or protein N-terminal, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation. Only peptide spectral matches (PSMs) with an XCorr score greater than or equal to 2 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The complex life cycle of the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, is driven by specific transcriptional programs, but it is unclear how most genes are activated or silenced at specific times. There is an association between transcription and spatial organization; however, the molecular mechanisms behind genome organization are unclear. While P.&#x2009;falciparum lacks key genome-organizing proteins found in metazoans, it has all core components of the cohesin complex. To investigate the role of cohesin in P.&#x2009;falciparum, we functionally characterize the cohesin subunit Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes protein 3 (SMC3). SMC3 knockdown during early stages of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) upregulates a subset of genes involved in erythrocyte egress and invasion, which are normally expressed at later stages. ChIP-seq analyses reveal that during the IDC, SMC3 enrichment at the promoter regions of these genes inversely correlates with gene expression and chromatin accessibility. These data suggest that SMC3 binding contributes to the repression of specific genes until their appropriate time of expression, revealing a new mode of stage-specific gene repression in P.&#x2009;falciparum.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Cohesin, Smc3

### Affiliations
Vice President of Research, Nanyang Technological University
NTU

### Submitter
AMEYA SINHA

### Lab Head
Dr Peter R. Preiser
Vice President of Research, Nanyang Technological University


