### Accession
PXD029792

### Title
Improved identification of proteoforms using FAIMS with internal CV stepping in top-down proteomics

### Description
In top-down (TD) proteomics, fractionation prior to mass spectrometric (MS) analysis is a crucial step for the high confidence identification of proteoforms and increased sample depth. In addition to liquid phase separations, gas-phase fractionation strategies such as field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) have been shown to be highly beneficial in TD proteomics. However, the need for multiple injections using different compensation voltages (CV) leads to a huge increase in measurement time and the amount of sample required. Therefore, we here investigated for the first time the use of internal    CV stepping for single shot TD analysis, i.e., the application of multiple CVs per acquisition. In addition, MS parameters were optimized for the individual CVs since different CVs target certain mass ranges. For example, small proteoforms identified mainly with lower CVs can be identified with a lower resolution and number of microscans than larger proteins identified mainly with higher CVs. We investigated the optimal combination and number of CVs for different gradient lengths and validated the optimized settings with the low molecular weight proteome of CaCo 2 cells obtained by different sample preparation techniques. Compared to measurements without FAIMS, both the number of identified protein groups (+60-94%) and proteoforms (+46-127%), and their confidence were significantly increased, while the measurement time remained identical. In total, we identified 684 protein groups and 2,675 proteoforms from CaCo-2 cells in less than 24 hours using the optimized multi-CV method.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of small proteins using solid-phase extraction Solid phase extraction was performed as previously described [Cassidy, 2021]. In brief, ca. 2⋅107 CaCo-2 cells were lysed in 8 M guanidinium chloride (GndHCl) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor by freeze-thaw cycling (10x 1 min -80 °C ethanol bath, 1 min sonification). The sample was heated 10 min at 70 °C and acidified with 4 ml 5% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged (21,100g, 15 min). The supernatant was transferred in a preconditioned SepPak (3cc, C18, washed 2x 3 ml with 100% acetonitrile and 2x 3 ml 5% FA) and washed twice with 3 ml 5% FA. Small proteins were eluted with each 150 µl 60% ACN (0.1% TFA) and 100% ACN. The eluate was dried to complete dryness in SpeedVac, resuspended in loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  GELFrEE CaCo-2 cells were lysed in 1% SDS, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor by ultrasonic homogenizing (Sonoplus HD 2070, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). After centrifugation (21,100g, 4 °C, 20 min), the protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay. Protein fractionation using the gel-eluted liquid fraction entrapment electrophoresis (GELFrEE) system was performed as previously described [Witkowski, 2009]. Briefly, 500 µg proteins were precipitated with four volumes of acetone (2 min, room temperature (RT)) [Nickerson, 2020], resolubilized in 112 µl of MilliQ water, 30 µl of GELFrEE loading buffer, and 8 µl of 1 M DTT and incubated at 50 °C for 10 min. For enrichment of the protein fraction <30 kDa, an 8% Tris-acetate cartridge was used. To estimate protein concentration, the first fraction was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. Proteins were purified by methanol-chloroform-water precipitation before resuspension in loading buffer and analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Molecular weight cut-off filter (MWCO) CaCo-2 cells were lysed in 8 M GndHCl and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor by ultrasonic homogenizing (Sonoplus HD 2070). After centrifugation (21,100g, 4 °C, 20 min), the supernatant was transferred in a new reaction vial and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Approximately 500 µg proteins in 500 µl 8 M GndHCl were transferred to a 30 kDa MWCO filter (Amicon® Ultra-0.5 ml, Merck, Frankfurt, Germany), which was before equilibrated with 8 M GndHCl (2x 500 µl, 14,000g, 15 min, RT). The sample was centrifuged (14,000g, RT) until a volume of ca. 20 µl was left. 400 µl 8 M GndHCl was added and the sample was centrifuged again. The filtrate was collected, protein concentration determined and a buffer exchange to 100 mM TEAB (2x 500 µl) was performed using a 3 kDa MWCO filter (Amicon® Ultra-0.5 ml, Merck). The proteins were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in loading buffer prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS Approximately 1 µg of proteins prepared either by GELFrEE or MWCO were separated on a Dionex U3000 UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a C4 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). A C4 precolumn (C4 PepMap300, 5 μm, 300 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for sample loading. Separation was performed using a 108 min gradient from 15-55% eluent B: 0-5 min 4% B, 5-7 min 4-15% B, 7-115 min 15-55% B, 115-117 min 55-98% B, 117-132 min 98% B, 132-135 min 98-4% B, 135-150 min 4% B. Eluent A was 0.05% formic acid (FA) in MilliQ and eluent B 80% ACN, 0.04% FA. The flow rate was 300 nl/min. For different gradient times only the duration of the step from 15-55% B was changed to 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 min respectively. The standard MS settings for the full mass spectra (MS1) acquisition were the following: resolution of 120,000, mass range of 400-1,800 m/z, 30% RF lens, 200% normalized AGC target, 246 ms maximum injection time and 15 V source-induced dissociation Within a cycle time of 4 s MS2 spectra were acquired with an isolation window of 5 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 400% AGC target, 250 ms injection time and 25% collision-induced dissociation (CID). Only precursors with a charge state between 4-50 or undetermined charge states were selected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (n=2 within 30 s, exclusion duration 60 s, tolerance 1.5 m/z, exclude isotopes and multiple charge states). For the single CV FAIMS measurements, different CVs were applied. For standard multiple CV measurements, multiple MS experiments were performed with different CVs in a single acquisition. For optimized multiple CV measurements, the MS settings for the CVs -60 and -50 were changed to 2/2 microscans (MS1/MS2), injection time 118/125 ms, resolution 60k/50k and for the CVs -20 to 0 V: acquisition start point 40 min. For the multiple CV measurements, the cycle time was reduced to 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search: Proteoform identification  Proteoform identification was performed with ProSightPD (Version 4.0, Proteinaceous, Inc., Evanston, USA) in Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific, Germany). The raw files were searched against human reviewed proteins (downloaded from UniProt, (taxon identifier: 9606)) using ProSightPD Annotated Proteoform Search and ProSightPD Subsequence Search with a precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human cell line, Top-down, Caco-2, Proteomics, Faims

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


