### Accession
PXD001774

### Title
Proteomic Analysis to Reveal the Role of Phosphoproteins in Rice Nucleus during Early Stage of Germination

### Description
Nucleus as the important subcellular organ of plant cell is responsible for storing most genetic information and controlling the plant's activities. Seed germination is an important stage for plant growth. To understand the role of nuclear protein and its phosphorylation during rice seed germination, gel free/label free proteomic technique was used

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of rice (Oryza sativa cultivar Nipponbare) were peeled off and placed in culture plates (10 cm x 10 cm) for germination. Seeds were imbibed in deionized water in dark growth chamber at 25oC and 70% relative humidity. Seeds were imbibed for 12 h and 24 h. Embryos were separated from seeds using knife blade and collected on ice. In total, 50 and 1,400 seeds were prepared for proteomic experiments and nuclear phosphoproteomic experiments. For total proteomics, proteins were extracted from rice embryos after 24 h germination, and then after reduction, alkylation, and digestion, peptides were analyzed using MS, Mascot search engine and the RAP database. For nuclear proteomics, nuclei were isolated and purified from rice embryos after 24 h germination. After nuclear proteins extraction, reduction, alkylation, and digestion, peptides were analyzed using MS, Mascot search engine and the RAP database. For nuclear phosphoproteomics, nuclei were isolated and purified from rice embryos after 24 h germination. After nuclear proteins extraction, reduction, alkylation, and digestion, phosphopeptides were enriched using PolyMAC phosphopeptide enrichment reagent. Phosphopeptides were analyzed using MS, Mascot search engine and the RAP database.

### Data Protocol
Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 nano-LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D × 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. The peptide ions in the spray were detected in the Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap MS over 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) and a rice protein database (50,253 sequences and 15,266,515 residues) obtained from The Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB, http:// rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp), including protein sequences supported by FL-cDNA and EST data (IRGSP-1.0_protein_2013-4-24) and protein sequence predicted computationally (IRGSP-1.0_predicted protein_2013-3-9) .For both normal peptides and peptides after phosphopeptide enrichment, trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charges were set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search.

### Publication Abstract
The early stage of seed germination is the first step in the plant life cycle without visible morphological change. To investigate the mechanism controlling the early stage of rice seed germination, we performed gel-and label-free nuclear phosphoproteomics. A total of 3467 phosphopeptides belonging to 102 nuclear phosphoproteins from rice embryos were identified. Protein-synthesis-related proteins were mainly phosphorylated. During the first 24 h following imbibition, 115 nuclear phosphoproteins were identified, and significant changes in the phosphorylation level over time were observed in 29 phosphoproteins. Cluster analysis indicated that nucleotide-binding proteins and zinc finger CCCH- and BED-type proteins increased in abundance during the first 12 h of imbibition and then decreased. The in silico protein-protein interactions for 29 nuclear phosphoproteins indicated that the Sas10/Utp3 protein, which functions in snoRNA binding and gene silencing, was the center of the phosphoprotein network in nuclei. The germination rate of seeds was significantly slowed with phosphatase inhibitor treatment. The mRNA expression of the zinc finger CCCH-type protein did not change, and the zinc finger BED-type protein was upregulated in rice embryos during the early stage of germination with phosphatase inhibitor treatment. These results suggest that the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of nuclear proteins are involved in rice seed germination. Furthermore, transcription factors such as zinc finger CCCH- and BED-type proteins might play a key role through nuclear phosphoproteins, and Sas10/Utp3 protein might interact with nuclear phosphoproteins in rice embryos to mediate the early stage of seed germination.

### Keywords
Germination phosphonetwork, Nucleus, Phosphoproteomics, Rice

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


