### Accession
PXD021874

### Title
Glycoproteomic analysis of Haloferax volcanii strains H53, DaglB, and Dagl15

### Description
An in-depth glycoproteomic analysis of Haloferax volcanii has been performed, comparing the wildtype H53 with knockout mutants of aglB and agl15. While AglB-dependent glycosylation has been described to occur under standard culture conditions, the Agl15-dependent glycosylation pathway has previously been described to be only active under low-salt conditions. In this dataset, the largest archaeal glycoproteome could be identified with more than 40 N-glycoproteins and more than 100 N-glycopptides. It reveals not only that both glycosylation pathways can be active under the same conditions but also that the same glycosites can be modified by different glycans from both glycosylation pathways.

### Sample Protocol
H53 liquid cultures (20 ml) were grown with agitation to an OD of 0.3. After taking 10 ml as an early-log phase sample, the remaining culture was grown for an additional 24 h and then harvested as a stationary phase sample. Each sample was fractionated into culture supernatant, membrane and cytosol fraction. After solubilizaiton with 2% SDS and concentration in 0.5 ml centrifugal filter units (Millipore, 10 kDa MWCO), protein concentrations were determined via a BCA assay. For each fracion, samples from early-log and stationary phase were mixed 1:1 using equal protein amounts (30 ug for membrane and cytosol and 10 ug for supernantant) and processed via an S-trap following the manufacturer's protocol, including reduction and carbamidomethylation with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were digested with Trypsin and GluC, seperately, and peptides were dried. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed as described in Esquivel et al (2016, J Biol Chem) with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were desalted on a C18 trap column and peptides were separated on a 25 cm C18 column (1 h gradient) directly coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer. MS1 scan paramters were as follows: resolution 60,000, AGC target 1e6, maximum IT 100 ms, scan range 400 - 2000 m/z. The top 20 peaks were triggered for HCD fragmentation with stepped NCE 25, 30, 35 . MS2 scan parameters were as follows: resolution 15,000, AGC target 1e5, maximum IT 200 ms, fixed first mass 130 m/z. A dynamic exclusion list (10 s) was used and charge states 1 and >6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The Python framework Ursgal was used to perform protein database searches employing the search engines X! Tandem, MS-GF+, and MSFragger. The database was based on the most recent HaloLex annotation (DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3565631) and merged with sequences from cRAP. Decoy sequences were generated by peptide shuffling. The Ursgal profile QExactive+ was used, including a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Additionally, carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and Oxidation of M as potential modifications. Additionally, all glycans (final as well as intermediates) of the AglB-dependent and Agl15-dependent pathways (10 glycans in total) were added as potential modifications in separate searches. Statistical postprocessing was performed with Percolator and results from multiple engines were combined using the combined PEP approach. PSMs were filtered by combined posterior error probability (combined PEP < 0.01) and sanitized (removing ambigious PSMs). Potential glycopeptide PSMs were further validated searching for glycopeptide specific oxonium and Y-ions in the corresponding spectra. Only PSMs with at least two Y-ions and one oxonium ion were accepted. Finally, two PSMs per glycopeptide were required for a safe identification.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation is one of the most complex posttranslational protein modifications. Its importance has been established not only for eukaryotes but also for a variety of prokaryotic cellular processes, such as biofilm formation, motility, and mating. However, comprehensive glycoproteomic analyses are largely missing in prokaryotes. Here, we extend the phenotypic characterization of N-glycosylation pathway mutants in Haloferax volcanii and provide a detailed glycoproteome for this model archaeon through the mass spectrometric analysis of intact glycopeptides. Using in-depth glycoproteomic datasets generated for the wild-type (WT) and mutant strains as well as a reanalysis of datasets within the Archaeal Proteome Project (ArcPP), we identify the largest archaeal glycoproteome described so far. We further show that different N-glycosylation pathways can modify the same glycosites under the same culture conditions. The extent and complexity of the Hfx. volcanii N-glycoproteome revealed here provide new insights into the roles of N-glycosylation in archaeal cell biology.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania Department of Biology

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Mechthild Pohlschroder
University of Pennsylvania Department of Biology


### SDRF

