### Accession
PXD004700

### Title
Bronchoalveolar Lavage proteomics

### Description
Mass spectrometry based proteome analysis on an observational prospective cohort consisting of 90 suspected lung cancer cases (suspicious=7, no lung cancer suspicion=47 and lung cancer=36 as diagnosed in 2014) which were followed during two years (suspicious=2, no lung cancer suspicion= 39 and Lung cancer=49).

### Sample Protocol
BAL processing In most cases, BAL was targeted toward affected lung segments. In most cases, the procedure was performed by wedging the bronchoscope in a subsegmental bronchus. Usually, three lavages were performed using approximately 50 mL of 0.9% saline solution per lavage. The recovered fluid was placed at 4°C immediately. BAL was centrifuged at 320 ×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, to remove the cellular fraction. The resulting cell-free supernatant was immediately aliquoted and frozen at −80 °C until further analysis. Protein sample preparation BAL samples were distributed to five sample batches by stratified random sampling, with approximately uniform distribution of lung cancer cases in each batch. Subsequent analysis confirmed a fairly even distribution of non-lung cancer versus lung cancer cases in each of the batches. BAL proteins were precipitated with six volumes of ice-cold acetone and then incubated overnight at −20˚C. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min at 4˚C and the supernatant discarded. The pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone and then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min at 4˚C and the supernatant discarded. The resultant pellets were dissolved in 100 μl of 8 M urea and 100 mM HEPES with alternate sonication and vortexing. Protein estimation was carried out using the micro BCA assay kit and concentration was adjusted to 100 μg/100 μl using 8 M urea and 100 mM HEPES buffer.  Peptide sample preparation Protein solution containing SDS and DTT were loaded onto filtering columns and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer[27]. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega).  LTQ Orbitrap XL analysis:  Peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters) on-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). An aliquot of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column (180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm, Waters). The precolumn was connected to a BEH130 C18 column (75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm, Waters), and equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted directly into the LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer through a nanoelectrospray capillary source (Proxeon Biosystems), at 300 nl/min and using a 120 min linear gradient of 3–40% acetonitrile, followed up by an increase to 40% acetonitrile for the next 30 min. The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Full MS scan survey spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with mass resolution of 30000 at m/z 400. After each survey scan, the six most intense ions above 1000 counts were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Peptides were excluded from further analysis during 60 s using the dynamic exclusion feature.

### Data Protocol
Preprocessing of MS data Q-Exactive data were calibrated using polycyclodi-methylsiloxane (PCMs—outgassed material from semiconductors) present in the ambient air and Bis(2-Ethylhexyl)(Phthalate) (DEHP—from plastic) [27, 28] by modular VEMS [29]. Modular VEMS further allows alternative parent ion annotations for each MS/MS spectrum which is needed if two peptide elution profiles overlap in the m/z and retention time dimension. By allowing alternative parent ion annotation for each MS/MS spectrum, provides a storage space efficient data format. Furthermore, these alternative parent ion annotations were taken into account during the database dependent search.  Database search The obtained data from the 124 LC-MS runs were searched using VEMS [30, 31] and MaxQuant [32]. A standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640) for which fusion proteins from Sun et al [30] and previous cancer mutations associated to adenocarcinomas from the COSMIC database [33] were included. Permutated protein sequences keeping Arg and Lys in place were included. Trypsin cleavage allowing a maximum of 4 missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was included as variable modifications. 5 ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 0.5 m/z for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups as defined by Matthiesen et al [34].

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer configures as one of the deadliest types of cancer. The future implementation of early screening methods such as exhaled breath condensate analysis and low dose computed tomography (CT) as an alternative to current chest imaging based screening will lead to an increased burden on bronchoscopy units. New approaches for improvement of diagnosis in bronchoscopy units, regarding patient management, are likely to have clinical impact in the future. Diagnostic approaches to address mortality of lung cancer include improved early detection and stratification of the cancers according to its prognosis and further response to drug treatment. In this study, we performed a detailed mass spectrometry based proteome analysis of acellular bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid samples on an observational prospective cohort consisting of 90 suspected lung cancer cases which were followed during two years. The thirteen new lung cancer cases diagnosed during the follow up time period clustered, based on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) data, with lung cancer cases at the time of BAL collection. Hundred and thirty-tree potential biomarkers were identified showing significantly differential expression when comparing lung cancer versus non-lung cancer. The regulated biomarkers showed a large overlap with biomarkers detected in tissue samples.

### Keywords
Human, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Affiliation: Computational and Experimental Biology Group National Health Institute Dr. Ricardo Jorge, (INSA,I.P.) Av Padre Cruz, 1649-016 Lisboa-Portugal phone: 00351-217508124

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Affiliation: Computational and Experimental Biology Group National Health Institute Dr. Ricardo Jorge, (INSA,I.P.) Av Padre Cruz, 1649-016 Lisboa-Portugal phone: 00351-217508124


