### Accession
PXD041622

### Title
Identification of co-factors of eIF4E1b protein in mouse ovary.

### Description
We have identified eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E family member 1B (Eif4e1b) as a regulator of maternal RNA translation, whose maternal deletion leads to 2-cell arrest phenotype in mouse embryos. eIF4E1b protein binds mRNA selectively in oocytes and controls their translation in early embryos. eIF4E1b expresses specifically in mouse ovary and we have generated a knock-in mouse line in which HA tag is conjugated to the C terminus of eIF4E1b. We aim to identify eIF4E1b co-factors using mass spectrometry after anit-HA immunoprecipitation (IP) using mouse ovaries.

### Sample Protocol
Ovary lysates from 6-week-old Eif4e1b HA knock-in female mice and WT control females were used for anti-HA IP succeeded by quantitative mass spectrometry. 3 experimental groups and 3 control groups were used for IP. Each group utilized ovary lysates from 2 female mice. A HA-Tag Magnetic IP/Co-IP Kit (Pierce 88838) was used for the IP experiments. Magnetic beads were washed 3 times with PBS before LC-MS/MS analysis. A protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce 78442) was supplied to the lysis and wash buffers.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to analyze the resulting data searching against the common contaminants list and a list containing each of the variants. The mass spectrometry results were analyzed by Perseus. Proteins that had log2 fold change > 1 and P-value < 0.05 were considered potential eIF4E1b co-factors.

### Publication Abstract
Translation of maternal mRNAs is detected before transcription of zygotic genes and is essential for mammalian embryo development. How certain maternal mRNAs are selected for translation instead of degradation and how this burst of translation affects zygotic genome activation remain unknown. Using gene-edited mice, we document that the oocyte-specific eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E family member 1b (eIF4E1b) is the regulator of maternal mRNA expression that ensures subsequent reprogramming of the zygotic genome. In oocytes, eIF4E1b binds to transcripts encoding translation machinery proteins, chromatin remodelers, and reprogramming factors to promote their translation in zygotes and protect them from degradation. The protein products are thought to establish an open chromatin landscape in one-cell zygotes to enable transcription of genes required for cleavage stage development. Our results define a program for rapid resetting of the zygotic epigenome that is regulated by maternal mRNA expression and provide new insights into the mammalian maternal-to-zygotic transition.

### Keywords
Ovary, Mouse, Initiation facto, Affinity, Eif-4e1b

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology,  NIDDK, NIH, US Government
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Jurrien Dean
Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology,  NIDDK, NIH, US Government


