### Accession
PXD005568

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals large amounts of decomposition enzymes and major metabolic pathways involved in algicidal process of Trametes versicolor F21a

### Description
A recent algicidal mode indicates that fungal mycelia can wrap and eliminate almost all the co-cultivated algal cells within a short time. However, the regulation of molecular mechanism is rarely understood. Here, proteomic analysis was applied to investigate the algicidal process of Trametes versicolor F21a. Our results showed that 3,754 fungal proteins were identified, among which 2,809 unique proteins could be quantified during the process. 30 isoenzymes with the capacity of degradation biomass, belonging to Glycoside Hydrolases, Auxiliary Activities, Carbohydrate Esterases and Polysaccharide Lyases, were significantly up-regulated, suggesting that these enzymes probably employed synergistic mechanisms in degrading algal cells. Additionally, peptidase, exonuclease, manganese peroxidase and cytochrome c peroxidase were also up-regulated. 10% of the significantly up-regulated proteins were extracellular enzymes. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis demonstrated that the enriched metabolic pathways mainly contained carbon metabolism, selenocompound metabolism, sulfur assimilation and metabolism, as well as several amino acid biosynthesis pathways, which implied that these pathways should play vital roles in the synthesis of needed nutrition for the fungal mycelia via components of algal cells. Moreover, the fungal NmrA-like transcriptional regulator which represses the nitrogen metabolite was also enriched and might be a key regulator in eliminating algal cells

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1% protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against JGI Coriolus versicolor or Uniprot Microcystis aeruginosa database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected in Mascot. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
A recent algicidal mode indicates that fungal mycelia can wrap and eliminate almost all co-cultivated algal cells within a short time span. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is rarely understood. We applied proteomic analysis to investigate the algicidal process of Trametes versicolor F21a and identified 3,754 fungal proteins. Of these, 30 fungal enzymes with endo- or exoglycosidase activities such as &#x3b2;-1,3-glucanase, &#x3b1;-galactosidase, &#x3b1;-glucosidase, alginate lyase and chondroitin lyase were significantly up-regulated. These proteins belong to Glycoside Hydrolases, Auxiliary Activities, Carbohydrate Esterases and Polysaccharide Lyases, suggesting that these enzymes may degrade lipopolysaccharides, peptidoglycans and alginic acid of algal cells. Additionally, peptidase, exonuclease, manganese peroxidase and cytochrome c peroxidase, which decompose proteins and DNA or convert other small molecules of algal cells, could be other major decomposition enzymes. Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis demonstrated that pyruvate metabolism and tricarboxylic acid cycle pathways play a critical role in response to adverse environment via increasing energy production to synthesize lytic enzymes or uptake molecules. Carbon metabolism, selenocompound metabolism, sulfur assimilation and metabolism, as well as several amino acid biosynthesis pathways could play vital roles in the synthesis of nutrients required by fungal mycelia.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Trametes versicolor f21a

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China
PTM biolab (Hangzhou)

### Submitter
zhu taotao

### Lab Head
Dr Guomin Han
School of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, China


