### Accession
PXD016119

### Title
Imipridones cause cellular toxicity in human cells and bacteria by ectopic activation of the ClpP protease

### Description
Ectopic activation of the conserved ClpP protease by chemical activators causes toxicity in bacteria and human cells due to unrestrained proteolysis. The imipridone ONC201 has been ascribed multiple mechanisms of action and is currently in cancer clinical trials. To systematically investigate the genetic dependencies of imipridone action, we screened a genome-wide CRISPR knockout library in the presence of ONC201 and its more potent analog ONC212. Loss of the mitochondrial matrix protease CLPP conferred strong resistance to both compounds, consistent with recent reports that ONC201 directly activates CLPP in cancer cells. Biochemical assays and surrogate genetic assays in yeast confirmed activation of CLPP in the absence of its regulatory subunits. Imipridone toxicity was bypassed by loss of only one other gene, the mitochondrial intermediate peptidase MIPEP, which we showed is necessary for proteolytic maturation of a CLPP precursor form. Quantitative proteomic analysis of cells treated with ONC212 revealed degradation of many mitochondrial proteins as well as cell cycle regulators. Prompted by the conservation of ClpP across kingdoms, we showed that the imipridones activate Escherichia coli ClpP in vitro and Staphylococcus aureus ClpP in a surrogate yeast assay. ONC212 and acyldepsipeptide (ADEP)-4, a known activator of bacterial ClpP, caused similar proteomic degradation profiles in S. aureus. ONC212 suppressed the proliferation of a number of Gram-positive (S. aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Enterococcus faecium) and Gram-negative species (E. coli, Neisseria gonorrhoeae). Moreover, a combination of ONC212 and rifampicin eradicated antibiotic-tolerant S. aureus persister cells. These results reveal the genetic dependencies of imipridone action in human cells and identify the imipridone scaffold as a new entry point for antibiotic development.

### Sample Protocol
NALM-6-shScrambled and NALM-6-shClpP-46861 were treated with either 150 nM ONC212 or DMSO vehicle control to yield a final DMSO concentration of 0.1% (v/v) for 24 hours. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4)HCO3) with 10 mM TCEP [Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific] and incubated under agitation for 1 h at 37°C. Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for at 55 mM and incubated under agitation for 1 hr at 37°C. Samples were digested by 1 µg trypsin for 8 h at 37°C and after drying solubilized in 5% ACN-0.2% formic acid (FA). The samples were separated on a home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 200 mm) with a 56-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on an Easy-NLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Fusion equipped with FAIMS Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA. Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 120,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 30% and acquired in the ion trap. FAIMS CVs were stepped from -37V to -93V.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a human database. Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. Variable selected posttranslational modifications were carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY) and acetylation (N-ter). The data were visualized with Scaffold 4.3.0 (protein threshold, 99%, with at least 2 peptides identified and a false-discovery rate [FDR] of 1% for peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Systematic genetic interaction profiles can reveal the mechanisms-of-action of bioactive compounds. The imipridone ONC201, which is currently in cancer clinical trials, has been ascribed a variety of different targets. To investigate the genetic dependencies of imipridone action, we screened a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) knockout library in the presence of either ONC201 or its more potent analog ONC212. Loss of the mitochondrial matrix protease CLPP or the mitochondrial intermediate peptidase MIPEP conferred strong resistance to both compounds. Biochemical and surrogate genetic assays showed that impridones directly activate CLPP and that MIPEP is necessary for proteolytic maturation of CLPP into a catalytically competent form. Quantitative proteomic analysis of cells treated with ONC212 revealed degradation of many mitochondrial as well as nonmitochondrial proteins. Prompted by the conservation of ClpP from bacteria to humans, we found that the imipridones also activate ClpP from <i>Escherichia coli</i>, <i>Bacillus subtilis</i>, and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> in biochemical and genetic assays. ONC212 and acyldepsipeptide-4 (ADEP4), a known activator of bacterial ClpP, caused similar proteome-wide degradation profiles in <i>S. aureus</i> ONC212 suppressed the proliferation of a number of Gram-positive (<i>S. aureus</i>, <i>B. subtilis</i>, and <i>Enterococcus faecium</i>) and Gram-negative species (<i>E. coli</i> and <i>Neisseria gonorrhoeae</i>). Moreover, ONC212 enhanced the ability of rifampin to eradicate antibiotic-tolerant <i>S. aureus</i> persister cells. These results reveal the genetic dependencies of imipridone action in human cells and identify the imipridone scaffold as a new entry point for antibiotic development.

### Keywords
Imipridones, Clpp protease

### Affiliations
Proteomic Platform
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer of the Université de Montréal

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Tyers
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer of the Université de Montréal


