### Accession
PXD005146

### Title
Proteomics Reveals the Effect of Environmental Change on Protist Ecophysiology

### Description
Protist predators are the primary agents of top-down control of bacteria and primary producers, and thus key organisms determining the fate and transport of organic matter in nature. In this study, we address the effects of light and silver stress on the mixotrophic protist Poterioochromonas malhamensis by means of mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
In order to evaluate the effect of light and silver treatment on P. malhamensis the following experiments were setup (4 replica each): First, light/no light was applied for 5 days. Then silver nitrate was added in two of the four treatments and samples were taken after 1, 3, and 5 days. In total we generated 68 samples. The protists were then collected by centrifugation and the cell pellets frozen at -80°C before further treatment. The frozen cell pellets were warmed to room temperature and taken up in 1 mL PBS. In order to break the cells, release the proteome and to shear the genomic DNA, the samples were lysed by ultrasonification in a Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 5 min. The turbid solution was cleared by centrifugation. Reduction/alkylation and tryptic digestion. 50 µg total protein from each sample was precipitated with acetone (ratio of sample to acetone = 1:4). The pellets were taken up in 25 µL 6 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and extensively vortexed. The proteins were then reduced by addition of dithiothreitol (DTT; 8 mM final) and incubation at 37 °C for 30 min and secondly alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (IAM, 16 mM final) and incubation at 30 °C for 30 min. In order to quench the excess IAM, we added more DTT to a final concentration of 24 mM. After this treatment 500 ng Lys-C (1:100; Wako Laboratory Chemicals) was added for 3 h at 37 °C. The samples were diluted to 25 mM ABC and 1.5 M urea. 800 µg sequencing grade Trypsin (1/60; Promega) were added and the samples were incubated over night at 37 °C while shaking. On the next morning, the samples were acidified by adding formic acid solution (FA, final 0.5% v/v). Sample clean-up for liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Acidified tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al. (2007). On each 2 disc StageTip we loaded around 15 µg peptides (based on the initial protein concentration). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution. LC-MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo; Michalski et al. 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 38 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45°C during data acquisition and in all other modi at 30°C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.3 – 0.6 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 240 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 220 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS) in the scan range of m/z 300-1,800 and at a resolution of 60,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 30 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 s with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant. RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) using the default settings (Cox & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014). MS/MS spectra data were searched against the in-house generated peptide database of predicted candidate ORFs from the assembled transcriptome of P. malhamensis (39,357 entries; (Beisser et al. 2016)). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modification and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Peptides were assembled into proteins and proteins sharing the same identified peptides were grouped together into one protein group. For label-free protein quantification (LFQ) unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification with a minimum score for modified peptides of 40.

### Publication Abstract
Aquatic environments are heavily impacted by human activities including climate warming and the introduction of xenobiotics. Due to the application of silver nanoparticles as bactericidal agent the introduction of silver into the environment strongly has increased during the past years. Silver ions affect the primary metabolism of algae, in particular photosynthesis. Mixotrophic algae are an interesting test case as they do not exclusively rely on photosynthesis which may attenuate the harmful effect of silver. In order to study the effect of silver ions on mixotrophs, cultures of the chrysophyte Poterioochromonas malhamensis were treated in a replicate design in light and darkness with silver nitrate at a sub-lethal concentration. At five time points samples were taken for the identification and quantitation of proteins by mass spectrometry. In our analysis, relative quantitative protein mass spectrometry has shown to be a useful tool for functional analyses in conjunction with transcriptome reference sequences. A total of 3,952 proteins in 63 samples were identified and quantified, mapping to 4,829 transcripts of the sequenced and assembled transcriptome. Among them, 720 and 104 proteins performing various cellular functions were differentially expressed after eight days in light versus darkness and after three days of silver treatment, respectively. Specifically pathways of the energy and primary carbon metabolism were differentially affected by light and the utilization of expensive reactions hints to an energy surplus of P. malhamensis under light conditions. The excess energy is not invested in growth, but in the synthesis of storage metabolites. The effects of silver were less explicit, observable especially in the dark treatments where the light effect could not mask coinciding but weaker effects of silver. Photosynthesis, particularly the light harvesting complexes, and several sulphur containing enzymes were affected presumably due to a direct interference with the silver ions, mainly affecting energy supply.

### Keywords
Poterioochromonas malhamensis, Silver, Label-free quantification, Protist

### Affiliations
Analytics Core Facility Essen, Chemische Biologie, Zentrum für Medizinische Biotechnologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstr. 2, 45117 Essen, Germany
University Duisburg-Essen

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen, Chemische Biologie, Zentrum für Medizinische Biotechnologie, Fakultät für Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Universitätsstr. 2, 45117 Essen, Germany


