### Accession
PXD034330

### Title
The parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) target sequencing based on the comparative proteomic profiling in sheep spermatozoa under non-capacitating (NC) and capacitating (CAP) conditions in vitro using a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) combined with tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling strategy

### Description
To verify protein expression levels obtained by TMT LC-MS/MS analysis strategy, the expression levels of differentially abundant proteins  in NC and CAP groups were selected and quantified by a PRM assay.

### Sample Protocol
three  non-capacitating (NC) biosamples, and three capacitating (CAP) biosamples.

### Data Protocol
For the PRM assay, the peptide mixtures were introduced into the mass spectrometer via an in-house packed C18 column (Thermo Scientific, 15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Chromatographic separation was performed using the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (500 nL/min). We used one-hour liquid chromatography gradients with acetonitrile ranging from 8-35% over 50 min. PRM analysis was performed using a Q-ExactiveTM mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode with the following parameters: full scan was performed with an m/z scan range of 350-1000 and an electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting as 25, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-independent procedure that alternated between one MS scan was followed by 20 PRM scans at a resolution of 17,500. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 3E6 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The targeted peptides were isolated within a 1.6 Th window. Ion activation/dissociation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25 in higher energy dissociation (HCD) collision cells. The raw data obtained were analyzed using the analytic program Proteome Discoverer 1.3. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins or peptides, and Skyline software 2.6 was used for quantitative data processing and proteomic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Capacitation, Spermatozoa, Proteomic, Lc-ms/ms, Prm, Tmt

### Affiliations
 Yunnan Animal Science and Veterinary Institute
Anhui agricultural university college of animal science and technology

### Submitter
Yan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zijun Zhang
Anhui agricultural university college of animal science and technology


