### Accession
PXD024312

### Title
A Proteomic Platform to Identify Off-Target Proteins Associated with Therapeutic Modalities that Induce Protein Degradation or Gene Silencing

### Description
Novel modalities such as Proteolysis Targeting Chimera (PROTAC) and RNA  interference (RNAi) have the ability to inadvertently alter the abundance of endogenous proteins. Currently available in vitro secondary pharmacology assays, which evaluate off-target binding or activity of small molecules, do not fully assess the off-target effects of PROTAC and are not applicable to RNAi. To address this gap, we developed a proteomics-based platform to comprehensively evaluate abundance of off-target proteins. The first part of the study involves selecting a panel of off-target proteins and a platform of cell lines using evidence from genetics and pharmacology. This process yielded 2,813 proteins, forming the basis of a panel that we refer to as the “selected off-target proteome” (SOTP). An iterative algorithm was then used to identify appropriate cell lines. Four human cell lines out of 932 were selected that, collectively, expressed ~ 80% of the SOTP based on transcriptome data. Second, we used mass spectrometry to quantify the intracellular and extracellular proteins of interest in the 4 selected cell lines. Among over 10,000 quantifiable proteins identified, 1,828 were part of the predefined SOTP. The SOTP was designed to be easily modified or expanded, owing rationale selection process developed and the label free LC-MS/MS approach chosen. This versatility inherent to our platform is essential to design fit-for-purpose studies that can address the dynamic questions faced in investigative toxicology.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular proteins (referred to as the cellular proteome) were collected by harvesting three consecutive passages of cells as biological triplicates. Adherent cells (TT, SU.86.86, and KYSE-270) were washed three times with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Invitrogen, CA, USA) and then harvested by scraping into another 1 mL of ice-cold PBS before centrifugation at 1,000 × g for 5 min at 4 ˚C. COR-L24 suspension cells were first centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 min to pellet the cells and then washed three times with ice-cold PBS. The supernatants were discarded, and the adherent and suspension cell pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 5% sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 7.6) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) at room temperature (RT). A high concentration of SDS detergent was also utilized to help dissolve and increase coverage of poorly-soluble membrane proteins. To shear the DNA and reduce the lysate’s viscosity, the samples were sonicated on ice for three 30 s rounds at 25 % amplitude with a probe sonicator (Agilent, CA, USA). SDS lysates were heated to 90 ˚C for 10 min and clarified at 15, 000 × g for 10 min. Total protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA). Total amounts of 600 µg proteins were then reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 30 min at 56 ˚C and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Thermo Scientific Pierce, MA, USA) for 30 min in the dark. After quenching with an additional of 20 mM DTT at RT for 30 min, protein digestion in the S-Trap filter was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, to the sample was added a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid and then six volumes of binding buffer (90 % methanol; 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1). After gentle mixing, the protein solutions were loaded to S-Trap filters, spun at 4,000 × g for 30s, and the flow-throughs collected were reloaded onto the filters. This step was repeated twice, and then the filters were washed three times with binding buffer. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:20 (wt:wt) in 50 mM TEAB (pH 8), and digested overnight at 37 ˚C.  To elute peptides, three step-wise buffers were applied, with 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid (FA) (Thermo Scientific Pierce, MA, USA), and 60% acetonitrile and 0.2% FA. All eluents containing tryptic peptides were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness.   Dried peptides were resuspended in 15 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) and fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 µm 4.6 × 150 mm column on a Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, NY, USA) operating at 1 mL/min with buffer A consisted of 15 mM ABC at pH 8 and buffer B consisted of 15 mM ABC with 95% acetonitrile, pH 8. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 2% B to 35% B in 50 min followed by a linear increase to 60% B in 7 min, and ramped to 70%B in 3 min. At this point, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was increased to 98% B in 9 min before being ramped back to 2% B, where the column was then washed and equilibrated. Fractions were collected at 30s intervals to a total of 120 fractions and were then recombined by pooling every 15th fraction in a step-wise concatenation strategy to yield a total of 15 fractions. All fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 0.1% FA in water and desalted. For nanoflow LC-MS/MS, the loading amount was kept constant at 1 µg per injection, determined by quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.4.0) equipped with the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (20,416 sequences) concatenated with 248 common contaminants. For secretome MS data search, a list of FBS associated proteins was also included (Shin et al., 2019). A first search was performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main search, precursor mass and product ion mass had an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages and minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Target decoy analysis was performed by searching a reverse database with an overall false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. For label-free protein quantification, the XIC-based MaxLFQ was used. The algorithm first calculated pairwise protein ratios by taking the median of all pairwise peptide ratios per protein to protect against outliers. Only shared identical peptides were considered for each pairwise comparison with a minimum of one ratio count. The relative abundance profile for each protein was then reconstructed with a least-squares analysis. To maximize the number of quantification events across biological samples within each cell line, we enabled the “match between runs” feature with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min to allow the quantification of high-resolution MS1 features that were not identified in each single measurement. For estimation of the absolute abundance of different proteins within a single sample, we used the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm. The values are the intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides. Thus, iBAQ levels are proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins. Lysates and secretomes were analyzed as two independent batches. The data output from Maxquant was analyzed using Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0), R or Python frameworks.

### Publication Abstract
Novel modalities such as PROTAC and RNAi have the ability to inadvertently alter the abundance of endogenous proteins. Currently available&#xa0;in vitro&#xa0;secondary pharmacology assays, which evaluate off-target binding or activity of small molecules, do not fully assess the off-target effects of PROTAC and are not applicable to RNAi. To address this gap, we developed a proteomics-based platform to comprehensively evaluate the abundance of off-target proteins. First, we selected off-target proteins using genetics and pharmacology evidence. This process yielded 2813 proteins, which we refer to as the "selected off-target proteome" (SOTP). An iterative algorithm was then used to identify four human cell lines out of 932. The 4 cell lines collectively expressed&#x2009;~&#x2009;80% of the SOTP based on transcriptome data. Second, we used mass spectrometry to quantify the intracellular and extracellular proteins from the selected cell lines. Among over 10,000 quantifiable proteins identified, 1828 were part of the predefined SOTP. The SOTP was designed to be easily modified or expanded, owing to the rational selection process developed and the label free LC-MS/MS approach chosen. This versatility inherent to our platform is essential to design fit-for-purpose studies that can address the dynamic questions faced in investigative toxicology.

### Keywords
Proteomic platform for off-target screening for protac or rnai

### Affiliations
Amgen
Amgen Inc.

### Submitter
Ye Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Fan
Amgen Inc.


