### Accession
PXD015824

### Title
The GATOR2–mTORC2 axis mediates Sestrin2-induced AKT Ser/Thr kinase activation

### Description
Sestrins represent a family of stress-inducible proteins that prevent the progression of many age- and obesity-associated disorders. Endogenous Sestrins maintain insulin-dependent AKT Ser/Thr kinase (AKT) activation during high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity, and overexpressed Sestrins activate AKT in various cell types, including liver and skeletal muscle cells. Although Sestrin-mediated AKT activation improves metabolic parameters, the mechanistic details underlying such improvement remain elusive. Here, we investigated how Sestrin2, the Sestrin homolog highly expressed in liver, induces strong AKT activation. We found that two known targets of Sestrin2, mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), are not required for Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Rather, phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and mTORC2, kinases upstream of AKT and important for its activation, were essential for Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Among these kinases, mTORC2 catalytic activity was strongly up-regulated upon Sestrin2 overexpression in an in vitro kinase assay, indicating that mTORC2 may represent the major link between Sestrin2 and AKT. As reported previously, Sestrin2 interacted with mTORC2; however, we found here that this interaction occurs indirectly through GATOR2, a pentameric protein complex that directly interacts with Sestrin2. Deleting or silencing WD repeat domain 24 (WDR24), the GATOR2 component essential for the Sestrin2–GATOR2 interaction, or WDR59, the GATOR2 component essential for the GATOR2–mTORC2 interaction, completely ablated Sestrin2’s effect on AKT activation. We also noted that Sestrin2 directly binds to the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of AKT and induces AKT translocation to the plasma membrane. These results uncover a signaling mechanism whereby Sestrin2 activates AKT through GATOR2 and mTORC2.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were seeded in 100mm plates then treated with adenoviruses expressing GFP or Flag-Sestrin2 for 24 hours. Cells were then washed with PBS two times and lysed in 500 L of Cell Lysis Buffer (20mM Tris pH 7.6, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 2.5mM NaPPi, 1mM Na3VO4, 1mM b-glyceroP, 1mM NaF, 0.3% Chaps). Cells were then vortexed and incubated on ice for 30 min, then centrifuged for 15min at 15,000rpm at 4C. The supernatant was collected and sample protein was normalized using the Biorad Protein Assay (Biorad 5000006). 20uL of 50:50 Flag bead slurry in cell lysis buffer was added, and samples were incubated on a rotisserie at 4C for 2 hours. Samples were then spun down for 2 min at 4000rpm and washed 5-7times. PBS was used for washing the samples for the final 2 washes.    The beads were resuspended in 50 l of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8).  Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 l of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 C for 30 min.  Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 min at room temperature.  An overnight digestion with 1 ug sequencing grade, modified trypsin was carried out at 37 C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer.  Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters).  Samples were completely dried using vacufuge.  Resulting peptides were dissolved in 8 l of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and 2 ls of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-22% buffer B in 110 min, 22-40% in 25 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 5 min and requilibration with Buffer A for 25 min).  Eluent was directly introduced into Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms).  Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against H Sapiens database (UniProt; 2016-11-30 download, 42054 entries) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspergine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sestrins represent a family of stress-inducible proteins that prevent the progression of many age- and obesity-associated disorders. Endogenous Sestrins maintain insulin-dependent AKT Ser/Thr kinase (AKT) activation during high-fat diet-induced obesity, and overexpressed Sestrins activate AKT in various cell types, including liver and skeletal muscle cells. Although Sestrin-mediated AKT activation improves metabolic parameters, the mechanistic details underlying such improvement remain elusive. Here, we investigated how Sestrin2, the Sestrin homolog highly expressed in liver, induces strong AKT activation. We found that two known targets of Sestrin2, mTOR complex (mTORC) 1 and AMP-activated protein kinase, are not required for Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Rather, phosphoinositol 3-kinase and mTORC2, kinases upstream of AKT, were essential for Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Among these kinases, mTORC2 catalytic activity was strongly up-regulated upon Sestrin2 overexpression in an <i>in vitro</i> kinase assay, indicating that mTORC2 may represent the major link between Sestrin2 and AKT. As reported previously, Sestrin2 interacted with mTORC2; however, we found here that this interaction occurs indirectly through GATOR2, a pentameric protein complex that directly interacts with Sestrin2. Deleting or silencing WDR24 (WD repeat domain 24), the GATOR2 component essential for the Sestrin2-GATOR2 interaction, or WDR59, the GATOR2 component essential for the GATOR2-mTORC2 interaction, completely ablated Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. We also noted that Sestrin2 also directly binds to the pleckstrin homology domain of AKT and induces AKT translocation to the plasma membrane. These results uncover a signaling mechanism whereby Sestrin2 activates AKT through GATOR2 and mTORC2.

### Keywords
Gator2, Sestrin2, Liver metabolism, Mtor, Akt pkb

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of molecular and integrative physiology, university of michigan, ann arbor MI 48109

### Submitter
Jun Hee Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Hee Lee
Department of molecular and integrative physiology, university of michigan, ann arbor MI 48109


