### Accession
PXD036343

### Title
Proteomics of the astrocyte secretome

### Description
Proteomics of the astrocyte secretome in response to soluble oligomeric Aß

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media from each sample was filtered by microcon filters with 10 kDa cutoff (Millipore) and buffer was exchanged with 8 M Urea 100 mM Tris pH8. 50 ug of secreted proteins was analyzed by Secret3D workflow (Matafora V et al, 2020). Eluted peptides were purified on a C18 StageTip. 1 μg of digested sample was injected onto a quadrupole Orbitrap Q‐exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (1.6.0.16), making use of the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). MS/MS peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB Mouse complete proteome database (uniprot_cp_mouse_2019) in which trypsin specificity was used with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Searches were performed selecting alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, N‐terminal acetylation and N‐Deamination as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 10 ppm for parent and fragment ions, respectively. A reverse decoy database was generated within Andromeda, and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to < 0.01 for peptide spectrum matches (PSMs). For identification, at least two peptide identifications per protein were required, of which at least one peptide had to be unique to the protein group. Matching between runs was performed with Neuron conditioned media, astrocytes conditioned media and conditioned media from astrocyte without serum serving as a library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lcmsms

### Affiliations
IFOM ETS- The AIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology.
ifom

### Submitter
vittoria matafora

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Bachi
IFOM ETS- The AIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology.


