### Accession
PXD038983

### Title
Post-transcriptional control of a stemness signature by RNA-binding 8 protein MEX3A regulates adult neurogenesis

### Description
Neural stem cells (NSCs) in the adult mammalian subependymal zone maintain a glial identity and the developmental potential to generate neurons during the lifetime. Production of neurons from these NSCs is not direct but follows an orderly pattern of cell progression which allows the gradual increase along the neurogenic lineage in the expression of pro-neural factors needed for neuronal specification. In this context, tightly regulated translation of existing transcriptional programs represents a potential mechanism to avoid the critical challenge posed by genes that encode proteins with conflicting functions, i.e. self-renew or differentiate. Here, we identify RNA-binding protein MEX3A as a post-transcriptional regulator of a set of stemness-associated transcripts at critical transitions in the subependymal neurogenic lineage. MEX3A binding to a set of quiescence-related RNAs in activated NSCs is needed for their return to quiescence, playing a role in the long-term maintenance of the NSC pool. Furthermore, it is required for the repression of the same program at the onset of neuronal differentiation. Our data indicate that MEX3A is a pivotal regulator of adult mammalian neurogenesis acting as a translational remodeller.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from crosslinked IPs were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, cat. no. V5111)93, vacuum dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). One third of the sample was loaded onto a Eksigent NanoLC trap column (ChromXP C18, 3 μm 120 Å, 350 μm x 0.5mm) (SCIEX, cat. no. 5016752) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 μl/min for 5 min. Then, peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 75 μm x 12 cm) (Nikkyo Technos Co®)equilibrated in 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide elution was performed by applying a linear gradient of solvents A (0.1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) from 5% to 40% of solvent B in A at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 min. Finally, peptides were analyzed in a nanoESI qQTOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX) (2.8 kV; data-dependent mode adquisition; MS1 scans: 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms, MS2 experiments: 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired in “high sensitivity” mode).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak lists directly from 5600 TripleTof .wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB SCIEX) was used to search the UniProt Mammals database (www.uniprot.org) with the following parameters: “trypsin specificity”, “cys-alkylation”, “no taxonomy restriction”, and the search effort set to “through”. The identified proteins were grouped by the Pro GroupTM algorithm. A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro GroupTM is guided entirely by observed peptides from experimentally acquired spectra and unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mex3a, Post-transcriptional regulator, Neuronal differentiation, Mammalian neurogenesis

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Departamento de Biología Celular, Biología Funcional y Antropología Física,Instituto de Biotecnología y Biomedicina

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel Fariñas
Departamento de Biología Celular, Biología Funcional y Antropología Física,Instituto de Biotecnología y Biomedicina


