### Accession
PXD025462

### Title
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) serum proteomics

### Description
While fewer cases of severe Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) are reported globally in children, a small proportion of SARS-CoV-2 infected children develop a novel pediatric febrile entity called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) that develops 2 to 5 weeks after initial SARS-CoV-2 exposure. MIS-C primarily effects male children and children of Hispanic or black descent. MIS-C manifests as a severe and uncontrolled inflammatory response with multiorgan involvement. A hyperinflammatory state is evidenced by clinical makers of inflammation including high levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), ferritin, and D-dimers, and an increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Children often present with persistent fever, severe gastrointestinal symptoms, cardiovascular manifestations, respiratory symptoms and neurological symptoms6-11,13. Cardiovascular manifestations include hypotension, shock, cardiac dysfunction, myocarditis and pericardial effusion. In the united states, admission to the intensive care unit occurs in approximately 58% of cases. To understand disease pathogenesis of MIS-C and proteins associated with the severe form of disease we performed proteomics analysis of serum or plasma samples. We collected serum from healthy children (SARS-CoV-2 negative, n=20), mild MIS-C (non-ICU, n=5) and severe MIS-C (ICU, n = 20) patients. MIS-C definition and diagnosis was performed according to CDC guidelines. Healthy adult serum (n = 4) was also used for reference ranges quality control and we obtained plasma samples from Kawasaki Disease (KD; n=7) patients that were recruited before the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion: Serum samples were depleted of the 14 most abundant plasma proteins albumin, Immunoglobulins A, E G and M (kappa and lambda light chains), alpha-1-acidglycoprotein, alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A1, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and transferrin using High select Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lyophilized depleted plasma is subjected to tryptic digestion. Digestion: Digestions and desalting are performed using an automated workstation (Beckman i7) which is programed to perform reactions at a controlled temperature with uniform mixing as previously described (https://www.jove.com/t/59842/a-plasma-sample-preparation-for-mass-spectrometry-using-an-automated) using standardized sample processing workflow (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.26.437268v1). LC-MS/MS: Data independent analysis (DIA) analysis is performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) instrument interfaced with a flex source coupled to an Ultimate 3000 ultra high-pressure chromatography system with mobile phase A 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides are separated on a linear gradient on a C18 column (15 cm, 3 µm) over the course of total 60mins at a flow rate of 9.5 ul/min. Fragmented ions are detected across 50 DIA non-overlapping precursor windows of 12Da size.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic Data analysis: DIA MS raw files were converted to mzML and the raw intensity data for peptide fragments was extracted from DIA files using the open source OpenSWATH workflow  against the Human Twin population plasma peptide assay library. The total ion current (TIC) normalized transition-level data was scored , aligned  and processed using the mapDIA software  to perform pairwise comparisons between groups at the peptide and protein level. Clustering Analysis and Network analysis: Principal component analysis was performed using the Factoextra package in R. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the pheatmap package in R. Protein network analysis was performed with Protein Interaction Network Extractor (PINE).

### Publication Abstract
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) manifests as a severe and uncontrolled inflammatory response with multiorgan involvement, occurring weeks after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Here, we utilized proteomics, RNA sequencing, autoantibody arrays, and B cell receptor (BCR) repertoire analysis to characterize MIS-C immunopathogenesis and identify factors contributing to severe manifestations and intensive care unit admission. Inflammation markers, humoral immune responses, neutrophil activation, and complement and coagulation pathways were highly enriched in MIS-C patient serum, with a more hyperinflammatory profile in severe than in mild MIS-C cases. We identified a strong autoimmune signature in MIS-C, with autoantibodies targeted to both ubiquitously expressed and tissue-specific antigens, suggesting autoantigen release and excessive antigenic drive may result from systemic tissue damage. We further identified a cluster of patients with enhanced neutrophil responses as well as high anti-Spike IgG and autoantibody titers. BCR sequencing of these patients identified a strong imprint of antigenic drive with substantial BCR sequence connectivity and usage of autoimmunity-associated immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (IGHV) genes. This cluster was linked to a TRBV11-2 expanded T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire, consistent with previous studies indicating a superantigen-driven pathogenic process. Overall, we identify a combination of pathogenic pathways that culminate in MIS-C and may inform treatment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mis-c, Proteomics, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
Advanced Clinical BioSystems Research Institute Smidt Heart Institute Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Aleksandra Binek

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Advanced Clinical BioSystems Research Institute Smidt Heart Institute Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


