### Accession
PXD022811

### Title
SOX4 AND SMARCA4 COOPERATIVELY REGULATE PI3K SIGNALING THROUGH TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION OF TGFBR2 IN BASAL LIKE BREAST CANCER

### Description
Dysregulation of PI3K/Akt signaling is a dominant feature in basal-like or triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC). However, the mechanisms regulating this pathway are largely unknown in this subset of aggressive tumors. Here we demonstrate that the transcription factor SOX4 is a key regulator of PI3K signaling in TNBC. Genomic and proteomic analyses coupled with mechanistic studies identified TGFBR2 as a direct transcriptional target of SOX4 and demonstrated that TGFBR2 is required to mediate SOX4-dependent PI3K signaling. We further report that SOX4 and the SWI/SNF ATPase SMARCA4, which are uniformly overexpressed in basal-like tumors, form a previously unreported complex that is required to maintain an open chromatin conformation at the TGFBR2 regulatory regions in order to mediate TGFBR2 expression and PI3K signaling. Collectively, our findings delineate the mechanism by which SOX4 and SMARCA4 cooperatively regulate PI3K/Akt signaling and suggest that this complex may play an essential role in TNBC genesis and/or progression.

### Sample Protocol
For Co-IP and LC-MS/MS analysis, 9000 µg of HCC1143 SOX4-V5 protein lysate was used to precipitate the protein complexes using either 5 µg of V5 antibody or a non-specific IgG control as described above. The precipitated protein complexes were separated on a 4-20% gradient SDS gel, visualized using the SYPRO Ruby protein gel staining kit (Thermofisher #S12000) and analyzed on Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Briefly, each gel lane was cut, in-gel trypsin digested (protein/trypsin ∼ 50:1) at 37 °C for 16 h. The tryptic peptides were extracted and desalted using a C18 cartridge prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS, the peptides were separated on a C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on an UltiMate 3000 LC system using a 2 h gradient of solvent A (2% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA) and solvent B (85% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA). The MS/MS spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Canoga Park, CA) using the data-dependent analysis mode. MS scan range is m/z 375−1500 with the resolution of 120000 (FWHM) The capillary temperature was set to 275 °C, and the spray voltage set to 2kV.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (74,072 entries) using the Sequest search engine through the Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.3) platform. The mass tolerance was 10 ppm for MS and 0.1 Da for MS/MS. The variable modifications included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation, whereas the fixed modification included cysteine carbamidomethylation. All proteins and peptides were identified with a false discovery rate of less than 1%. Relative quantitation was calculated based on a spectral counting method, where the spectral counts of identified proteins in V5 pulldown were divided by their corresponding spectral counts in non-specific IgG control. To avoid a large ratio from the presence of zero in the denominator, we arbitrarily added 2 spectral count to both the nominator and denominator during the ratio calculation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pi3 kinase, Chromatin, Transcription, Swi/snf, Epigenetics, Breast cancer, Smarca4, Tgfbr2, Sox4

### Affiliations
Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey - Rutgers University
Michael L. Gatza, PhD Principal Investigator  Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey

### Submitter
Gaurav Mehta

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L Gatza
Michael L. Gatza, PhD Principal Investigator  Assistant Professor of Radiation Oncology Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey


