### Accession
PXD008710

### Title
Neurochondrin interacts with the SMN protein suggesting a novel mechanism for Spinal Muscular Atrophy pathology.

### Description
Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an inherited neurodegenerative condition caused by reduction in functional Survival Motor Neurones Protein (SMN). SMN has been implicated in transport of mRNA in neural cells for local translation. We previously identified microtubule-dependant mobile vesicles rich in SMN and SmB, a member of the Sm family of snRNP-associated proteins, in neural cells. By comparing the interactomes of SmB and SmN, a neural-specific Sm protein, we now show that the essential neural protein neurochondrin (NCDN) interacts with Sm proteins and SMN in the context of mobile vesicles in neurites. NCDN has roles in protein localisation in neural cells, and in maintenance of cell polarity. NCDN is required for the correct localisation of SMN, suggesting they may both be required for formation and transport of trafficking vesicles. NCDN may have potential as a therapeutic target for SMA together with, or in place of, those targeting SMN expression

### Sample Protocol
Proteins interacting with YFP-SmB and YFP-SmN were affinity purified using GFP-TRAP (Chromotek) from whole-cell lysates of SH-SY5Y cell lines constitutively expressing the tagged proteins, with a cell line expressing YFP alone as a control for non-specific binding to the tag or bead matrix.The affinity purified material was size separated using SDS-PAGE and analysed by nLC ESI MS/MS mass spectrometry to identify peptides and therefore proteins interacting with YFP-SmB and YFP-SmN.  Each gel lane (N, B, CI) was excised in 3 chunks names top, middle and bottom.  The gel chunks were diced into 1mm3 and destained, reduced with DTT, alkyalted with IAA and digested with trypsin overnight at 37C.  The peptides extracted in 5%formic acid and concentrated to 20ul.  2-4 ul of each sample loaded in nLCMSMS and analysed in a 3hour run (2.5hour linear gradient H2O to ACN).  Data collected in MS from 400-1250m/z and the 20 most intense peptides of charge 2+-5+ selected for MSMS.  These peptides were then excluded for 90 sec.

### Data Protocol
The wiff files generated for each lane (top middle and bottom) were searched using Sciex Protein Pilot search algorithm, the data being merged into one search for each lane/sample.  Data searched agaisnt NCBI Oct 2014 restricted to Human proteins only.  Trypsin was selected as a digestion enzyme and carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an inherited neurodegenerative condition caused by a reduction in the amount of functional survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. SMN has been implicated in transport of mRNA in neural cells for local translation. We previously identified microtubule-dependent mobile vesicles rich in SMN and SNRPB, a member of the Sm family of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP)-associated proteins, in neural cells. By comparing the interactomes of SNRPB and SNRPN, a neural-specific Sm protein, we now show that the essential neural protein neurochondrin (NCDN) interacts with Sm proteins and SMN in the context of mobile vesicles in neurites. NCDN has roles in protein localisation in neural cells and in maintenance of cell polarity. NCDN is required for the correct localisation of SMN, suggesting they may both be required for formation and transport of trafficking vesicles. NCDN may have potential as a therapeutic target for SMA together with, or in place of the targeting of SMN expression.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Smn, Sm proteins, Neurochondrin, Snrnps, Spinal muscular atrophy

### Affiliations
Judith Sleeman PhD FRSB Lecturer in Developmental Cell Biology BSRC Complex School of Biology University of St Andrews KY16 9ST UK +44 (0)1334 463524
University of St Andrews

### Submitter
Sally Shirran

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Elizabeth Sleeman
Judith Sleeman PhD FRSB Lecturer in Developmental Cell Biology BSRC Complex School of Biology University of St Andrews KY16 9ST UK +44 (0)1334 463524


