### Accession
PXD041794

### Title
A Bioconductor workflow for processing, evaluating and interpreting expression proteomics data: Case data

### Description
Files associated with "A Bioconductor workflow for processing, evaluating and interpreting expression proteomics data".

### Sample Protocol
Six samples representing HEK293 cells under two conditions (anonymised). Samples 1-3 underwent a treatment and are referred to as 'Treated'. Samples 4-6 acted as controls and are referred to as 'Mock'. At 96-hours post-treatment, samples were centrifuged and separated into cell pellet and supernatant fractions to investigate cellular and secreted proteins, respectively. All samples were denatured, alkylated and digested with trypsin.  Cellular proteins were evaluated using a TMT labelling strategy (TMT6plex). Specifically, S1 (TMT6-128), S2 (TMT6-127), S3 (TMT6-131), S4 (TMT6-129), S5 (TMT6-126) and S6 (TMT6-130). The order of TMT labels was randomized to minimize channel interference. Cell pellet samples were pooled and fractionated using a Pierce(TM) High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit giving a total of 8 fractions. Fractions were analyzed over a two-hour gradient in an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system.Quantitation was achieved via SPS-MS3 data acquisition of TMT reporter ions.  Secreted proteins from the supernatant samples were evaluated using a label-free approach. After digestion, samples were de-salted and each analyzed in an independent mass spectrometry run. Again, a two-hour gradient was used on an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. Quantitation was achieved at the MS1 level based on signal intensities.

### Data Protocol
This raw data is associated with the publication "A Bioconductor workflow for processing, evaluating and interpreting expression proteomics data". All details of data processing can befound in this publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Tmt, Shotgun proteomics, Differential expression

### Affiliations
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Charlotte Hutchings

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge


