### Accession
PXD042300

### Title
Rab11a and Rab11b immunoprecipitates

### Description
We want to determine the protein networks that are associated with Rab11a and Rab11b, individually. We performed immunoprecipitation against Flag-tagged Rab11a or Flag-tagged Rab11b in HEK293 cells, and subjected the immunoprecipitates to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Hek293T cells were transfected with pQCXIP-3xFlag-Rab11a or 3xFlag-Rab11b. Protein lysates were obtained. Immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag M2 affinity agarose beads was performed. The resulting protein complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE, stained by Sypro Ruby. The gel was into 6 samples (Rab11a-above 25 kDa-green, Rab11b-above 25 kDa-green, Rab11a-below 25 kDa-high abundance-red, Rab11b-below 25 kDa-high abundance-red, Rab11a-below 25 Kda-low abundance-red, Rab11b-below 25 kDa-low abundance-red). We performed in-gel trypsin digestion. The resulted peptides were C18 desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive instrument.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra was searched against Swissprot human database using MASCOT (V2.3) search engines on Proteome Discover(V1.4) platform. The protein false discovery rate is less than 1%. The comparison of identified protein and their relative quantitation based on spectra counting were received.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rab11

### Affiliations
Rutgers University, Newark, USA
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Ivor Joseph

### Lab Head
Dr Nan Gao
Rutgers University, Newark, USA


