### Accession
PXD017492

### Title
A benzimidazole inhibitor attenuates sterile inflammation induced in a model of systemic autoinflammation

### Description
Sterile stimuli can trigger inflammatory responses, and in some cases can lead to a variety of acute or chronic diseases. In this study, we hypothesize that a benzimidazole inhibitor may be used as a therapeutic in the treatment of sterile inflammation. In vitro, this inhibitor blocks TLR signalling and inflammatory responses. The benzimidazole inhibitor does not prevent mouse macrophage activation after stimulation with 2, 6, 10, 14-tetramethylpentadecane (TMPD, also known as pristane), a hydrocarbon oil that mimics features of sterile inflammation when injected in vivo. However, C57BL/6 female mice treated with the benzimidazole inhibitor exhibited a significant reduction of pristane-dependent induction of splenocyte number and weight. Conversely, no significant difference was observed in males. Using mass spectrometry, we found that the urine of pristane-injected mice contained increased levels of putative markers for several inflammatory diseases, which were reduced by the benzimidazole inhibitor. To study the mechanism, we showed that pristane-injected mice had increased cell free DNA in serum, which was not impacted by inhibitor treatment. However, chemokine release (e.g. MCP-1, RANTES and TARC) was significantly reduced in inhibitor-treated mice. Thus, the benzimidazole inhibitor might be used as a new drug to block the recruitment of immune cells during sterile inflammatory diseases in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Each urine sample was diluted to a final volume of 100 µL using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in water, pH 8.  Proteins were subject to Cys reduction and alkylation using 5 mM dithiothreitol in 0.1 M ABC for 1.5 hr and 10 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ABC for 45 min in the dark at room temperature, respectively.  Proteolysis was achieved using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) added at a 1:20 ratio (enzyme:protein) for 16 hr at 37°C.  The resulting peptides were desalted using Pierce C18 Peptide Desalting Spin columns per manufacturer’s instructions.  Equimolar peptide aliquots were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, injected onto a 75 µm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 EasySpray column (2 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific), and separated using a 60 min nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) reversed-phase gradient on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC instrument (Thermo Scientific).  Eluted peptides were ionized directly into a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument implementing high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and electrospray ionization (ESI) with the following parameters: positive ESI mode, 60K and 15K resolution for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, MS mass range 300 to 1,800 m/z, Top 15 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and label-free quantitation (LFQ) was achieved by searching against the Uniprot Mus musculus proteome database (accessed 2017 May 16) using the Andromeda and MaxQuant software package (v1.6.0.1)REF and the following parameters: 1% false discovery rate cutoff, trypsin cleavage specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages, variable modifications: oxidized Met, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of Asn/Gln, peptide N-terminal Gln to pyroGlu, fixed carbamidomethylation on Cys, “LFQ” protein quantification active, and a minimum of 5 amino acids/peptide.  All other parameters were assigned default values.  Search results were uploaded into Scaffold Q+S (v4.9.0, Proteome Science) for visualization and further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sterile stimuli can trigger inflammatory responses, and in some cases can lead to a variety of acute or chronic diseases. In this study, we hypothesize that&#xa0;a benzimidazole inhibitor may be used as a therapeutic in the treatment of sterile inflammation. In vitro, this inhibitor blocks TLR signalling and inflammatory responses. The benzimidazole inhibitor does not prevent mouse macrophage activation after stimulation with 2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane (TMPD, also known as pristane), a hydrocarbon oil that mimics features of sterile inflammation when injected in vivo. However, C57BL/6J female mice treated with the benzimidazole inhibitor exhibited a significant reduction of pristane-dependent induction of splenocyte number and weight. Conversely, no significant difference was observed in males. Using mass spectrometry, we found that the urine of pristane-injected mice contained increased levels of putative markers for several inflammatory diseases, which were reduced by the benzimidazole inhibitor. To study the mechanism, we showed that pristane-injected mice had increased cell free DNA in serum, which was not impacted by inhibitor treatment. However, chemokine release (e.g. MCP-1, RANTES and TARC) was significantly reduced in inhibitor-treated mice. Thus, the benzimidazole inhibitor might be used as a new drug to block the recruitment of immune cells during sterile inflammatory diseases in humans.

### Keywords
Urine, Mouse, Benzimidazole, Proteomics, Inflammation

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut
Director of University of Connecticut Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Balsbaugh
Director of University of Connecticut Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility


