### Accession
PXD012141

### Title
Proteomic changes in oocytes after in vitro maturation in lipotoxic conditions are different from those in cumulus cells

### Description
Sensitivity of cumulus enclosed-oocytes to metabolic stress during in vitro maturation. A proteomic insight

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation   Pools of denuded oocytes and their corresponding CCs (collected from 120-200 COCs per replicate, 3 replicates) were used for the analysis. Samples were lysed using 25 µL RIPA buffer (1x) (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) containing 1x HALT phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Scientific) and 1x HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), combined with a 30 s sonication (Branson Sonifier SLPe ultrasonic homogenizer, Labequip, Ontario, Canada) on ice.  After centrifugation of the samples for 15 min at 14,000 g on 4°C, the pellet was discarded. To improve further solubilisation of the proteins and to provide an efficient digestion, 0.1% Rapigest SF surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA) was added to the supernatant and the sample was incubated for 5 min at 100 °C. Next, the protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific).   Digestion and TMT labelling  Before labelling the samples, 9.5 µg protein of each sample was reduced using 1.25 µl of 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), supplied with the TMT labeling kit (Thermo Scientific), in a volume of 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB, and incubated for 1 h at 55°C. Next, the samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio = 1:20). Afterwards, the tryptic digests are desalted using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Next, the eluted peptides were vacuum dried and reconstituted in 100mM TEAB to a final concentration of 1µg/µl before labelling was performed.  For the reconstitution of the tags, the TMT labels were dissolved in 41 µl acetonitrile according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  From every sample, 5 µg was labeled with 4 µl of a TMT tag dissolved in acetonitrile and every sample was incubated for 1 hour at ambient temperature.   Labels 126-128 were used to label the 3 replicates of control oocyte samples, while labels 129-131 were used for the 3 replicates of the PA-treated oocyte samples. The same was done for the cumulus cell samples. The labelling reaction was stopped by adding 2µl 5% hydroxylamine. After 15 minutes, a pooled sample was prepared based on the six labelled samples with a protein concentration ratio of 1:1:1:1:1:1. To remove the excess of labels, the pooled sample was cleaned again using C18 spin columns and vacuum dried.  Nano reversed phase liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry  Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed phase C18 chromatography on an Easy nanoLC 1000 system using an Acclaim C18 PepMap®100 column (75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size) connected to an Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (50 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm particle size) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Before loading, pellets were dissolved in mobile phase A, containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and spiked with 20 fmol Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Glu-fib, Protea biosciences, Morgantown, WV). For each TMT experiment 1µg of labelled peptides (in a volume of 10µL) were loaded on the column. A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) from 2 to 45% in 230 min. followed by a steep increase to 100% mobile phase B in 10 min was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.   Liquid Chromatography was followed by MS (LC-MS/MS) and was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The high resolution orbitrap mass spectrometer was set up in a MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350 – 1850 m/z, resolution 70,000) was followed by a maximum of five high energy collision activated dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (100 to 2000 m/z). Peptide ions were selected for further interrogation by tandem MS as the five most intense peaks of a full scan mass spectrum. The normalized collision energy used was set at 35%. A dynamic exclusion list of 15 sec for data dependent acquisition was applied.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Proteome discoverer (2.1) software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to perform database searching against the bos taurus reference database, generated from Uniprot (UP000009136, 23971 entries) using both the SEQUEST and Mascot algorithms. The following settings were applied: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Trypsin was specified as digesting enzyme and 2 missed cleavages are allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT modifications (N-terminus and lysine residues) were defined as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation and phosphorylation (STY) were variable modifications. The results were filtered using following settings: only medium and high confident peptides with a global FDR < 5% based on a target-decoy approach (Nesvizskhii et al, 2007, Nature Methods PMID: 17901868) and first ranked peptides were included in the results. In the TMT quantitation workflow the most confident centroid method was used with an integration window of 20 ppm. The extracted reporter ion intensities of all the quantification channels in all the runs were transformed by the logarithmic function with base 2. The log2-transformed intensity distributions were normalized by the CONSTANd algorithm as described in Maes et al, 2016 (PMID: 27302888). Differentially regulated proteins were determined based on a 5% FDR, adjusted P value < 0.05, and more than 10% fold change in PA compared to control groups.    Developmental competence (cleavage and blastocyst rates) data were analysed using a binary logistic regression model IBM SPSS Statistics 23 (for Windows, Chicago, IL, USA). Numerical data e.g. from JC1 staining and CellRox quantification were analyzed using a mixed model ANOVA. In all analyses, replicates, treatments and their interactions were taken into account. The interactions had no significant effects and were omitted from the models. A Bonferroni post-hoc test was performed to correct for multiple comparisons. All data were from at least three independent repeats. Differences of P values ≤ 0.05 were considered significant and those >0.05 and ≤0.1 were reported as tendencies.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal lipolytic metabolic disorders result in a lipotoxic microenvironment in the ovarian follicular fluid (FF) which deteriorates oocyte quality. Although cellular stress response mechanisms are well defined in somatic cells, they remain largely unexplored in oocytes, which have distinct organelle structure and nuclear transcription patterns. Here we used shotgun proteomic analyses to study cellular responses of bovine oocytes and cumulus cells (CCs) after in vitro maturation under lipotoxic conditions; in the presence of pathophysiological palmitic acid (PA) concentration as a model. Differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) were mainly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria and nuclei of CCs and oocytes, however the DRPs and their direction of change were cell-type specific. Proteomic changes in PA-exposed&#xa0;CCs were predominantly pro-apoptotic unfolded protein responses (UPRs), mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunctions, and apoptotic pathways. This was also functionally confirmed. Interestingly, although the oocytes were enclosed by CCs during PA exposure, elevated cellular stress levels were also evident. However, pro-survival UPRs, redox regulatory and compensatory metabolic mechanisms were prominent despite evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and reduced subsequent embryo development. The data provides a unique insight that enriches the understanding of the cellular stress responses in metabolically-compromised oocytes and forms a fundamental base to identify new targets for fertility treatments as discussed within.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Bos taurus, Cumulus complex, Oocyte

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp - VITO
Gamete Research Centre, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium.

### Submitter
Kurt Boonen

### Lab Head
Dr Jo .L.M.R. Leroy
Gamete Research Centre, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium.


