### Accession
PXD043811

### Title
Mouse embryonic tail tendon bundle time series

### Description
Laser capture microdissection mass spectrometry analysis on mouse embryonic tail tendon bundles, E12.5-E14.5 in half day steps.

### Sample Protocol
Laser microdissected tissue was resuspended in 25 μL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 5% SDS (pH 7.5) and subjected to 95 °C for 20 min, then 60 °C for 2 h while shaking at 1400 RPM. We then added 75 μL of a 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, 10 M urea, 13.3 mM DTT (pH 7.5) solution to the 25 μL sample, after it had cooled to room temperature to avoid deamination, to create a final volume of 100 μL of 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, 7.5 M urea, 10 mT DTT (pH 7.5). Samples were then placed into a Covaris microtube and sheared using the LE220-Plus Focused Ultrasonicator set at 6 °C with the following settings: duration of 50 s, peak power 500, duty factor of 20.0%, cycles/burst of 200, average power at 100, and then delayed for 10 s. This was repeated 10 times. After shearing, samples were alkylated by the addition of 8 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then acidified by the addition of 12 μL of 12% aqueous phosphoric acid and centrifuged at 12000 RPM for 5 min. The supernatant was collected and resuspended with 600 µL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10). The sample was then added to a micro S-Trap column and centrifuged at 2000 RPM using 200 µL at a time until all the sample had passed through the column. The S-Trap column was then washed by adding 150 μL of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB (pH 7.10) and centrifuging at 2000 RPM. Washing was repeated a further 9 times, discarding the flow through each time. In-column digest was performed by adding 25 μL of a 0.8 µg/µL trypsin solution in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 for 1-hour digestion at 47°C without shaking. Samples were eluted by adding 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) and centrifuging at 2000 RPM, followed by the addition of 40 μL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and centrifuging, and finally adding 40 μL 50% aqueous acetonitrile and centrifuging. Eluted fractions were combined and the total 120 μL sample was then lyophilised using a speed-vac. Desalting of samples was performed using Oligo R3 resin beads. Briefly, 100 µL of a 10 mg/mL settled Oligo R3 resin in aqueous 50% acetonitrile was placed into a 96-well 0.2 µm PVDF filter plate. The plate was centrifuged at 1400 RPM for 1 min to clear Oligo R3 resin with a blank 96-well plate underneath to catch the flow through which was then discarded. 100 μL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile was mixed with the resin and centrifuged again, discarding the flow through. Finally, 100 μL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid were mixed with the resin and centrifuged for a total of two repeats, while discarding the flow through. Samples were then resuspended in 100 µl of aqueous 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic and mixed with the now washed Oligo R3 Resin and allowed to shake on a plate shaker for 5 min at 800 RPM, and then centrifuged. The sample peptides were now bound to the Oligo R3 Resin and washed for a total of ten times by the addition of 100 µL of aqueous 0.1% formic acid, mixed for 2 min at 800 RPM, centrifuged, and flow through discarded. Finally, the washed peptides were eluted by mixing with 50 µL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile for 2 min at 800 RPM, centrifuged, collecting the flow through in a clean 96-well capture plate. Elution was repeated with an additional 50 μL of aqueous 50% acetonitrile and retained. Desalted peptides were lyophilized in a speed-vac and stored at 4 °C until needed. Liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry was performed. The separation was performed on a Thermo RSLC164system. The analytical column was connected to a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometry system via a Thermo nanospray Flex Ion source via a 20μmID fused silica capillary. The capillary was connected to a fused silica spray tip with an outer diameter of 360μm, an inner diameter of 20μm, a tip orifice of 10μm and a length of63.5 mm via a butt-to-butt connection in a steel union using a168custom-made gold frit to provide the electrical connection. The nanospray voltage was set at 1900 V and the ion transfer tube temperature set to 275C. Data were acquired in a data-dependent manner using a fixed cycle time of 1.5 s, an expected peak width of 15s and a default charge state of 2. Full MS data was acquired in positive mode over a scan range of 300 to 1750m/z, with a resolution of 1.2×10^5 FWHM, a normalized AGC target of 300 %, and a max fill time of 25 ms for a single microscan. Fragmentation data was obtained from signals with a charge state of +2 or +3 and an intensity over 5000 ion/second, and they were dynamically excluded from further analysis for a period of 15s after a single acquisition within a 10 ppm window. Fragmentation spectrawere acquired with a resolution of 1.5×10^4 FWHM with a normalized collision energy of 30%, a normalized AGC target of 300%, first mass of 110m/zand a max fill time of 25ms for a single microscan. All data were collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant (v.2.0.3.0) against the mouse proteome downloaded from Uniprot (August 2022). Variable modifications were set as oxidation of methionine, oxidation of proline and protein N-terminal acetylation, with a fixed modifcation as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set as 0.01 at both PSM and protein level. Tolerances were set at 20ppm and 4.5ppm for the precursor in both first and main searches, with a 20ppm tolerance set for MS/MS. The option “match between runs” was also selected. Known contaminants were removed. Processed MS data were analysed in R (v.4.1.2) using the R package MSqRob2 (v.1.20). Peptides were normalised using quantile normalisation and protein roll-up was performed using robust summarisation. Timepoints were compared to the first (E12.5) timepoint, with significantly changing proteins taken at an FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen is a key structural component of multicellular organisms and is arranged in a highly organized manner. In structural tissues such as tendons, collagen forms bundles of parallel fibers between cells, which appear within a 24-h window between embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) and E14.5 during mouse embryonic development. Current models assume that the organized structure of collagen requires direct cellular control, whereby cells actively lay down collagen fibrils from cell surfaces. However, such models appear incompatible with the time and length scales of fibril formation. We propose a phase-transition model to account for the rapid development of ordered fibrils in embryonic tendon, reducing reliance on active cellular processes. We develop phase-field crystal simulations of collagen fibrillogenesis in domains derived from electron micrographs of inter-cellular spaces in embryonic tendon and compare results qualitatively and quantitatively to observed patterns of fibril formation. To test the prediction of this phase-transition model that free protomeric collagen should exist in the inter-cellular spaces before the formation of observable fibrils, we use laser-capture microdissection, coupled with mass spectrometry, which demonstrates steadily increasing free collagen in inter-cellular spaces up to E13.5, followed by a rapid reduction of free collagen that coincides with the appearance of less-soluble collagen fibrils. The model and measurements together provide evidence for extracellular self-assembly of collagen fibrils in embryonic mouse tendon, supporting an additional mechanism for rapid collagen fibril formation during embryonic development.

### Keywords
Embryonic, Mouse, Lcm-ms, Tendon

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cellular and Molecular Function, FBMH, University of Manchester

### Submitter
Joan Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Chang
Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Division of Cellular and Molecular Function, FBMH, University of Manchester


