### Accession
PXD002235

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of human liver tissue and isolated hepatocytes with a focus on proteins determining drug exposure

### Description
Freshly isolated human hepatocytes are considered the gold standard for in vitro studies of liver functions, including drug transport, metabolism, and toxicity. For accurate predictions of in vivo outcome, the isolated hepatocytes should reflect the phenotype of their in vivo counterpart, i.e., hepatocytes in human liver tissue. Here, we quantified and compared the membrane proteomes of freshly isolated hepatocytes and human liver tissue using a label-free shotgun proteomics approach. A total of 5144 unique proteins were identified, spanning over six orders of magnitude in abundance. There was a good global correlation in protein abundance. However, the expression of many plasma membrane proteins was lower in the isolated hepatocytes than in the liver tissue. This included transport proteins that determine hepatocyte exposure to many drugs and endogenous compounds. Pathway analysis of the differentially expressed proteins confirmed that hepatocytes are exposed to oxidative stress during isolation and suggested that plasma membrane proteins were degraded via the protein ubiquitination pathway. Finally, using pitavastatin as an example, we show how protein quantifications can improve in vitro predictions of in vivo liver clearance. We tentatively conclude that our data set will be a useful source for improved hepatocyte predictions of in vivo outcome.

### Sample Protocol
Liver membrane fractions  Crude membrane fractions were isolated from frozen liver tissue by consecutive extractions of liver homogenate with 2 M NaCl, 0.01 M NaCO3, and 4 M urea as described elsewhere.13 The membrane fractions were lysed in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 4 % (w/v) SDS and 0.1 M DTT. Aliquots containing 50 µg of total protein were processed in 30kDa ultrafiltration units (MRCF0R030, Millipore)14 according to the filter aided sample preparation procedure.15 The ratio of total protein to trypsin was 100:1. Aliquots of 6 µg of the trypsin-digested peptides were brought to pH 11 with 1x Britton & Robinson Universal Buffer (BRUB, 0.1 M CH3COOH, 0.1 M H3PO4, and 0.1 M H3BO3, adjusted with NaOH to pH 11). The samples were subsequently loaded into pipette tip SAX microcolumns as described,16 then washed with 200 µl of 0.2x BRUB. The peptides were eluted with 100 µl 0.1 % CF3COOH into StageTip C18-columns.17 The SAX fractionation step was necessary for removal of unknown polar substances affecting the liquid chromatography. Peptide concentrations were determined spectrofluorometrically using tryptophan as a standard.18 Hepatocyte membrane fractions Hepatocytes were homogenized in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 0.25 M sucrose, 5 mM MgCl2, and protease inhibitors (Complete Tablets, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), and clarified by centrifugation (2,000 x g, 10 min). The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 200,000 x g, 4 °C, for 30 min. The resulting crude membrane fractions were lysed and processed as described above except that the ion exchange step was omitted.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software version 1.2.6.20 and the 'matching between runs' option.19 Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (May 2013) containing 50807 sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The allowed mass deviation was initially up to 6 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for the fragment masses. Mass accuracy of the precursor ions was improved by time-dependent recalibration algorithms of MaxQuant. The 'matching between runs' option enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Freshly isolated human hepatocytes are considered the gold standard for in vitro studies of liver functions, including drug transport, metabolism, and toxicity. For accurate predictions of the in vivo outcome, the isolated hepatocytes should reflect the phenotype of their in vivo counterpart, i.e., hepatocytes in human liver tissue. Here, we quantified and compared the membrane proteomes of freshly isolated hepatocytes and human liver tissue using a label-free shotgun proteomics approach. A total of 5144 unique proteins were identified, spanning over 6 orders of magnitude in abundance. There was a good global correlation in protein abundance. However, the expression of many plasma membrane proteins was lower in the isolated hepatocytes than in the liver tissue. This included transport proteins that determine hepatocyte exposure to many drugs and endogenous compounds. Pathway analysis of the differentially expressed proteins confirmed that hepatocytes are exposed to oxidative stress during isolation and suggested that plasma membrane proteins were degraded via the protein ubiquitination pathway. Finally, using pitavastatin as an example, we show how protein quantifications can improve in vitro predictions of in vivo liver clearance. We tentatively conclude that our data set will be a useful resource for improved hepatocyte predictions of the in vivo outcome.

### Keywords
Adme proteins, Human hepatocyte, Human liver, Fasp

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


