### Accession
PXD007596

### Title
MHC peptides presentation is limited by availability of empty HLA molecules rather than the supply of peptides ligands

### Description
Whether the presentation levels of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC, called the human leukocytes antigens, HLA, in humans) is limited by the availability of peptide ligands for loading or by the supply of empty MHC molecules, is a yet unresolved issue. This study aims to tackle this dilemma using large-scale immunopeptidome analyses. First, cultured cells (MCF-7) were treated with interferons, which dramatically increased presentation levels of their HLA-B molecules, much more than HLA-A and HLA-C. The differential increase in the HLA-B molecules with their bound peptides, was driven by elevated HLA synthesis levels and not by supply of peptides, since all three HLA allotypes draw peptides from the same peptide pool, which should have been affected similarly by the interferons treatment. In addition, artificial competition for peptides was created by recombinant high levels expression of soluble HLA-A*02:01 molecules, in the same MCF-7 cells and on top of their endogenous membranal HLA-A*02:01. This high level expression of the soluble HLA did not affect the endogenous membranal HLA-A*02:01 peptidomes or its cell surface presentation levels. We therefore concluded that a surplus supply of peptides is available for loading and that presentation levels are more likely limited by the supply of HLA molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Membranal HLA (mHLA) class I molecules were purified from about 5x108 cells, lysed with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), 1 mM PMSF and 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS at 4°C for 1 hour. The cell extracts were cleared by centrifugation for 45 minutes at 47,580g at 4°C. The HLA class I molecules were immunoaffinity purified using the W6/32 mAb bound to Amino-Link beads (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) or the BB7.2 mAb bound to protein A-resin beads (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ). The HLA molecules with their bound peptides were eluted from the affinity column with five column volumes of 0.1% TFA. The eluted HLA class I proteins and the released peptides were loaded on disposable C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) and the peptides fraction was recovered with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and the HLA co-immunoaffinity purified proteins (Interactome) were recovered with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The peptides and immunoaffinity purified proteins fractions were dried using vacuum centrifugation. The HLA peptides were reconstituted in 100μl of 0.1% TFA, reloaded on C18 StageTips, eluted with 80% acetonitrile, dried and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid for µLC-MS/MS analysis. Soluble HLA class I (sHLA) molecules were immunoaffinity purified from the cleared culture medium using the BB7.2 mAb,eluted as describes for the membranal HLA class I molecules and analyzed using μLC-MS/MS. The purification of the mHLA and sHLA molecules from the un-transfected and transfected cells, using the BB7.2 mAb were performed in two biological replicas. The HLA peptidome analyses using the W6/32 mAb was carried out in three biological replicas, of IFN-β or IFN-γ treated cells, and with four biological replica for the untreated/control cells. Proteomics analysis and HLA-interacting proteins:An in-gel proteolysis of 5 gel slices from each lane of 30 µg of the total cell proteins of the standard MCF-7 cells was carried out. In addition, the proteins co-purifying with the HLA molecules from the immunoaffinity columns (the interactome) were dried by vacuum centrifugations, resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate and trypsinized in-solution, followed by resolution of the peptides by reversed phase capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. The in-gel proteolysis assay was performed once, while the Interactome was carried out in three biological replicas, of the IFNs treated cells, and with four biological replica of the untreated cells. Identification of HLA peptides and of tryptic peptides: The HLA and the tryptic peptides from the proteomics assays were resolved by capillary chromatography and electrospray tandem mass spectrometry by a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with Easy nLC 1000 capillary HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) or with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The reversed phase capillary chromatographies were performed with home-packed capillary column of about 30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter column with 3.5 μm silica ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). HLA peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5-28% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min for 2 hours. Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 10” method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3x106 ions. Fragmented masses were accumulated to AGC (automatic gain control) target value of 105 with a maximum injection time of generally 100 msec. For the HLA peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states, or charge states of four and above, no fragmentation was performed. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 seconds. The recovered tryptic peptides from the interactome assay were analyzed by the LTQ OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) fitted with a capillary HPLC (Eksigent, CA, USA). The peptides were resolved using a linear gradient of 7-40% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate of the gradient program was 0.25 μl/min for 2 hours. Each full MS was followed by MS/MS of the top seven most intense precursor ions using collision-induced disintegration (CID). Tryptic peptides of 2-5 charge state were selected for fragmentation according to the following conditions: Exclusion time was set to 30 sec, the AGC was set to target value of 5×105 ions for the full scan MS and for 1×104 ions for MS-MS, the MS resolution was set to 60000 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed by the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.5.2.8for all of the analysis, except for the HLA-A2 peptidomics that was analyzed using the version 1.5.8.3. The MaxQuant search was done using the Andromeda search engine. Peptide identifications were based on the human section of the Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/) of November 2014 containing 88,812 entries, except for the HLA-A2 peptides that were identified using the Uniprot database of April 2017, containing 70,946 entries. Mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragments were allowed. Methionine oxidation was accepted as variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was accepted as a fixed modification for the proteomics data and as a variable modification for the HLA peptidome data. Methionine sulfoxide and n-acetylation were set as variable modifications for both the proteomics and HLA peptidomics analyses. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed for tryptic peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for tryptic peptides to 0.01 and 0.05 for the HLA peptides. The resulting identified protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications derived from the reverse database, as well as common contaminants. Peptides were defined as significantly changed in their levels in the treated cells relative to the untreated cells using a T-test, performed by the Perseus software. Peptides were also defined as affected if they were not observed in the untreated cells, but were observed in at least two of the biological reapets of the treated cells.

### Publication Abstract
While antigen processing and presentation (APP) by the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules have been extensively studied, a question arises as to whether the level of MHC-I expression is limited by the supply of peptide-receptive (empty) MHC molecules, or by the availability of peptide ligands for loading. To this end, the effect of interferons (IFNs) on the MHC peptidomes of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) were evaluated. Although all four HLA allotypes of the MCF-7 cells (HLA-A*02:01, B*18, B*44, and C*5) present peptides of similar lengths and C-termini, which should be processed similarly by the proteasome and by the APP chaperones, the IFNs induced differential modulation of the HLA-A, B, and C peptidomes. In addition, overexpression of recombinant soluble HLA-A*02:01, introduced to compete with the identical endogenous membrane-bound HLA-A*02:01 for peptides of the MCF-7 cells, did not alter the expression level or the presented peptidome of the membrane-bound HLA-A*02:01. Taken together, these results indicate that a surplus supply of peptides is available inside the ER for loading onto the MHC-I peptide-receptive molecules, and that cell surface MHC-I expression is likely limited by the availability of empty MHC molecules.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Mhc, Interferon, Hla, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Dganit Melamed Kadosh

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology


