### Accession
PXD038818

### Title
D2O proteome dynamics in FSHD vs UASb myoblasts

### Description
Proteomic studies in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) could offer new insight to disease mechanisms underpinned by post-transcriptional processes. We used stable isotope (deuterium oxide; D2O) labelling and peptide mass spectrometry to investigate the abundance and turnover rates of proteins in cultured muscle cells from 2 individuals affected by FSHD and their unaffected siblings (UASb). We measured the abundance of 4483 proteins and the turnover rate of 2324 proteins in each (n = 4) myoblast sample. FSHD myoblasts exhibited a greater abundance but slower turnover rate of subunits of mitochondrial respiratory complexes and mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, which may indicate an accumulation of ‘older’ less viable mitochondrial proteins in myoblasts from individuals affected by FSHD. Our results highlight the importance of post-transcriptional processes and protein turnover in FSHD pathology and provide a resource for the FSHD research community to explore this burgeoning aspect of FSHD.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with 250 μl of Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris, pH ~8.5) for 5 min at room temperature, scraped into Eppendorf tubes in preparation for total protein quantification, digestion, and proteomic analyses. Total protein concentration (μg/μl) was quantified against bovine serum albumin (BSA) standards using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Rockford, IL, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was performed using lysates containing 100 μg protein and incubated at 37 °C for 15 min in UA buffer with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) followed by 20 min at 4 °C in UA buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide (protected from light). Samples were washed twice with 100 μl UA buffer and transferred to 50 mM ammonium hydrogen bicarbonate (Ambic). Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM Ambic was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and the samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were collected in 50 mM Ambic and trifluoracetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.2 % (v/v) to terminate digestion. Aliquots, containing 4 µg peptides, were desalted using C18 Zip-tips (Millipore, Billercia, MA, USA) and eluted in 50:50 of acetonitrile and 0.1 % TFA. Peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifugation for 25 min at 60 °C and peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid spiked with 10 fmol/ul yeast ADH1 (Waters Corp.) in preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis Quantitative Informatics for Proteomics (QI-P; Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corp., Newcastle, UK) was used for label-free quantitation, consistent with previous studies (30-33). Log-transformed MS data were normalized by inter-sample abundance ratio, and relative protein abundances were calculated using nonconflicting peptides only. In addition, abundance data were normalized to the 3 most abundant peptides of yeast ADH1 to obtain abundance estimates (ABDmol) in fmol/μg protein. MS/MS spectra were exported in Mascot generic format and searched against the Swiss-Prot database (2021_03) restricted to Homo-sapiens (20,371 sequences) using locally implemented Mascot server (v.2.2.03; www.matrixscience.com). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with 2 allowed missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (variable modification) and oxidation of methionine (variable modification). M/Z error tolerances of 10 ppm for peptide ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ion spectra were used. The Mascot output (xml format), restricted to non-homologous protein identifications was recombined with MS profile data in Progenesis.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies in facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) could offer new insight into disease mechanisms underpinned by post-transcriptional processes. We used stable isotope (deuterium oxide; D<sub>2</sub>O) labeling and peptide mass spectrometry to investigate the abundance and turnover rates of proteins in cultured muscle cells from two individuals affected by FSHD and their unaffected siblings (UASb). We measured the abundance of 4420 proteins and the turnover rate of 2324 proteins in each (n&#xa0;= 4) myoblast sample. FSHD myoblasts exhibited a greater abundance but slower turnover rate of subunits of mitochondrial respiratory complexes and mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, which may indicate an accumulation of "older" less viable mitochondrial proteins in myoblasts from individuals affected by FSHD. Treatment with a 2'-O-methoxyethyl modified antisense oligonucleotide targeting exon 3 of the double homeobox 4 (DUX4) transcript tended to reverse mitochondrial protein dysregulation in FSHD myoblasts, indicating the effect on mitochondrial proteins may be a DUX4-dependent mechanism. Our results highlight the importance of post-transcriptional processes and protein turnover in FSHD pathology and provide a resource for the FSHD research community to explore this burgeoning aspect of FSHD.

### Keywords
Human, Fusion

### Affiliations
Liverpool John Moores University

### Submitter
Jatin Burniston

### Lab Head
Dr Jatin G Burniston
Liverpool John Moores University


