### Accession
PXD024910

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis reveals novel insights into mechanisms of action of Disulfiram (DSF)

### Description
The new uses of the old drugs may reduce cost and shortens the production cycle of research and development, especially that approved by FDA for important clinical conditions.  Alcohol abuse Disulfiram (DSF) has been proven safe and shows the promising anti-tumor effect in may preclinical studies. However, the potential side effects of DSF on tumor remain unknown. In this study, we explored the role of DSF in cancer cells and searched for the differential expressed protein after DSF treatment in the HeLa cells. To fully understand the mechanism of action of DSF with a systems perspective, we employed a quantitative proteomics strategy to systematically identify potential targets of DSF. In total, 201 proteins were dys-regulated significantly after DSF exposure, implying that they may be potential targets of DSF. Analysis of this data on a system level revealed major changes of proteins involved in diverse biological processes, including metabolic process and response to stimulus.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in SILAC DMEM Medium (Thermo, USA) containing 10% FBS, and either the 13C6-L-lysine (heavy) or 12C6-L-lysine (light) for more than 7 generations before harvested, to ensure high labeling efficiency (> 99%). Heavy-labeled cells were treated with DSF (16 μM) and light-labeled HeLa cells were treated with DMSO as a negative control. After 48 hrs incubation, cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and transferred to clean 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes and lysed with RIPA lysis buffer and protease inhibitor (100×) , which were subsequently incubated on ice for 15 min. The “Light” and “Heavy” lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio (100 μg of each), then separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB). The entire gel lane was cut into 9 sections for in-gel tryptic digestion. Excised sections were chopped into small pieces of 1 mm, washed in deionized water and completely destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% ACN. A reduction step was performed in 100 mMDTT at 37 °C for 1 hr. The proteins were alkylated in 50 mMIAA at room temperature (RT) for 1 hr in the dark. Gel sections were first washed in deionized water, then ACN, and finally dried by SpeedVacsystem (Thermo, USA). Digestion was carried out using 20 μg/mL sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Sufficient trypsin solution was added to swell the gel pieces, which were kept at 4 °C for 45 min and then incubated at 37 °C overnight. The supernatants were transferred into clean 200 μleppendorftubes and the gels were extracted twice with extraction buffer (67% ACN containing 2.5% TFA). The peptide extracted and the supernatant of the gel slices were combined and then completed dried in the SpeedVac system. The dried peptides from each gel slice were thawed and dissolved 60 μl of 5% ACN in 0.1% FA by incubation for 30 min and analyzed by Q-Exactive ion-trap mass spectrometry (Thermo, USA) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo, USA). Every sample was automatically injected and loaded onto the trap column at a flow rate of 30 μl /min and eluted with a linear gradient of 5-45% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 70 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The remaining peptides were eluted by a gradient from 45 to 80% buffer B over 15 min. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 27.0; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans was applied for the15 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20000 in the MS survey scan with a following Dynamic Exclusion duration of 15 s. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to optimize the spectra generated by the orbitrap. The AGC target for full MS was 3e6 and 1e5 for MS2. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 2000Da. For MS2 scans, the m/z scan range was 100-1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v. 1.5.3.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the IPI human 3.87 database (including 91,491 entries). The search parameters used were as follows: enzyme specificity, trypsin/with no proline restriction; maximum missed cleavages, 2; carbamidomethyl (+57.0215 Da, Cys) as fixed modification; oxidation (+15.9949 Da, Met), protein N-term, Deanudation, Lys (+6.0201 Da, SILAC heavy amino acid) as variable modifications; precursor ion mass tolerance, 5 ppm; and MS/MS mass tolerance, 0.02 Da, respectively. The precursor charge states allowed were from 1 to 5. Detection of at least two matching peptides per protein was set as a requirement for unambiguous identification. For all experiments, only unique peptides were considered for protein quantification. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for peptide, and protein were specified at maximum 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.  For protein expression profiling, an SILAC-based quantitative proteomics approach was employed to screen DEPs in heavy group and light group. Four biological replicates are included in the proteomics experiments. The ration of each quantified proteins normalized using Z-score analysis, as described previously. In brief, heavy/light ratios from three biological replicates were averaged and converted in log2 space to determine geometric means and facilitate normalization, then the average and standard deviations (SD) of log2 ratios for the dataset were calculated. The log2 heavy/light ratio of each protein was converted into a Z-score, using the following formula: Z-score (σ)of (b)=(log2 Heavy/Light(b)-average of (log2 of each member,a….n))/(Standard deviation of (〖log2 of each member,a…..n)〗⁡ ) where b represents an individual protein in a data set population (a....n), and the Z-score is the measure of how many standard deviation units (expressed as "σ" ) that protein's log2 heavy/light ration is away from its population mean. Thus, a protein with a z-score of 1.960 indicates that is outside the 95% confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dsf; quantitative proteomics; migration; invasion;

### Affiliations
Wuhan university of science and technology
Institute of Biology and Medicine, College of Life Science and Healthy, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China,

### Submitter
peng zheng

### Lab Head
Dr peng zheng
Institute of Biology and Medicine, College of Life Science and Healthy, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China,


