### Accession
PXD013412

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the Enterobacter cloacae response to imipenem

### Description
Recently, we have reported on a highly drug-resistant carbapenemase-producing isolate of Enterobacter cloacae (Nepal et al., Virulence. 2018; 9: 1377-1389). In the present study, we asked the question whether and, if so, how this isolate responds to a sub-inhibitory challenge with the antibiotic imipenem. To answer this question, we applied a SILAC proteomics approach that allowed the quantification of changes in the relative abundance of bacterial protein in response to imipenem. The results show that the investigated E. cloacae isolate mounts a highly specific response to counteract the detrimental effects of imipenem.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultivation and cell protein collection Bacteria were first grown on blood agar plates. The inoculation of cultures for SILAC was subsequently done using RPMI medium supplemented with heavy or light lysine and arginine. To obtain a heavy protein standard, a bacterial pre-culture was grown at 37 °C, 200 rpm to an OD600 of 0.2 to 0.3. The cells were then grown for six passages on heavy RPMI medium. Lastly, the heavy-labeled cells were used to inoculate two cultures with heavy RPMI. From one of these cultures the cells were harvested by centrifugation at an OD600 of 0.2 to 0.3. The other culture was used for a challenge with 5 mg/L imipenem (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) for 30 min after which the cells were harvested by centrifugation at ~3000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. Bacterial pellets were resuspended in Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent (B-PER; Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the supplier’s instructions, and the mixture was agitated at 37 °C for 30 min. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min and the supernatant fraction with extracted proteins was collected. The protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The heavy standard was then prepared by mixing proteins from imipenem-stressed and non-stressed cells in a 1:1 ratio based on protein amount. For the actual imipenem challenge experiments, bacteria were grown in light RPMI medium. To obtain three biological replicates for each condition, a pre-culture on light RPMI was used to inoculate three main cultures on light RPMI at a starting OD600 of 0.05. Growth was continued till OD600 of 0.2 to 0.3. Subsequently, each light culture was split into two, of which one moiety was challenged with 5 mg/L imipenem for 30 min, whereas the other moiety was not exposed to antibiotic. In parallel triplicate cultures were grown on light RPMI till OD600 of 0.2 to 0.3 to serve as a growth control. Bacteria were then collected by centrifugation at ~3000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and proteins were extracted with B-PER as indicated above. The protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Finally, 10 µg of the proteins extracted from cells grown on the light RPMI medium with or without imipenem stress were mixed with 10 µg of the heavy standard. The protein mixtures thus obtained were separated by lithium dodecyl sulphate (LDS)-PAGE using 10% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA). Subsequently, the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Sample preparation for mass spectroscopy Each LDS-PAGE lane was cut into 10 pieces, which were subsequently de-stained, desiccated and rehydrated in trypsin as previously described (Bonn, F.; Bartel, J.; Büttner, K.; Hecker, M.; Otto, A.; Becher, D. Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 7421–7427). Gel digests were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were eluted with water by sonication for 15 min and concentrated to 10 µL in a vacuum centrifuge. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometric analysis Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) and subsequently eluted in 80 min using a 1% to 99% non-linear gradient with buffer B (0.1% acetic acid (v/v), 94.9% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were injected into a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scan at a resolution of R = 30000 was followed by selection of the five most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Relative protein quantification was achieved using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10.) (Cox, J.; Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology 2008, 26, 1367–72) and the Andromeda plug-in (Cox, J.; Neuhauser, N.; Michalski, A.; Scheltema, R.A.; Olsen, J.V.; Mann, M. Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 1794–1805). The *.raw files were searched against a non-redundant E. cloacae database including common laboratory contaminations (30528 entries in total). Additionally MaxQuant’s generic contamination list was included during the search. Database search was performed with the following parameters: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; Arg +6 and Lys +4 specified as MS1 labels, variable modification, methionine oxidation, and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide and activated ‘match-between-runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match and protein were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The identified proteins from MaxQuant output files were filtered for contaminants, identified only by site and reverse hits with the Perseus software (v. 1.6.1.3). Proteins were accepted if at least two unique peptides could be identified in at least two of the three biological replicates. The heavy-to-light ratios were log2-transformed, exported from MaxQuant, and used for statistical analysis using TM4 (Saeed et al, 2003). Statistical significance required a p-value < 0.01 in a student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Gram-negative bacteria belonging to the <i>Enterobacter cloacae</i> complex are increasingly implicated in difficult-to-treat nosocomial infections, as exemplified by a recently characterized highly carbapenem-resistant clinical <i>Enterobacter roggenkampii</i> isolate with sequence type (ST) 232. While mechanisms of carbapenem resistance are well-understood, little is known about the responses of highly drug-resistant bacteria to these antibiotics. Our present study was therefore aimed at charting the responses of the <i>E. roggenkampii</i> ST232 isolate to the carbapenem imipenem, using a 'stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture' approach for quantitative mass spectrometry. This unveiled diverse responses of <i>E. roggenkampii</i> ST232 to imipenem, especially altered levels of proteins for cell wall biogenesis, central carbon metabolism, respiration, iron-sulfur cluster synthesis, and metal homeostasis. These observations suggest a scenario where imipenem-challenged bacteria reduce metabolic activity to save resources otherwise used for cell wall biogenesis, and to limit formation of detrimental reactive oxygen species at the cytoplasmic membrane due to respiration and Fenton chemistry. We consider these observations important, because knowing the adaptive responses of a highly resistant bacterium of the <i>E. cloacae</i> complex to last-resort antibiotics, such as imipenem, provides a 'sneak preview' into the future development of antibiotic resistance in this emerging group of pathogens.

### Keywords
Enterobacter cloacae, Proteomics, Drug resistance, Anitbiotic, Imipenem

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald


