### Accession
PXD018225

### Title
Facultative protein selenation controls redox sensitivity, adipose tissue thermogenesis and obesity

### Description
Oxidation of cysteines by reactive oxygen species (ROS) initiates thermogenesis in brown and beige adipose tissues. Cellular selenols, where sulfur is replaced with selenium, exhibit enhanced reactivity with ROS. Here we developed a mass spectrometric method to interrogate incorporation of selenols into proteins. Unexpectedly, this approach revealed facultative incorporation of selenium into proteins that lack canonical encoding for selenium-containing amino acids. Selenium was selectively incorporated into regulatory sites on key metabolic proteins, including as selenocysteine replacing cysteine at position 253 in UCP1. Remarkably, dietary selenium supplementation elevated facultative incorporation into UCP1, elevated energy expenditure through thermogenic adipose tissue, and protected against obesity. Together, these findings reveal the existence of facultative protein selenation, which correlates with impacts on thermogenic adipocyte function.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Samples were homogenized in 50 mM Tris base, containing 100 mM NaCl, 100 μM DTPA, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.5% TritonX 100, 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM iodoacetamide or 50 mM NEM depending on the experiment.  Following incubation for 15 min, SDS was added to a final concentration of 1% and samples were incubated for a further 15 min. Protein digestion. Protein pellets were dried and resuspended in 8 M urea containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) before protease digestion. Protein lysates were diluted to 4 M urea and digested with LysC (Wako, Japan) in a 1/100 enzyme/protein ratio overnight. Protein extracts were diluted further to a 1.0 M urea concentration, and trypsin (Promega) was added to a final 1/200 enzyme/protein ratio for 6 h at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with 20 μl of 20% formic acid (FA) to a pH ∼2, and subjected to C18 solid phase extraction (50 mg SepPak, Waters). LC–MS/MS parameters for peptide analysis. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) in line with an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography pump. Peptides were separated onto a 100- μM inner diameter column containing 1 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by 30 cm of Sepax Technologies GPC18 resin (1.8 μm, 120 Å) with a gradient consisting of 9–30% (ACN, 0.125% FA) over 180 min at ∼250 nl min−1. For all LC– MS/MS experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode. We collected MS1 spectra at a resolution of 120,000, with an AGC target of 150,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The ten most intense ions were selected for MS2 (excluding 1 Zions). MS1 precursor ions were excluded using a dynamic window (75 s ± 10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 0.5 Th. For the MS3 based TMT quantitation, MS2 spectra were collected at an AGC of 4,000, maximum injection time of 200 ms, and CID collision energy of 35%. MS3 spectra were acquired with the same Orbitrap parameters as the MS2 method except HCD collision energy was increased to 55%. Synchronous precursor selection was enabled to include up to six MS2 fragment ions for the MS3 spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Determination of selenocysteine and selenomethionine containing peptides. A compendium of in-house developed software was used to convert mass spectrometric data(Raw file) to the mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements. All experiments used the Mouse UniProt database (downloaded March 2019) where reversed protein sequences and known contaminants such as human keratins were appended. SEQUEST searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance, while requiring peptide amino/carboxy (N/C) terminus to have trypsin protease specificity and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Ten-plex TMT tags on peptide N termini and lysine residues (+ 229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) or N-ethylmaleimide (+ 125.047679) of cysteine residues were set as static modifications while methionine oxidation (+ 15.99492 Da) and selenium replaces sulfur (+ 47.9444) set as variable modifications. A MS2 spectra assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy database search strategy19. Filtering was performed using an in-house linear discrimination analysis(LDA) method to create one combined filter parameter  from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra metrics: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and ΔCn, peptide ion mass accuracy and charge state, in-solution charge of peptide, peptide length and miscleavages. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS 2 spectrum for being assigned correctly and these probabilities were further used to filter the dataset with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR of smaller than a 1% at the protein level. Quantification of UCP1 Sec-253 peptide using heavy standard AQUA peptides. AQUA peptides employed in this study : AQUA Peptide / Sequence / Mass (Da) Heavy UCP1 240-261/ FINSLPGQYPSVPSU*AMSMYTK / 2477.20 UCP1 240-261 / FINSLPGQYPSVPSCAMSMYTK / 2430.149 U* = Selenocysteine Y = Heavy Tyrosine 10.027228 Skyline version 19.1.0.193 was used to quantify absolute and relative amounts of UCP1 253 selenocysteine and cysteine in all experiment with heavy AQUA peptides used as a reference.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidation of cysteine thiols by physiological reactive oxygen species (ROS) initiates thermogenesis in brown and beige adipose tissues. Cellular selenocysteines, where sulfur is replaced with selenium, exhibit enhanced reactivity with ROS. Despite their critical roles in physiology, methods for broad and direct detection of proteogenic selenocysteines are limited. Here we developed a mass spectrometric method to interrogate incorporation of selenium into proteins. Unexpectedly, this approach revealed facultative incorporation of selenium as selenocysteine or selenomethionine into proteins that lack canonical encoding for selenocysteine. Selenium was selectively incorporated into regulatory sites on key metabolic proteins, including as selenocysteine-replacing cysteine at position 253 in uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). This facultative utilization of selenium was initiated by increasing cellular levels of organic, but not inorganic, forms of selenium. Remarkably, dietary selenium supplementation elevated facultative incorporation into UCP1, elevated energy expenditure through thermogenic adipose tissue, and protected against obesity. Together, these findings reveal the existence of facultative protein selenation, which correlates with impacts on thermogenic adipocyte function and presumably other biological processes as well.

### Keywords
Thermogenesis, Ucp1, Selenium

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Assistant Professor
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
mark Jedrychowski

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
Dana Farber Assistant Professor


