### Accession
PXD003286

### Title
Changes in Gab2 phosphorylation and interaction partners in response to interleukin (IL)-2 stimulation in T-lymphocytes

### Description
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) stimulation results in T-cell growth as a consequence of activation of highly sophisticated and fine-tuned signaling pathways. Despite lacking intrinsic enzymatic activity, scaffold proteins such as Gab2, play a pivotal role in IL-2-triggered signal transduction integrating, diversifying and amplifying the signal by serving as a platform for the assembly of effectors proteins. Traditionally, Gab2-mediated protein recruitment was believed to solely depend on cytokine-induced phosphotyrosine moieties. At present, increasing body of literature indicates that phosphorylation on serine/threonine residues are emerging also as key mediators of Gab2-dependent signal regulation. Despite its relevance, IL-2-triggered regulation on Gab2 phosphorylation is yet poorly understood. Combining antibody- and TiO2-based enrichment of Gab2 with SILAC quantitative mass spectrometry we disclose the prominent regulation on serine/threonine phosphorylated residues of Gab2 by IL-2 showing that at least 18 serines and 1 threonine, including previously non-reported ones, become phosphorylated in response to the cytokine. Additionally, we deciphered the interactome of the scaffold protein in resting and cytokine-treated T-lymphocytes and besides well-known Gab2 interactors we uncover three novel cytokine-inducible Gab2-binding proteins. Thus, our data provide novel insights and a wealth of candidates for future studies that will shed light into the role of Gab2 in IL-2-initiated signal transduction.

### Sample Protocol
We performed two biological replicates of the same double SILAC experiment. Protein was extracted from control (0/0) and IL-2-treated (6/4) Kit225 T-cells and mixed in a 1:1 ratio according to the protein concentration. Then, we performed an immunoprecipitation using an antibody that specifically recognizes the scaffold protein Gab2. Eluted immune complexes were fractionated in a SDS-PAGE, proteins were in gel digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were either directly analysed by LC-MS/MS or enriched in phosphopeptides using TiO2 beads prior MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software and further statistical analyses were done in the Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) stimulation results in T-cell growth as a consequence of activation of highly sophisticated and fine-tuned signaling pathways. Despite lacking intrinsic enzymatic activity, scaffold proteins such as Gab2, play a pivotal role in IL-2-triggered signal transduction integrating, diversifying and amplifying the signal by serving as a platform for the assembly of effectors proteins. Traditionally, Gab2-mediated protein recruitment was believed to solely depend on cytokine-induced phosphotyrosine moieties. At present, phosphorylation on serine/threonine residues is also emerging as a key mediator of Gab2-dependent signal regulation. Despite its relevance, IL-2-triggered regulation on Gab2 phosphorylation is yet poorly understood. Combining antibody- and TiO2-based enrichment of the scaffold protein with SILAC quantitative mass spectrometry we disclose the prominent regulation IL-2 exerts on Gab2 serine/threonine phosphorylation by showing that at least 18 serines and 1 threonine, including previously non-reported ones, become phosphorylated in response to cytokine stimulation. Additionally, we decipher the interactome of the docking protein in resting and cytokine-treated T-lymphocytes and besides well-known Gab2 interactors we discover three novel cytokine-inducible Gab2-binding proteins. Thus, our data provide novel insights and a wealth of candidates for future studies that will shed light into the role of Gab2 in IL-2-initiated signal transduction.

### Keywords
T-lymphocytes, Phosphorylation, Interactome, Il-2, Gab2, Scaffold protein

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark.
Postdoc

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Irina kratchmarova
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark.


