### Accession
PXD023260

### Title
Nelfinavir overcomes proteasome inhibitor resistance in multiple myeloma by modulating lipid bilayer composition and fluidity

### Description
Nelfinavir has broad anti-cancer activity precilincally as a single agent and in combination. Clinically, it is particularly effective in the therapy of proteasome inhibitor-refractory multiple myeloma. The broad anti-cancer mechanism of action of nelfinavir implies that it may interfere with very fundamental aspects of cancer cell biology. We combined proteome-wide affinity-purification with genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9-based screening to identify protein partners interacting with nelfinavir alongside with candidate genetic contributors affecting nelfinavir cytotoxicity. We show that nelfinavir has multiple binding partners embedded in organellar lipid-rich membranes. By binding to these, nelfinavir affects the composition and fluidity of lipid-rich membranes, which subsequently disrupts downstream membrane-related processes, such as lipid metabolism, glucose processing, mitochondrial respiration, vesicular transport and ABCB1-mediated drug efflux. Targeting membrane fluidity by FDA-approved drug nelfinavir is a potent mechanism to achieve anti-cancer activity and is in particular suitable for the treatment of proteasome inhibitor-refractory multiple myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
cell culture conditions Human MM cell lines AMO-1 (wt), AMO-CFZ, breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and BT-474 were maintained in the RPMI-1640 cell culture medium with 10% FBS, 100 µg/ml strep 100U/ml pen. U-2 OS grown in DMEM with 10% FBS and Pen-strep, K562 cells in RPMI-1640 with 10% FBS and pen strep, HEK293 in DMEM low glucose GlutaMax with 10% FBS, 1% HEPES, 1% pen/strep, 1% non-essential amino acids, HeLa cells with CFP-Rab1A in RPMI-8226 with 10% FBS and 1% % pen/strep, cell lines were STR-typed to confirm the authenticity (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) and routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination. chemical pull-down  Pull-down experiments were done 3x in MM cells (AMO-1 and AMO-CFZ) and breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231, BT474). MM cells were put in 50 ml tubes, centrifuged (5 min 1.5k x g) and washed twice with PBS. After cell counting, cell pellet was taken up in PBS (750 µL/experiment, 10^7 cells/ experiment) and transferred to clear 6 well plates. The chemical probes SC-441 and SC-451 were dissolved at 2X in DMSO and added to the cells. Cells were incubated with 10µM probe for 1h at 37 °C in the dark. Then, cells went to low-binding tubes and centrifuged (10 min, 1.5k x g, 4 °C). Supernatant was replaced with cold PBS (750 µL) and cells were transferred to 6 well plated containing cold PBS (750 µL). UV-treatment was done with a Caprobox at 350 nm for 10 min. No UV samples were at ambient light for 10 min with ice cooling. Cells were transferred to low-binding tubes and centrifuged (5 min, 1.5k x g, 4 °C). PBS was removed, cold lysis buffer (250 µL, 250 mM sucrose, PIC (Roche) 20mM HEPES, 2 mM HEPES, 2 mN DTT, 1 mM MgCl) was added and incubated for 45 min on ice. Lysis with probe sonicator (10% amplitude, 10x2.5 s on, 0.5 s off), centrifuged and transferred to fresh tubes. After chloroform/methanol precipitation, the protein pellet was re-dissolved in 50 mM HEPES/10% SDS, aided by sonication as above. Protein concentration by Qbit Assay and adjusted to 400 µg total protein with 50 mM HEPES. “Click mix” of 25 mM CuSO4 and 0.25M Na-ascorbate, 25 mM THPTA, 2.25 mM biotin-azide. Some 43.7 µL/sample added to the cell lysates and incubated for 1 h at RT, then 50 µL of HEPES added. Chl/MeOH precipitation to remove click mix, protein film redissolved in 6M urea/25 mM NH₄HCO₃ (500 µL) and incubated 15 min at RT. Samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM, 15 min, 65 °C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (40 mM, 30 min, RT, dark). After addition of 10% SDS (140 µL, 2% final), samples were diluted with PBS (6 mL) for the pull-down. Pull-downs were done with avidin-agarose beads (Sigma), washed 3x with PBS (6 mL) before being added to the samples and incubated while rotating for 2h at RT. Then, beads were washed with 0.5% SDS in PBS (10 mL) and PBS (3x 10 mL). After last wash, on bead digestion buffer (250 µL, 100 mM Tris pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 2% acetonitrile, 1.5 µg trypsine) was added, samples transferred to low-binding tubes and kept o/N at 37 °C with shaking. Digestion was stopped with formic acid (12.5 µL) and beads were filtered off using Biospin columns. Peptides were desalted and dimethyl-labeled with StageTips: after conditioning, loading and washing, the samples were treated with either light reagent (5x20 µL, 50 mM phosphate, pH 7.5, CH2O (5%), 30 mM NaBH3CN) or heavy reagent (5x20 µL, 50 mM phosphate, pH 7.5, CD2O (5%), 30 mM NaBH3CN) by centrifuging the StageTips at low speed (8 min, 400 x g), then wash with solution A (0.5% formic acid) and elution with sol B (0.5% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to fresh tubes and evaporated to dryness. Samples dissolved in LC sol (50µL, 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), mixed heavy/light 1:1 and submitted to LC-MS analysis. Pulldown exps with MDA-MB-231 and BT-474 cells were done with cells at 90% confluency on 10 cm Petri dishes. Medium removed, cells washed twice with BS, 2nd wash in PBS with 1mM CaCl2 and 1 mM MgCl2 to prevent detachment. Cells were kept at 37 °C, in PBS/CaCl2/MgCl2 until treatment. Probes were added in PBS/CaCl2/MgCl2 (3 mL/dish, 10 µM final) incubated for 1h at 37 °C in the dark, washed and put with in cold PBS (1.5 mL), irradiated in a Caprobox, at 350 nm for 10 min, no UV samples were kept on ice at ambient light for 10 min. Cells were removed by scraping, after spinning down (10 min, 1.2k x g, 4 °C), PBS was removed and lysis buffer was added. From this point on, processing was performed according to the protocol used for AMO cells.

### Data Protocol
Chemical pull-down data analysis Raw data were processed with MaxQuant using default parameters except: in “Group-specific parameters” – “Type” Multiplicity was changed to 2, DimethLys0/DimethNter0 was chosen for the light labels and DimethLys4/DimethNter4 for the heavy labels. “Digestion” was changed to Trypsin, in “Instrument” Main search peptide tolerance was changed to 10, in “Misc.” the re-quantify option was chosen. In “Global parameters” “Adv. Identification” the match between runs option was enabled and the match time window changed to 1.0. Finally, in “MS/MS – ITMS” match tolerance was changed to 0.8. Samples were searched against the Uniprot-human-reviewed database combined with the sequence of pig trypsin and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences.  The “proteinGroups” file was processed using Perseus using “Ratio H/L normalized” as main columns. Hits were filtered for contaminants, reverse and only identified by site hits. Normalized H/L ratios were log2 transformed and statistically analyzed using a one-sided t-test with a p-value truncation of 0.05. For experiments 1 and 3 the t-test was performed for the right side, in case of experiment 2 for both sides. Results for every experiment were individually exported and further processed using a workflow created with KNIME Analytics Platform.  Results from experiment 1 were filtered for significant hits (p-value<0.05) and matched against non-significant hits (p-value >0.05) from experiment 2. The non-significant hits were subsequently removed from the list of putative binders. Finally, the list was filtered for enrichment (log2 ratio >1) in the UV-treated samples to create a list of possible nelfinavir targets. To check this list for off-targets a hit list from experiment 3 was filtered for significant hits (p-value<0.05) and matched against the list created from experiments 1 and 2.

### Publication Abstract
The HIV-protease inhibitor nelfinavir has shown broad anticancer activity in various preclinical and clinical contexts. In patients with advanced, proteasome inhibitor (PI)-refractory multiple myeloma, nelfinavir-based therapy resulted in 65% partial response or better, suggesting that this may be a highly active chemotherapeutic option in this setting. The broad anticancer mechanism of action of nelfinavir implies that it interferes with fundamental aspects of cancer cell biology. We combined proteome-wide affinity-purification of nelfinavir-interacting proteins with genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9-based screening to identify protein partners that interact with nelfinavir in an activity-dependent manner alongside candidate genetic contributors affecting nelfinavir cytotoxicity. Nelfinavir had multiple activity-specific binding partners embedded in lipid bilayers of mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum. Nelfinavir affected the fluidity and composition of lipid-rich membranes, disrupted mitochondrial respiration, blocked vesicular transport, and affected the function of membrane-embedded drug efflux transporter ABCB1, triggering the integrated stress response. Sensitivity to nelfinavir was dependent on ADIPOR2, which maintains membrane fluidity by promoting fatty acid desaturation and incorporation into phospholipids. Supplementation with fatty acids prevented the nelfinavir-induced effect on mitochondrial metabolism, drug-efflux transporters, and stress-response activation. Conversely, depletion of fatty acids/cholesterol pools by the FDA-approved drug ezetimibe showed a synergistic anticancer activity with nelfinavir <i>in vitro</i>. These results identify the modification of lipid-rich membranes by nelfinavir as a novel mechanism of action to achieve broad anticancer activity, which may be suitable for the treatment of PI-refractory multiple myeloma. SIGNIFICANCE: Nelfinavir induces lipid bilayer stress in cellular organelles that disrupts mitochondrial respiration and transmembrane protein transport, resulting in broad anticancer activity via metabolic rewiring and activation of the unfolded protein response.

### Keywords
Adipor2, Hiv-protease inhibitor, Upr, Crispr/cas9, Ezetimibe, Nelfinavir, Multiple myeloma, Affinity-purification, Proteasome inhibitors

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Lenka Besse, PhD Department of Oncology and Hematology,  Kantonsspital St Gallen,  Rorschacherstrasse 95, St Gallen, Switzerland e-mail: lenka.kubiczek@gmail.com / Lenka.besse@kssg.ch phone: +41 (0) 71 494 1162

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Lenka Besse
Lenka Besse, PhD Department of Oncology and Hematology,  Kantonsspital St Gallen,  Rorschacherstrasse 95, St Gallen, Switzerland e-mail: lenka.kubiczek@gmail.com / Lenka.besse@kssg.ch phone: +41 (0) 71 494 1162


