### Accession
PXD035772

### Title
Complement factor B is critical for sub-RPE deposit formation in the Efemp1 R345W mutant mouse model with features of age-related macular degeneration

### Description
This dataset represent supplemental data for publication submitted to Human Molecular Genetics  in 2022. Briefly, Efemp1 R345W is a protein misfolding-prone mutation in humans causing Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy/Mallatia Leventinese (DHRD/ML), a disease sharing similar clinical pathology with age-related macular degeneration (AMD).   Efemp1R345W/R345W knock-in mice (Efemp1ki/ki mice) develop deposits on the basal side of retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, which is complement C3- dependent.  We assessed alternative complement pathway component factor B (Cfb) in sub-RPE deposit formation in Efemp1ki/ki mice.

### Sample Protocol
Whole eyes minus lens collected from18 month old female mice. Briefly, protein tissue extract was reduced, alkylated, and ethanol-chloroform precipitation was performed to remove contaminants. Recovered protein pellet was digested with trypsin and labeled with TMT11 reagents. Pooled labeled peptides were separated into 12 fractions using high pH reversed-phase chromatography, and desalted prior to mass spec analysis. LC-MS was performed in the SPS mode on Thermo Lumos instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1 and log2 fold changes and pvalues across sample groups were calculated using the LIMMA package.

### Publication Abstract
EFEMP1 R345W is a dominant mutation causing Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy/malattia leventinese (DHRD/ML), a rare blinding disease with clinical pathology similar to age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Aged Efemp1 &#xa0;R345W/R345W knock-in mice (Efemp1ki/ki) develop microscopic deposits on the basal side of retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE), an early feature in DHRD/ML and AMD. Here, we assessed the role of alternative complement pathway component factor B (FB) in the formation of these deposits. RNA-seq analysis of the posterior eyecups revealed increased unfolded protein response, decreased mitochondrial function in the neural retina (by 3&#xa0;months of age) and increased inflammatory pathways in both neural retina and posterior eyecups (at 17&#xa0;months of age) of Efemp1ki/ki mice compared with wild-type littermate controls. Proteomics analysis of eye lysates confirmed similar dysregulated pathways as detected by RNA-seq. Complement activation was increased in aged Efemp1ki/ki eyes with an approximately 2-fold elevation of complement breakdown products iC3b and Ba (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Deletion of the Cfb gene in female Efemp1ki/ki mice partially normalized the above dysregulated biological pathway changes and oral dosing of a small molecule FB inhibitor from 10 to 12 months of age reduced sub-RPE deposits by 65% (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.029). In contrast, male Efemp1ki/ki mice had fewer sub-RPE deposits than age-matched females, no elevation of ocular complement activation and no effect of FB inhibition on sub-RPE deposits. The effects of FB deletion or inhibition on Efemp1ki/ki mice supports systemic inhibition of the alternative complement pathway as a potential treatment of dry AMD and DHRD/ML.

### Keywords
Mouse efemp1 model, Age-related macular degeneration, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
Novartis Institutes for Biomedial Research
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 22 Windsor Street, Cambridge MA 02139, USA

### Submitter
Tomas Rejtar

### Lab Head
Dr Sha-Mei Liao
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, 22 Windsor Street, Cambridge MA 02139, USA


