### Accession
PXD028564

### Title
Elucidation of the protein composition of mouse seminal vesicle fluid

### Description
The seminal vesicles are male accessory sex glands that contribute the bulk of the seminal plasma in which mammalian spermatozoa are bathed during ejaculation. In addition to helping convey sperm through the ejaculatory duct, seminal vesicle secretions support sperm survival after ejaculation and influence the female reproductive tract to promote receptivity to pregnancy. Despite its biological importance, there is limited understanding of seminal vesicle fluid (SVF) composition with only 75 proteins having been identified in publicly available proteomic analyses. To address this limitation, here we report new preparative methodology involving sequential solubilization of mouse SVF in guanidine hydrochloride, prior to acetone precipitation and analysis by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. This strategy identified 126 proteins, including 83 previously undetected in SVF. Members of the seminal vesicle secretory protein family were the most abundant, accounting for 79% of all peptide spectrum matches. Functional analysis of SVF proteins identified inflammation and formation of the vaginal plug as the two most prominent biological processes. Notable additional processes included modulation of sperm function and regulation of the female reproductive tract immune environment. Together, these findings provide a robust methodological framework for future SVF studies and identify novel proteins with the potential to influence both male and female reproductive health.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse SVF was collected by extrusion from one horn of the seminal vesicle gland directly into 8 M guanidine hydrochloride. Samples were vortexed for 5 min to completely dissolve extruded material, then incubated at 95°C to deactivate endogenous phosphatases and proteases, and sonicated (3 × 10 s cycles, 100% output power) prior to storage at -80°C. Samples underwent an acetone precipitation approach using 10 × the sample volume. Acetone precipitated samples (n = 5) were resuspended in 4% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and prepared for MS-based proteomics in accordance with a modified previously described approach. In brief, following overnight enzymatic digestion, peptides (7.5 µg) were aliquoted and diluted 4-fold (to <1% SDC concentration) using 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Samples were then diluted 1:1 with 99% ethyl acetate/1% TFA and mixed on a Thermoshaker (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 5 min at room temperature (2,000 rpm). Prior to MS analysis, samples were desalted using styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonated StageTips. MS analyses were carried out using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a linear gradient of ACN (2 - 35%) over 120 min. Full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode was utilized on Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution of 60,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 360 – 1500, incorporating a normalized automatic gain control target of 300% and maximum fill times of 100 ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a collisional energy of 30%. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 using standard mode for automatic gain control target and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of raw files were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), utilizing SEQUEST HT to search against the UniProt Mus musculus database (92,698 sequences, 16th April 2021). Parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation was set, with acetylation (K, N-terminus) and oxidation (M) designated as dynamic modifications. Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification using Percolator based on q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level. The protein list was then refined to only those with ≥1 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The seminal vesicles are male accessory sex glands that contribute the major portion of the seminal plasma in which mammalian spermatozoa are bathed during ejaculation. In addition to conveying sperm through the ejaculatory duct, seminal vesicle secretions support sperm survival after ejaculation, and influence the female reproductive tract to promote receptivity to pregnancy. Analysis of seminal vesicle fluid (SVF) composition by proteomics has proven challenging, due to its highly biased protein signature with a small subset of dominant proteins and the difficulty of solubilizing this viscous fluid. As such, publicly available proteomic datasets identify only 85 SVF proteins in total. To address this limitation, we report a new preparative methodology involving sequential solubilization of mouse SVF in guanidine hydrochloride, acetone precipitation, and analysis by label-free mass spectrometry. Using this strategy, we identified 126 SVF proteins, including 83 previously undetected in SVF. Members of the seminal vesicle secretory protein family were the most abundant, accounting for 79% of all peptide spectrum matches. Functional analysis identified inflammation and formation of the vaginal plug as the two most prominent biological processes. Other notable processes included modulation of sperm function and regulation of the female reproductive tract immune environment. Together, these findings provide a robust methodological framework for future SVF studies and identify novel proteins with potential to influence both male and female reproductive physiology.

### Keywords
Seminal vesicle fluid, Proteomics, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, College of Engineering, Science and Environment,  The University of Newcastle, Australia

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr David Skerrett-Byrne
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, College of Engineering, Science and Environment,  The University of Newcastle, Australia


