### Accession
PXD004816

### Title
Protein abundance of AKT and ERK pathway components governs cell-type-specific regulation of proliferation

### Description
Signaling through the AKT and ERK pathways controls cell proliferation. However, the integrated regulation of this multistep process, involving signal processing, cell growth and cell-cycle progression, is poorly understood. Here we study different murine hematopoietic cell types, in which AKT and ERK signaling is triggered by erythropoietin (Epo). Although these cell types share the molecular network topology for pro-proliferative Epo signaling, they exhibit distinct proliferative responses. Iterating quantitative experiments and mathematical modeling, we identify two molecular sources for cell-type-specific proliferation. First, cell-type-specific protein abundance patterns cause differential signal flow along the AKT and ERK pathways. Second, downstream regulators of both pathways have differential effects on proliferation, suggesting that protein synthesis is rate-limiting for faster-cycling cells while slower cell-cycles are controlled at the G1-S progression. The integrated mathematical model of Epo-driven proliferation explains cell-type-specific effects of targeted AKT and ERK inhibitors and faithfully predicts based on the protein abundance anti-proliferative effects of inhibitors in primary human erythroid progenitor cells. Our findings suggest that the effectiveness of targeted cancer therapy might become predictable from protein abundance patterns.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain primary human erythroid progenitor CFU-E cells, CD34+ cells were sorted by autoMACS (CD34-Multisort Kit, Miltenyi Biotech) from mobilized peripheral blood of healthy donors after written consent. Sample collection and data analysis were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of Heidelberg. CD34+ cells were expanded using Stem Span SFEM II (StemCell Technology) supplemented with Stem Span CC100 (StemCell Technology). After seven days of expansion, cells were differentiated. For differentiation, cells were cultivated in Stem Span SFEM II supplemented with 10 ng/ml mIL-3 (R&D Systems), 50 ng/ml mSCF (R&D Systems) and 6 U/ml Epo alfa (Cilag-Jansen) as reported previously (Miharada et al, 2006, Nat. Biotechnol. 24: 1255–6). After 3 days of cultivation, human CFU-E cells were employed to perform experiments. Human CFU-E cells were washed three times with IMDM GlutaMAX and growth-factor deprived in IMDM GlutaMAX supplemented with 1 mg/ml BSA at 37oC for an hour. 2.5x106 cells were lysed by adding 2x RIPA buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mg/ml deoxycholate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 5 mM NaF). Similarly, 1x107 growth-factor deprived BaF3-EpoR and mCFU-E cells were lysed. Whole-cell lysates were sonicated and protein yield was determined by BCA assay (Thermo). Each 75 µg of protein lysates of hCFU-E cells, or 100 µg of BaF3-EpoR protein lysates, or 30 µg of mCFU-E protein lysates were fractionated by 10% 1D SDS-PAGE for 105 minutes. Gels were then stained with Coomassie (Invitrogen) and each lane was divided in five segments and each segment was cut into smaller pieces. In-gel digestion was performed as previously described (Boehm et al, 2014, J. Proteome Res. 13: 5685–94). Samples were analysed by liquid chromatography, nano-electrospray ionization and tandem mass spectrometry with a Q-ExactiveM plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained were then analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.30 as described elsewhere (Cox & Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnol. 26: 1367–72) by MaxQuant (version: 1.5.0.12). MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al, 2014, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13: 2513–26) was employed for the quantification purpose. Protein copy numbers per cell were obtained by applying the "proteomic ruler" method (Wiśniewski et al, 2014, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13: 3497–506).

### Publication Abstract
Signaling through the AKT and ERK pathways controls cell proliferation. However, the integrated regulation of this multistep process, involving signal processing, cell growth and cell cycle progression, is poorly understood. Here, we study different hematopoietic cell types, in which AKT and ERK signaling is triggered by erythropoietin (Epo). Although these cell types share the molecular network topology for pro-proliferative Epo signaling, they exhibit distinct proliferative responses. Iterating quantitative experiments and mathematical modeling, we identify two molecular sources for cell type-specific proliferation. First, cell type-specific protein abundance patterns cause differential signal flow along the AKT and ERK pathways. Second, downstream regulators of both pathways have differential effects on proliferation, suggesting that protein synthesis is rate-limiting for faster cycling cells while slower cell cycles are controlled at the G1-S progression. The integrated mathematical model of Epo-driven proliferation explains cell type-specific effects of targeted AKT and ERK inhibitors and faithfully predicts, based on the protein abundance, anti-proliferative effects of inhibitors in primary human erythroid progenitor cells. Our findings suggest that the effectiveness of targeted cancer therapy might become predictable from protein abundance.

### Keywords
Human, Cfu-e, Proteome ruler, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel Schilling
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


