### Accession
PXD002928

### Title
Mammalian Target of Rapamycin shapes the cytotoxic T cell proteome

### Description
High resolution mass spectrometry maps the CD8 cytotoxic cell (CTL) proteome and the impact of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) on CTL. We show mTORC1 selectively represses and promotes expression of a subset (10%) of CTL proteins including key CTL effector and adhesion molecules and adaptor proteins. mTORC1 also controls flux through a selective subset of metabolic pathways but is not an on/off switch for CTL metabolism. Proteomic data highlighted the potential for mTORC1 negative control of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3) production in CTL. Further work revealed that mTORC1 represses PI(3,4,5)P3 production and controls the mTORC2 requirement for activation of the serine/threonine kinase AKT. Unbiased proteomic analysis thus provides a comprehensive understanding of CTL identity and mTORC1 control of CTL function.

### Sample Protocol
25 x 10^6 CTL treated with either DMSO or rapamycin were harvested in a 50 mL falcon tube and washed three times in cold HBSS and transferred into a 2.0 mL Eppendorf tube. Cells were lysed in 0.5 mL urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and vigorously mixed for 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then sonicated with a Branson digital sonicator before vigorously mixed for another 15 minutes. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instructions before DTT at a working concentration of 10 mM was added. Lysates were incubated at 30 °C for 30 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to a working concentration of 50 mM and lysates were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 minutes. Lysates were diluted with digest buffer to 4 M urea. LysC was added to the samples in a 50:1 (protein:LysC) ratio and  the samples were then incubated at 30 °C over night. The samples were then split in half. One half was diluted to 0.8 M urea with digest buffer and Trypsin was added in a 50:1 ratio. The other half was kept a LysC fraction. The samples were then incubated at 30 C for a further 8 hours. Samples were adjusted to 1% TFA using 10% TFA. In case of strong precipitation of urea the samples were spun down to remove the urea. The Sep-Pak cartridges were washed twice with 1 mL elution buffer and equilibrated twice with 1 mL wash buffer before the acidified peptide samples were loaded. The flow through was loaded again to ensure maximal peptide binding. The peptide loaded cartridges were washed three times with 1 mL washing buffer. Peptides were eluted into 2 mL Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes by 2 subsequent elutions with 600 uL elution buffer each. The eluted samples were reduced to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were separated via hSAX chromatography as described previously. Samples were resuspended in 210 uL SAX sample buffer (10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3, 20% acetonitrile) and the pH was readjusted to pH 9.3 with 1 M NaOH if necessary. Samples were injected and peptides separated by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with an AS24 strong anion exchange column. The following buffers were used for the separation of peptides: 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3 (Buffer A) and 10 mM sodium borate, pH 9.3, 500 mM NaCl (Buffer B). An exponential elution gradient starting with Buffer A was used to sepearte the peptides into 12 fractions of 750 uL which were desalted prior to analysis via LC-MS/MS. Samples from desalting were resuspended at a concentration 0.066 ug/uL in 5% formic acid and 15 uL (equivalent to 1 ug of peptides) was used for analysis. A Dionex RSLCnano HPLC was used for the peptide chromatography. A 5 mm PepMap-C18 pre-column with an inner diameter of 0.3 mm was used and a 75 um x 50 cm PepMap-C18 column was used for the subsequent chromatography. The mobile phase consisted of 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A constant flow rate of 300 nL/min was used and the linear gradient increased from 5% to 35% solvent B over a runtime of 156 minutes. The eluted peptides were injected into a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) through a nanoelectrospray emitter. A typical ‘Top15’ acquisition method was used. The primary mass spectrometry scan (MS1) was performed at a resolution of 60,000. The aforementioned top 15 most abundant m/z signals from the MS1 scan were selected for subjected for collision-induced dissociation and MS2 analysis in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched, and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.0.0 as described previously, using the default settings and employing the mouse Uniprot database from April 2014 and the contaminants database supplied by MaxQuant. The following settings were used: two miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme specificities were Trypsin and/or LysC were applicable; variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine or asparagine, N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Default MaxQuant settings included a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions, and a tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions. A reverse database was used to apply a maximum false positive rate of 1% for both peptide and protein identification. This cut-off was applied to individual spectra and whole proteins in the MaxQuant output. The match between runs feature was activated with an allowed time window of 2 minutes. All proteins were quantified on the basis of unique and Razor proteins with the requantification feature enabled. iBAQ intensities were calculated by dividing the summed peptide intensities for each protein by the number of theoretically observable peptides.

### Publication Abstract
We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to map the cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) proteome and the effect of the metabolic checkpoint kinase mTORC1 on CTLs. The CTL proteome was dominated by metabolic regulators and granzymes, and mTORC1 selectively repressed and promoted expression of a subset of CTL proteins (~10%). These included key CTL effector molecules, signaling proteins and a subset of metabolic enzymes. Proteomic data highlighted the potential for negative control of the production of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) by mTORC1 in CTLs. mTORC1 repressed PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 production and determined the requirement for mTORC2 in activation of the kinase Akt. Our unbiased proteomic analysis thus provides comprehensive understanding of CTL identity and the control of CTL function by mTORC1.

### Keywords
Lymphocytes, Proteomics, Mtor

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Jens Hukelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Ann Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


