### Accession
PXD001243

### Title
change in hypopharyngeal glands of overwintering bees Proteomics

### Description
In this project, proteomic approaches were used to detect statistically significant changes in the honeybee proteome and to explore the mechanistic basis for the HG regulation that accompanies the seasonal changes.

### Sample Protocol
Honeybees (A. mellifera carnica) were derived from a single drone-inseminated queen as described elsewhere to minimize noise in the genetic background. Adult worker bees were marked with paint on the thorax when emerging from the cells and were picked up from the hives and allotted to three treatments representing the distinct phases of bees in the winter-spring cycle as follows: (A) overwintering bees in wintering phase (bees were expected to remain quiescent within the hive in the winter cluster during the long periods of low temperatures, and the queen was confined in situ in a cage for periods); (B) overwintering bees in feeding phase (the queen was uncaged and stimulated to lay by feeding a sugar-syrup supplement with a pollen substitute, and the worker bees were busy feeding the larvae and the queen; the colonies become crowded and buzzing); (C) overwintering bees in after feeding phase (the old bees that were going to be replaced by the newly emerged bees). Pooled HG tissues were collected from each treatment and used as one biological replicate. Overwintering bee colonies were prepared after the autumn multiplication (late Oct.) and ending before the spring multiplication (early Feb.). Samples were collected on 8 Jan. 2013 (a) for the overwintering bees in wintering phase , on 5 Feb. 2013 (b) for the overwintering bees in feeding phase, and on 16 Feb. 2013 (c) for the overwintering bees in after feeding phase. Total RNA was isolated from tissue pooled from 30 HGs of the worker bees, tagged by iTRAQ regent and performed on LC-ESI-MA/MS.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data (*.wiff) was transferred to the *.mgf format and then searched against the database created from the transcriptomic CDS FASTA database (GEO accession number: GSE47136) by a six-frame translation (34,702 sequences) with Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, U.K.; version 2.3.02). For protein identification and quantification, the search parameters were set to a fragment mass tolerance (monoisotopic mass) of 0.1 Da and a peptide mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (Cys) was considered a fixed modification, and the conversion of N-terminal glutamine (Gln) to pyroglutamic acid and the oxidation of methionine (Met) were considered variable modifications. The instrument type was set to “default”, and the enzyme specificity of trypsin was set to allow up to one missed cleavage. A mass accuracy of 2 parts per million (ppm) was used in this analysis, which is typical for the latest bench-top time-of-flight mass spectrometers. All the identified peptides had an ion score that was above the Mascot peptide identity threshold. The presence of at least one unique peptide match with a significance threshold of 95% confidence was required for us to proceed with protein quantification. Proteins quantified with at least a 1.5-fold change (average iTRAQ ratio >1.5 or <0.67) and a two-tailed p-value less than 0.05 were considered DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Hypopharyngeal glands, Itraq

### Affiliations
Yangzhou University
Lab

### Submitter
Zhenguo Liu

### Lab Head
Dr lzhenguo  
Lab


