### Accession
PXD026100

### Title
Effect of HPV8-E7 expression on the secretome of keratinocytes

### Description
Human papillomavirus type 8 (HPV8) is associated with the development of non-melanoma skin cancer. In the past we already delved into the mechanisms involved in keratinocyte invasion, showing that the viral E7 oncoprotein is a key player that drives invasion of basal keratinocytes controlled by the extracellular protein fibronectin. To unravel further downstream effects in E7 expressing keratinocytes we now characterized alterations of the secretome of E7 expressing N/TERT keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
N/TERT keratinocytes were retrovirally transduced for HPV8-E7 or the empty vector (pLXSN), selected against G418 and pooled stable cell populations were expanded. Cell culture supernatants were collected from cells which were grown on fibronectin coated cell culture dishes for 96h.  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 90 min method with following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 65.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 13.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against a human Uniprot fasta file (downloaded at: 16.6.2017) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Human papillomavirus type 8 (HPV8) is associated with the development of non-melanoma skin cancer. In the past we already delved into the mechanisms involved in keratinocyte invasion, showing that the viral E7 oncoprotein is a key player that drives invasion of basal keratinocytes controlled by the extracellular protein fibronectin. To unravel further downstream effects in E7 expressing keratinocytes we now aimed at characterizing gene and protein/phosphoprotein alterations to narrow down on key cellular targets of HPV8-E7. We now show that gene expression of GADD34 and GDF15 are strongly activated in the presence of E7 in primary human keratinocytes. Further analyses of fibronectin-associated factors led to the identification of the Src kinase family members Fyn and Lyn being aberrantly activated in the presence of HPV8-E7. Phospho-proteomics further revealed that E7 not only targets cell polarity and cytoskeletal organization, but also deregulates the phosphorylation status of nuclear proteins involved in DNA damage repair and replication. Many of these differentially phosphorylated proteins turned out to be targets of Fyn and Lyn. Taken together, by using unbiased experimental approaches we have now arrived at a deeper understanding on how fibronectin may affect the signaling cascades in HPV8 positive keratinocytes, which may be key for skin tumorigenesis and that may also aid in the development of novel therapeutic approaches for betaHPV-mediated cancers.

### Keywords
E7 oncoprotein, Human papillomavirus type 8 (hpv8), Secretome, Keratinocyte transformation

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Institute of Virology, University of Cologne Medical Faculty and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Baki Akgül
Institute of Virology, University of Cologne Medical Faculty and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


