### Accession
PXD004455

### Title
Silkworm spinneret LC-MSMS -  Proteome profile of spinneret from the silkworm, Bombyx mori

### Description
Spinneret, which locates at the end of the silk gland, is an important tissue for silk spinning. Although it has been discovered for hundreds of years, its particular roles in silk spinning and fiber formation are still unclear. Here we report the first proteome profile of silkworm spinnerets by LC-MS/MS. Totally, 1572 non-redundant proteins and 232 differential expressed proteins were identified in the spinneret from the spinning larvae and the third day of fifth instar larvae. Silk fiber formation related proteins, such as cuticle proteins, ion-transporting proteins, muscular proteins, and energy metabolic proteins, were abundant in the spinneret. By analyzing the signal pathways, we discovered that the processes associated with energy metabolism were active in spinneret. GO enrichment analysis revealed that the differential expressed proteins were involved in energy metabolism, chitin binding, and cuticle construction. The active energy metabolism might provide abundant energy for the muscle contraction, ion and water transporting. The chitin binding and cuticle construction process might provide sufficient shear forces for silk formation. This dataset suggests that the spinneret provided a suitable physiological and biochemical environment for silk formation, and will be helpful for elucidating the functions of spinneret.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection   Silkworms (strain Dazao) were provided by the State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology (Southwest University, China) and were reared on mulberry at 25oC under standard conditions. The spinnerets from the third day of fifth instar larvae and spinning larvae were dissected on ice. One hundred spinnerets were used per sample, with three biological replicates. Spinnerets were homogenized in 8 M urea with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), using tissue grinding pestles. Then, the samples were centrifuged at 14000 ×g for 30 min at 10 oC. The supernatant was moved to a new centrifuge tube and the protein concentrations were measured by the Bradford method [1].  Sample Preparation  A total of 500 μg proteins were added into an ultrafiltration device (3 kDa interception, Millipore), followed by centrifugation at 12000 ×g for 15 min at room temperature. Then, 200 μL UA buffer (containing 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris-base, pH 8.0) was added, and centrifuged again for 3 times. The resulting proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 150 min at 37oC, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 60 min at room temperature in the dark. After that, the samples were centrifuged again and washed 3× separately with UA buffer and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were then incubated with 6 μg trypsin (Sigma) at 37 oC for 24 h [2]. The digested peptides were collected, dried, and re-dissolved in 100 μL 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. A Ziptip C18 Pipette Tip (Millipore) was used for desalting the digested peptides. Desalted peptides were eluted in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and dried for 5 h in a vacuum concentrator. Finally, the samples used for LC-MS/MS analysis were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  Protein identification 10μL of each sample was injected into a Thermo Scientiﬁc EASY-nLC 1000 system equipped with an EASY-Spray column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×50 cm) using a 2−100% (v/v) acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid over 180 min at a ﬂow rate of 250 nL/min. Then, the peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode with a nanospray voltage of 2 kV and a source temperature of 250° C. The instrument was operated with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70 000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 300–1800. The maximum ion injection times for the full mass scan and the MS/MS scans were, 20 and 60 ms, with a dynamic exclusion for previously sequenced ions set to 10 s. Raw data converted into Mascot generic peak lists by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) [3, 4]. Protein identification was done by searching against a silkworm proteome database containing 35859 protein sequences. Variable modiﬁcations of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and ﬁxed modiﬁcation of carbamidomethyl cysteine were included in the searching parameters. 5 and 20 ppm were set as the precursor mass and fragment mass tolerances, respectively. The minimal peptide length was five amino acids, and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for both the peptide and protein. After searching, protein data were filtered to remove contaminants and identified proteins from the reverse database. At least one unique peptide was considered to be accurately identified.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification To compare the protein abundances between samples, a label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was introduced. All the original LFQ intensities were normalized to silkworm β-tubulin (gi|112983456|). The proteins with a Log2foldchange (W1/L5D3 LFQ intensity) ≥1 or ≤-1 (p-value<0.05, Student’s t-test) were considered as significantly altered.   Protein Annotation The sequences of identified proteins were searched against Europe, ES: PublicDB (version: b2g_sep 14) using Blast2GO software (version 3.0) to identify their annotation and GO numbers [5]. The protein sequences were searched against KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) GENES using the BLAST2GO program [6]. GO enrichment was performed by Blast2GO software using Fisher’s exact test [7].

### Publication Abstract
The silkworm spinneret is an important tissue for silk fibrillogenesis and spinning. All biochemical processes during silk fibrillogenesis are correlated with silk properties. Understanding the role of spinneret in silk fibrillogenesis may help to reveal the mechanism of silk fibrillogenesis as well as improve silk quality for commercial purposes. Thus, we profiled the proteome of silkworm spinneret. A total of 1572 proteins and 232 differential abundance proteins were identified. Silk fibrillogenesis-related proteins, such as cuticle proteins, ion-transporting proteins, muscular proteins, and energy metabolic proteins, were abundant in spinneret. Metabolic pathway and GO enrichment analyses revealed that the identified proteins were involved in energy metabolism, chitin binding, and cuticle construction. Active energy metabolism may provide abundant energy for the muscle contraction as well as ion and water exchange. The chitin binding and cuticle construction process may provide sufficient shear forces for silk formation. Our data suggest that silkworm spinneret provides a suitable physiological and biochemical environment for silk fibrillogenesis. These proteins are potential targets for improving silk quality in the silk industry. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004455.

### Keywords
Insect tissue, Lc-msms, Spinneret, Silkworm

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest Univ., China
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing, PRC

### Submitter
Xin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing, PRC


