### Accession
PXD043959

### Title
Identification of state-specific proteomic and transcriptomic signatures of microglia-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
We performed quantitative label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) on 16 cell lysates and 16 EV lysates derived from BV2 microglia. These included four groups of BV2 cells (n=4/group) that were treated (72 hours) with either LPS (100ng/mL) to polarize to a pro-inflammatory state, IL-10 (50ng/mL) to polarize to a protective state, TGFβ (50ng/mL) to polarize to a homeostatic state or untreated controls

### Sample Protocol
To prepare enriched samples for mass spectrometry analysis, EV fractions and cells were lysed in 8M urea containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. 100 µg of protein from the cell lysates and the entire volume of the EV lysates were then reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min with rotation. Proteins were digested overnight with 2 µg of lysyl (Lys-C) endopeptidase (Wako, 127-06621) at RT on shaker. Samples were then diluted (7-fold) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to bring the urea concentration to 1 M. Samples were then digested overnight with 2 µg of trypsin (Thermo, 90058) at RT on shaker. The resulting peptide solutions were acidified to a final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA) and 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA), desalted with a HLB columns (Waters, 186003908), and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator).      Mass spectrometry (MS)   Dried peptides were resuspended in 15 μL of loading buffer (0.1% FA and 0.03% TFA in water), and 7–8 μL was loaded onto a self-packed 25 cm (100 μm internal diameter packed with 1.7 μm Water’s CSH beads) using an Easy-nLC 1200 or Dionex 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system. The liquid chromatography gradient started at 1% buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) and ramps to 5% in 10 s. This was followed by a 55 min linear gradient to 35% B and finally a 4 min 50 s 99% B flush. The spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s. Survey scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a 60,000 resolution, 400 to 1600 m/z range, 400,000 automatic gain control (AGC), 50 ms max injection time and RF lens at 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra were collected in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35%, an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 10000, and a max injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance window.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched using the search engine Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant, against 2020 mouse Uniprot database (91,441 target sequences). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned as a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for orbitrap and 0.6 Da tolerance for ion trap MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match MS1 peaks between runs; a 0.7 min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20 min RT search space. Quantitation of proteins was performed using summed peptide intensities given by MaxQuant. The quantitation method only considered razor plus unique peptides for protein level quantitation.   The MaxQuant output data were uploaded onto Perseus (Version 1.6.15) for analyses. The categorical variables were removed, and intensity values were log (base 2) transformed. The data were filtered based on 50% missingness values and missing values were further imputed from normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). The MaxQuant output data (LFQ intensities) from the EV samples were first normalized based on column sum weight (column sum of given sample divided by average sum across all samples) for each sample to account for volumetric loading of EV samples. The data was then processed as described above with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia are resident immune cells of the brain that play important roles in mediating inflammatory responses in several neurological diseases via direct and indirect mechanisms. One indirect mechanism may involve extracellular vesicle (EV) release, so that the molecular cargo transported by microglia-derived EVs can have functional effects by facilitating intercellular communication. The molecular composition of microglia-derived EVs, and how microglial activation states impact EV composition and EV-mediated effects in neuroinflammation, remain poorly understood. We hypothesize that microglia-derived EVs have unique molecular profiles that are determined by microglial activation state. Using size-exclusion chromatography to purify EVs from BV2 microglia, combined with proteomic (label-free quantitative mass spectrometry or LFQ-MS) and transcriptomic (mRNA and noncoding RNA seq) methods, we obtained comprehensive molecular profiles of microglia-derived EVs. LFQ-MS identified several classic EV proteins (tetraspanins, ESCRT machinery, and heat shock proteins), in addition to over 200 proteins not previously reported in the literature. Unique mRNA and microRNA signatures of microglia-derived EVs were also identified. After treating BV2 microglia with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interleukin-10, or transforming growth factor beta, to mimic pro-inflammatory, anti-inflammatory, or homeostatic states, respectively, LFQ-MS and RNA seq revealed novel state-specific proteomic and transcriptomic signatures of microglia-derived EVs. Particularly, LPS treatment had the most profound impact on proteomic and transcriptomic compositions of microglia-derived EVs. Furthermore, we found that EVs derived from LPS-activated microglia were able to induce pro-inflammatory transcriptomic changes in resting responder microglia, confirming the ability of microglia-derived EVs to relay functionally relevant inflammatory signals. These comprehensive microglia-EV molecular datasets represent important resources for the neuroscience and omics communities and provide novel insights into the role of microglia-derived EVs in neuroinflammation.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Rna sequencing, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Neuroinflammation, Mass spectrometry, Microglia

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Deparment of Neurology, Emory University
Emory University 

### Submitter
Juliet Santiago

### Lab Head
Dr Srikant Rangaraju
Associate Professor, Deparment of Neurology, Emory University


