### Accession
PXD042423

### Title
In-depth analysis of the pancreatic extracellular matrix during development for next generation tissue engineering

### Description
The pancreas is a complex organ consisting of differentiated cells and extracellular matrix (ECM), which together enable its functions, including exocrine secretion and hormone production. Alt-hough much is known about the intrinsic factors that control pancreas development, under-standing of the microenvironment surrounding pancreatic cells remains incomplete. This envi-ronment is composed of various cells and ECM components, which play a critical role in main-taining tissue organization and homeostasis. In this study, we applied mass spectrometry to identify and quantify the ECM composition of the developing pancreas at embryonic E14.5 and perinatal P1 stages. Our proteomic analysis identified 160 ECM proteins that displayed a dynamic expression profile with a shift in collagens and proteoglycans. Furthermore, we used atomic force microscopy to measure the biomechanical properties of the ECM and found that the whole pan-creas ECM is relatively soft with no significant change during pancreas maturation. Finally, we developed a decellularization protocol for P1 pancreatic tissues, which preserved the 3D organi-zation of the ECM and can be used for recellularization studies. Our findings provide insights into the composition and biomechanics of the pancreatic embryonic and perinatal ECM, offering a foundation for future studies investigating the dynamic interactions between the ECM and pan-creatic cells.

### Sample Protocol
The preparation of samples for mass spectrometry analysis followed the protocol de-scribed in Ouni et al. with some modifications. [10] Briefly, 5 mg (wet weight) of pancreat-ic tissue was lysed mechanically with stainless steel beads (Full Moon Biosystem, LB020) and Rapigest homogenization buffer [2% Rapigest (Waters, 186001861), 0.25 mM Sodium orthovanadate, 0.25 mM PMSF, 50 mM NaF, 1mM cOmplete inhibitor EDTA free (Roche, 13539320), 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and 300 mM NaCl] in Precellys tissue homogenizer (4X15 s) at 4°C. After centrifugation, samples were separated into two fractions: fraction 1 for the supernatant and fraction 2 for the pellet. Fraction 2 was digested enzymatically with 1.35 mg/mL Liberase TM DH (Roche, 492586) for 2 h at 37°C, resuspended in urea 6 M, centrifuged at 10 000 g for 5 min and the remaining pellet was discarded. BCA assay was used to quantify total proteins by subtracting LiberaseTM DH amounts for fraction 2. 200 µg of proteins from both fractions were reduced with 5mM DTT and alkylated with 25mM chloroacetamide. For fraction 1, proteins were precipitated using chloroform-methanol phase-extraction and afterwards digested with Lys-C/Trypsin (Promega, V507A) at 1/25 enzyme:substrate ration (w/w) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped with 0.2% tri-fluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the solution was dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 3.5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA. For Fraction 2, proteins were digested twice, first with Lys-C/Trypsin for 2 h at 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio and then with trypsin (Thermo Fischer, 90057) overnight at 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio. After stopping the digestion with TFA 0.5%, peptides were desalted and concentrated using HyperSep C18 Cartridge 200 mg/mL (Thermo Fischer, 60108-303). After drying in a speedvac and similarly to frac-tion 1, peptides were resuspended in 3.5% ACN and 0.1% TFA. After peptides quantifica-tion with a Pierce quantitative colorimetric Peptide assay (Thermo Fischer, 23290), 100 µg of both fractions were eluted into six fractions using a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fischer, 84868) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-tion. Finally, all the fractions were quantified using Pierce quantitative colorimetric Pep-tide assay and resuspended in 3.5% ACN and 0.1% TFA for MS injection

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Pro-teome Discoverer 2.5 against a mouse protein reference target-decoy database obtained from Uniprot (1 January 2022, 55,310 forward entries). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide, and up to 3 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for-fragment ions, and considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine proline and +57.00 Da for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was per-formed by measuring the area under the curve (AUC) for each peptide and the abundance ratios were calculated within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 after normalization on the total ionic current (TIC). The false discovery rate (FDR) was investigated using Percolator, and thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%.silico identified ECM data set from the Matrisome Project. Proteins were then filtered out to keep the most confidently detected proteins for our subsequent interpretation of results. This threshold included proteins with unique peptides equal to or higher than 2, a false discovery rate of less than 1% and a minimum of 3 peptide spectral matches. If found in both fractions, protein abundance was defined as the addition of its abundance in Frac-tion 1 and Fraction 2.  Once all the samples combined (n=3 for E14.5 and n=3 for P1), proteins that were only detected in one or two samples were removed and the median ab-solute values method was applied to normalize the data sets.   4.2.5 Statistical tests  All statistical tests on proteomics data have been performed using R software (v.3.5.1). The Principal Component Analysis was computed on all quantifiable proteins before normalization using the Nipals package that considers the influence of NA values. Since a batch effect was observed between our samples, we decided to perform a paired t-test to compare proteins between E14.5 and P1 samples. This was computed with the Lima package with P1-E14.5 as a fold change and considering the batch effect not similar for proteins of the same data set. Proteins were considered significantly different when the adjusted p-value was under 0.05. Listing of the most abundant proteins was performed based on the number of peptides spectral matches at both stages

### Publication Abstract
The pancreas is a complex organ consisting of differentiated cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) organized adequately to enable its endocrine and exocrine functions. Although much is known about the intrinsic factors that control pancreas development, very few studies have focused on the microenvironment surrounding pancreatic cells. This environment is composed of various cells and ECM components, which play a critical role in maintaining tissue organization and homeostasis. In this study, we applied mass spectrometry to identify and quantify the ECM composition of the developing pancreas at the embryonic (E) day 14.5 and postnatal (P) day 1 stages. Our proteomic analysis identified 160 ECM proteins that displayed a dynamic expression profile with a shift in collagens and proteoglycans. Furthermore, we used atomic force microscopy to measure the biomechanical properties and found that the pancreatic ECM was soft (&#x2264;400 Pa) with no significant change during pancreas maturation. Lastly, we optimized a decellularization protocol for P1 pancreatic tissues, incorporating a preliminary crosslinking step, which effectively preserved the 3D organization of the ECM. The resulting ECM scaffold proved suitable for recellularization studies. Our findings provide insights into the composition and biomechanics of the pancreatic embryonic and perinatal ECM, offering a foundation for future studies investigating the dynamic interactions between the ECM and pancreatic cells.

### Keywords
Pancreas; extracellular matrix; development; decellularization; proteomics; atomic force mi-croscopy

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Cell Biology Unit, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe E. Pierreux
Cell Biology Unit, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium


