### Accession
PXD027733

### Title
Phenotypic quantitative high throughput screening with Caenorhabditis elegans

### Description
Quantitative high throughput screening (qHTS) pharmacologically evaluates libraries of drugs and investigational agents for potential therapeutic uses, toxicological risk assessment, and increasingly for academic chemical tool discovery.  Phenotypic HTS assays aim to interrogate molecular pathways and networks, often relying on cell culture systems, historically with less emphasis on multicellular organisms.  C. elegans has served as a powerful eukaryotic model organism for human biology and disease by virtue of genetic conservation and experimental tractability, as well as a surrogate for infectious parasitic nematodes.  Here we describe a paradigm to enable C. elegans in qHTS using 384-well microtiter plate laser scanning cytometry for rapid signal acquisition with concurrent quantification of the fluorescent protein-encoded phenotype.  E. coli ghost capsules are used as a non-replicating nutrient source to allow compound titration exposures over the full 7-day life cycle to mitigate complications from bacterial overgrowth.  We demonstrate the method using 643 anti-infective biased agents tested in 7-pt titration to assess feasibility of nematode-based in vivo qHTS.  A pharmacological profile from the primary screen confirmed the efficacy of known anti-parasitic molecules, such as ivermectin and levamisole as well as illuminating anthelmintic properties of general chemical classes, including -secretase, bromodomain and proteasome inhibitors.  We anticipate a broader application of laser scanning cytometry-based qHTS will enable the analysis of C. elegans orthologous transgenic phenotypes of human pathologies to facilitate drug discovery for a range of therapeutic indications.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics samples (two groups consisting of three control biological replicates and three treated biological replicates) were digested using in-solution protocol. The digested peptides were loaded to HPLC-MS/MS analysis using data-dependent mode.All discovery proteomic HPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000-nano LC system coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer equipped with the Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) with the Sequest algorithm were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The MS raw data were searched against a Swiss-Prot Caenorhabditis elegans  database (version August 2020, reviewed database) consisting of 4,165 entries using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Peptide identification false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to a maximum of 0.01 using identifications from a concatenated database from the non-decoy and the decoy databases. Label-free quantification analysis used the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) pharmacologically evaluates chemical libraries for therapeutic uses, toxicological risk and, increasingly, for academic probe discovery. Phenotypic high-throughput screening assays interrogate molecular pathways, often relying on cell culture systems, historically less focused on multicellular organisms. Caenorhabditis elegans has served as a eukaryotic model organism for human biology by virtue of genetic conservation and experimental tractability. Here, a paradigm enabling C. elegans qHTS using 384-well microtiter plate laser-scanning cytometry is described, in which GFP-expressing organisms revealing phenotype-modifying structure-activity relationships guide subsequent life-stage and proteomic analyses, and Escherichia coli bacterial ghosts, a non-replicating nutrient source, allow compound exposures over two life cycles, mitigating bacterial overgrowth complications. We demonstrate the method with libraries of anti-infective agents, or substances of toxicological concern. Each was tested in seven-point titration to assess the feasibility of nematode-based in vivo qHTS, and examples of follow-up strategies were provided to study organism-based chemotype selectivity and subsequent network perturbations with a physiological impact. We anticipate that this qHTS approach will enable analysis of C. elegans orthologous phenotypes of human pathologies to facilitate drug library profiling for a range of therapeutic indications.

### Keywords
Infectious disease, Genetic disorders, High-throughput screening, Model organisms, Laser cytometry, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health


