### Accession
PXD012413

### Title
Type 1 Diabetes: Urinary Proteomics and Protein Network Analysis Support Perturbation of Lysosomal Function.

### Description
While insulin replacement therapy restores the health and prevents the onset of diabetic complications (DC) for many decades, some T1D patients have elevated hemoglobin A1c values suggesting poor glycemic control, a risk factor of DC. We surveyed the stool microbiome and urinary proteome of a cohort of 220 adolescents and children, half of which had lived with T1D for an average of 7 years and half of which were healthy siblings. Phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA gene did not reveal significant differences in gut microbial alpha-diversity comparing the two cohorts. The urinary proteome of T1D patients revealed increased abundances of several lysosomal proteins that correlated with elevated HbA1c values. In silico protein network analysis linked such proteins to extracellular matrix components and the glycoprotein LRG1. LRG1 is a prominent inflammation and neovascularization biomarker. We hypothesize that these changes implicate aberrant glycation of macromolecules that alter lysosomal function and metabolism in renal tubular epithelial cells, cells that line part of the upper urinary tract.

### Sample Protocol
DNA extracted from stool samples was amplified using primers that targeted the V1-V3 regions of the 16S rRNA gene. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were generated de novo from raw Illumina sequence reads using the UPARSE pipeline. The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method using 30 kDa MWCO filter devices (Sartorius, Germany) was applied to process urine samples 30 before the tryptic peptide mixtures were desalted with the spinnable StageTip protocol 45. Eluates were dried and stored at -80°C until used for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The phyloseq package version 1.16.2 in R package version 3.2.3 was used for the microbiome census data analysis. The MaxQuant software tool (version 1.5.1.0) accepting most default settings was employed to identify and quantify proteins from raw MS data. To detect differential abundances in the gut microbiota at a genus or species level the DESeq2 package version 1.12.3 in R was used. The phyloseq object are converted into a DESeq2 object using the function phyloseq_to_deseq2 function. Gene ontology information of proteins was obtained using the ClueGO version 2.2.5 and CluePedia version 1.2.5 plugin in Cytoscape version 3.3.0

### Publication Abstract
While insulin replacement therapy restores the health and prevents the onset of diabetic complications (DC) for many decades, some T1D patients have elevated hemoglobin A1c values suggesting poor glycemic control, a risk factor of DC. We surveyed the stool microbiome and urinary proteome of a cohort of 220 adolescents and children, half of which had lived with T1D for an average of 7 years and half of which were healthy siblings. Phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA gene did not reveal significant differences in gut microbial alpha-diversity comparing the two cohorts. The urinary proteome of T1D patients revealed increased abundances of several lysosomal proteins that correlated with elevated HbA1c values. <i>In silico</i> protein network analysis linked such proteins to extracellular matrix components and the glycoprotein LRG1. LRG1 is a prominent inflammation and neovascularization biomarker. We hypothesize that these changes implicate aberrant glycation of macromolecules that alter lysosomal function and metabolism in renal tubular epithelial cells, cells that line part of the upper urinary tract.

### Keywords
Gut microbiome; lysosome; protein network; type 1 diabetes; urinary proteome.

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


