### Accession
PXD007171

### Title
Dynamic adaptation of myocardial proteome during heart failure development after induction of left ventricular pressure overload in mice

### Description
We analyzed time dependent global proteomic adaptations during heart failure (HF) progression in a mouse model, suffering from left ventricular pressure overload due to transverse aortic constriction (TAC), to gain deeper insights in the disease development and identify new biomarker candidates.  The hearts from TAC and sham mice were examined by cardiac MRI on either day 4, 14, 21, 28, 42, and 56 after surgery (n=6 group/time point). At each time point, proteomes of the left (LV) and right ventricles (RV) of TAC and sham mice were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
- protein extraction via bead mill and ultra-sonication from LV and RV of TAC, sham and baseline animals  - pooling of protein extracts per group and time point - tryptic digestion (LysC and Trypsin)  - desalting of digests with ZipTip µ-C18 - data dependent LC-ESI-MS/MS measurement on nano-UPLC/LTQ Orbitrap Velos

### Data Protocol
- data processing via Rosetta Elucidator software package - identification via SEQUEST algorithm (Sage-N Sorcerer database search)

### Publication Abstract
Heart failure (HF) development is characterized by huge structural changes that are crucial for disease progression. Analysis of time dependent global proteomic adaptations during HF progression offers the potential to gain deeper insights in the disease development and identify new biomarker candidates. Therefore, hearts of TAC (transverse aortic constriction) and sham mice were examined by cardiac MRI on either day 4, 14, 21, 28, 42, and 56 after surgery (n = 6 per group/time point). At each time point, proteomes of the left (LV) and right ventricles (RV) of TAC and sham mice were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS). In TAC mice, systolic LV heart function worsened from day 4 to day 14, remained on a stable level from day 14 to day 42, and showed a further pronounced decline at day 56. MS analysis identified in the LV 330 and in RV 246 proteins with altered abundance over time (TAC vs. sham, fc&#x2265;&#xb1;2). Functional categorization of proteins disclosed the time-dependent alteration of different pathways. Heat shock protein beta-7 (HSPB7) displayed differences in abundance in tissue and serum at an early stage of HF. This study not only provides an overview of the time dependent molecular alterations during transition to HF, but also identified HSPB7 as a novel blood biomarker candidate for the onset of cardiac remodeling.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Hspb7, Right ventricle, Proteome, Left ventricle

### Affiliations
Department of Functional Genomics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Alexander Benkner

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
Department of Functional Genomics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


