### Accession
PXD023999

### Title
Viperin inhibits cholesterol biosynthesis and interacts with enzymes in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway

### Description
Many enveloped viruses bud from cholesterol-rich lipid rafts on the cell membrane.  Depleting cellular cholesterol impedes this process and results in viral particles with reduced viability.  Viperin (virus inhibitory protein endoplasmic reticulum-associated, interferon-induced) is an ER membrane-associated enzyme that when expressed in response to viral infections exerts broad-ranging antiviral effects, including inhibiting the budding of some enveloped viruses.  Here we have investigated the effect of viperin expression on cholesterol biosynthesis.  We found that viperin expression reduces cholesterol levels by 20 – 30 % in HEK293T cells.  A proteomic screen of the viperin interactome identified several cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes among the top hits.  The two most highly enriched proteins were lanosterol synthase and squalene monooxygenase, enzymes that catalyze key steps establishing the sterol carbon skeleton.  Co-immunoprecipitation experiments established that viperin, lanosterol synthase and squalene monooxygenase form a complex at the ER membrane.  Co-expression of viperin was found to significantly inhibit the specific activity of lanosterol synthase in HEK293T cell lysates.  Co-expression of viperin had no effect on the specific activity of squalene monooxygenase, but reduced its expression levels in the cells by approximately 30 %.  Despite these inhibitory effects, co-expression of either LS or SM failed to reverse the viperin-induced depletion of cellular cholesterol levels in HEK293T cells.  Our results establish a clear link between the down-regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis and viperin, although at this point the effect cannot be unambiguously attributed interactions between viperin and a specific biosynthetic enzyme.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells over-expressing either 3x-FLAG-viperin or 3x-FLAG-tagged empty vectors (3x-FLAG-pcDNA3.1) as a control were harvested in PBS from 10 cm plates. Cells were incubated on ice for 20 minutes with 0.5 mL lysis buffer (20mM Tris pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and lysed using a Fisher Scientific handheld sonicator at 10% amplitude (25 pulses 1 second on, 5 seconds off). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 RPM for 30 minutes at 4°C and the pellets were discarded. Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma Aldrich, M8823) were washed and pre-equilibrated with ice-cold 20mM Tris pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20. Total protein concentration of the supernatant was measured by Protein DC Assay (Bio-Rad) and subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag M2 magnetic beads. Supernatant (total protein concentration ~ 7 μg/μL) was incubated with the pre-equilibrated anti-FLAG magnetic beads at 50:1 (w/v) ratio for two hours at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with 20x bead volume of TBS using a magnetic tube rack (MagRack 6, GE Life Sciences).   The beads were re-suspended in 50 µL of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8); cysteine residues were reduced by adding 50 µL of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45° C for 30 min.  Samples were cooled to room temperature and cysteine alkylated by incubation with 65 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 30 min. at room temperature in the dark.  Overnight digestion with 1 μg sequencing grade, modified trypsin was carried out at 37° C with constant shaking.  Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters).  Samples were dried and the resulting peptides were re-dissolved in 8 µL of 0.1% formic acid/ 2% acetonitrile solution. 2 µL of the peptide solution were chromatographed on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/ 2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nL/min over a period of 180 minutes (2-22% buffer B in 110 minutes, 22-40% in 25 minutes, 40-90% in 5 minutes followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 5 minutes and re-quilibration with Buffer A for 25 minutes).  Eluent was directly introduced into Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms).  Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing the MS/MS data against Homo sapiens protein database (UniProt; 42054 entries, 2016-11-30) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, ubiquitination of lysine (diglycine signature) were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Many enveloped viruses bud from cholesterol-rich lipid rafts on the cell membrane. Depleting cellular cholesterol impedes this process and results in viral particles with reduced viability. Viperin (Virus Inhibitory Protein, Endoplasmic Reticulum-associated, Interferon iNducible) is an endoplasmic reticulum membrane-associated enzyme that exerts broad-ranging antiviral effects, including inhibiting the budding of some enveloped viruses. However, the relationship between viperin expression and the retarded budding of virus particles from lipid rafts on the cell membrane is unclear. Here, we investigated the effect of viperin expression on cholesterol biosynthesis using transiently expressed genes in the human cell line human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T). We found that viperin expression reduces cholesterol levels by 20% to 30% in these cells. Following this observation, a proteomic screen of the viperin interactome identified several cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes among the top hits, including lanosterol synthase (LS) and squalene monooxygenase (SM), which are enzymes that catalyze key steps in establishing the sterol carbon skeleton. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that viperin, LS, and SM form a complex at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. While coexpression of viperin was found to significantly inhibit the specific activity of LS in HEK293T cell lysates, coexpression of viperin had no effect on the specific activity of SM, although did reduce SM protein levels by approximately 30%. Despite these inhibitory effects, the coexpression of neither LS nor SM was able to reverse the viperin-induced depletion of cellular cholesterol levels, possibly because viperin is highly expressed in transfected HEK293T cells. Our results establish a link between viperin expression and downregulation of cholesterol biosynthesis that helps explain viperin's antiviral effects against enveloped viruses.

### Keywords
Viperin; cholesterol regulation; interactome analysis; radical sam enzyme; squalene monooxygenase; lanosterol synthase

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

### Submitter
Neil Marsh

### Lab Head
Dr Neil G Marsh
Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109


