### Accession
PXD018743

### Title
Ubiquitination profile of polarized macrophages

### Description
Previous studies linked mac activation with the ubiquitination (ub) status of key proteins in inflammatory signal pathways. Lysine-48 ub (K48-ub) of the NF-κB inhibitor (IκB), the final checkpoint of the NFκB pathway, leads to IκB degradation and consequent NF-κB-associated inflammation. In contrast, TRAF6, an upstream positive regulator of the NF-κB pathway, is modulated by K63-ub, leading to its conformational change and activation. However, a comprehensive analysis of ub profiles of polarized macs has not been reported. If a unique ub signature is associated with individual mac subsets is not known.

### Sample Protocol
PBS, LPS, or IL-4 treated macs were collected for ubiquitin proteomics following a published protocol (16). In brief, cells were lysed in freshly prepared urea lysis buffer. Protein concentration was measured using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Cat. 23225). Disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT (2mM, Sigma) for one hour at RT. Cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated by adding iodoacetamide (10mM, Sigma) for 30 min incubation at RT in the dark. Proteins were precipitated using the chloroform/methanol precipitation method, followed by re-suspension in 1M urea, 50 mM HEPES. Enzymatic digestion was performed using trypsin (Pierce) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37°C.  The reaction was quenched in the morning by the addition of formic acid (Pierce) to 1%.  The peptide solution was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 10,000g to remove precipitates. Peptides were desalted using a 130-mg C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) and then dried down in a Centrivap Concentrator (Labconco).  For immunoaffinity purification of K-ε-GG peptides, lyophilized peptides were re-constituted, and ubiquitin-modified peptides were enriched with PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology, cat. no. 5562). In brief, reconstituted peptides were incubated with K-ε-GG specific antibody crosslinked-Protein-A agarose beads, and eluted with IAP elution buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl, 0.15 % (vol/vol) Trifluoroacetic acid). Then peptides were desalted with a homemade C18 column. For LC-MS/MS, K-ε-GG enriched samples were reconstituted in 20 μL trifluoroacetic acid (0.1%, JT Baker) and 6 μl (30%) was loaded onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column, with 1.8 um beads (Sepax) using an Easy nLC-1000 (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (JT Baker) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (JT Baker).  The gradient began at 3% B, went to 8% over 5 minutes, to 30% over 68 minutes, then to 70% B in 4 minutes as was held there for 4 minutes. The gradient was returned to initial conditions in 3 minutes and the column was allowed to re-equilibrate for 10 minutes. The flow rate was kept constant at 300 nL/min. The peptides were detected using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), using a data dependent top 10 method. A full scan from 400-1400 m/z was collected at 70,000 resolution with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, and an AGC setting of 1x106.  The MS2 spectra were collected at 17,500 resolution using a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation width of 1.5 Da, a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms, and an AGC setting of 5 x 104. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set at 25 seconds, with a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) within the Proteome Discoverer software platform, version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher), using the SwissProt Mus musculus database. Percolator was used as the false discovery rate calculator, filtering out peptides that had q-values greater than 0.01. To semi-quantify the protein relative abundance in multiple samples, the peak area of the extracted ion chromatograms for each peptide precursor in the full scan was calculated using the Minora Feature Detector node within Proteome Discoverer, which also used retention time alignment and precursor mass to link peptides across runs, which reduces the level of missing values. The abundance of an individual protein was calculated as the sum of its peak areas for all peptides derived from that protein. Thus, the relative concentration of each protein was determined by comparing the total MS intensities of all identified peptides from that protein in one sample versus those from other samples.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages play critical roles in homeostasis and inflammation. Macrophage polarization to either a pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory status is controlled by activating inflammatory signaling pathways. Ubiquitination is a posttranslational modification that regulates these inflammatory signaling pathways. However, the influence of protein ubiquitination on macrophage polarization has not been well studied. We hypothesized that the ubiquitination status of key proteins in inflammatory pathways contributes to macrophage polarization, which is regulated by itchy E3 ubiquitin ligase (ITCH), a negative regulator of inflammation. Using ubiquitin proteomics, we found that ubiquitination profiles are different among polarized murine macrophage subsets. Interestingly, interleukin-1&#x3b1; (IL-1&#x3b1;), an important pro-inflammatory mediator, was specifically ubiquitinated in lipopolysaccharide-induced pro-inflammatory macrophages, which was enhanced in ITCH-deficient macrophages. The ITCH-deficient macrophages had increased levels of the mature form of IL-1&#x3b1; and exhibited pro-inflammatory polarization, and reduced deubiquitination of IL-1&#x3b1; protein. Finally, IL-1&#x3b1; neutralization attenuated pro-inflammatory polarization of the ITCH-deficient macrophages. In conclusion, ubiquitination of IL-1&#x3b1; is associated with increased pro-inflammatory polarization of macrophages deficient in the E3 ligase ITCH.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Macrophage polarization, Lc-ms/ms, Inflammation

### Affiliations
University of Rochester

### Submitter
Xi Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Lianping Xing
University of Rochester


