### Accession
PXD029265

### Title
Dietary sugar shifts mitochondrial metabolism and small RNA biogenesis in sperm 

### Description
It is known that exogenous factors influences sperm quality and function, such as toxins, exercise, diet and smoking. Still, the moleuclar mechanisms of this is not understood. Here, we set out to determine how a dietary insult of different sugar levels in the diet affects Drosophila sperm proteome, by dissecting out seminal vesicles containing mature sperm from adult flies. These flies have been on a dietary intervention of two days on a sugar diet of 3, 30 or 300 g/L of sugar. Whole seminal vesicles were then used for mass spectometry to increase our understanding of how an acute dietary intervention may change sperm proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila melanogaster strain W1118 were used for seminal vesicle dissection into insect medium (Sigma # T3160), where 20 males and in total 40 seminal vesicles were pooled per sample. Tissue was lysed mechanically with pestle and beads (bead shaker, 40 oscilations per second for 2 minutes) and then centrifuged at 1000g for 5 minutes at 4 degrees C to remove debris. Proteins in supernatant were alkylated, first with ammonium bicarbonate (25 mM) and DTT (10 mM) for 1 hour at 56 degrres C, and then with iodoacetmaide (55 mM) in ammonium bicarbonate (25 mM) for 1 hour in room temp in darkness. Percipitation of proteins were performed with ice cold acetone overnight at -20 C and then centrifuged at 15000 g for 10 minutes. Pellet was digested with trypsin (0.005 µg/µL, Pierce #90057) at 37 C overnight + additional boost of Trypsin next morning for 3 hours at 37 C, to then be vaccum-dried and stored at -2. Before mass spec, peptides were resuspended in 12 uL 0.1% formic acid and ran as duplicates on an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectometer in 5 uL concentration.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS samples were analysed using Sequest, version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288. Search parameters were Fly uniprot 7227.fasta assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, with the following parameter settings: 1 miscleavages, variable methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine and threonine, carboxymethyl cysteine as fixed modification, with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 6.0 PPM. Scaffold (Proteome Software) version 3.00.04 was used for merging of results. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0 % probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,0 % probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al; 2003) Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
<b><i>Aims:</i></b> Increasing concentrations of dietary sugar results in a linear accumulation of triglycerides in male <i>Drosophila,</i> while inducing a U-shaped obesity response in their offspring. Here, using a combination of proteomics and small RNA (sRNA) sequencing, we aimed at understanding the molecular underpinning in sperm for such plasticity. <b><i>Results:</i></b> Proteomic analysis of seminal vesicles revealed that increasing concentrations of dietary sugar resulted in a bell-shaped induction of proteins involved in metabolic/redox regulation. Using stains and <i>in vivo</i> redox reporter flies, this pattern could be explained by changes in sperm production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), more exactly mitochondria-derived H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. By quenching ROS with the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine and performing sRNA-seq on sperm, we found that sperm miRNA is increased in response to ROS. Moreover, we found sperm mitosRNA to be increased in high-sugar diet conditions (independent of ROS). Reanalyzing our previously published data revealed a similar global upregulation of human sperm mitosRNA in response to a high-sugar diet, suggesting evolutionary conserved mechanisms. <b><i>Innovation:</i></b> This work highlights a fast response to dietary sugar in mitochondria-produced H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in <i>Drosophila</i> sperm and identifies redox-sensitive miRNA downstream of this event. <b><i>Conclusions:</i></b> Our data support a model where changes in the sperm mitochondria in response to dietary sugar are the primary event, and changes in redox homoeostasis are secondary to mitochondrial ROS production. These data provide multiple candidates for paternal intergenerational metabolic responses as well as potential biomarkers for human male fertility. <i>Antioxid. Redox Signal</i>. 38, 1167-1183.

### Keywords
Seminal vesicle, Sperm, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Öst lab, BKV, Linköping University
Öst Lab, BKV, Linköping University

### Submitter
Signe Skog

### Lab Head
Dr Anita Öst
Öst Lab, BKV, Linköping University


