### Accession
PXD038640

### Title
Structural basis of calmodulin modulation of the rod cyclic nucleotide-gated channel (XL-MS)

### Description
We used chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry to study the organization and the interaction of the bovine rod outer segment cyclic nugleotide-gated channel with calmodulin. The aims of the study were to identify the D-helix that could not be resolved with cryo-EM and gain further insights into the protein organization.

### Sample Protocol
20 ug of purified CNG channel were crosslinked with calmodulin (CaM) at a 1:2 molar ratio according to a previously published protocol (Leitner et al., Nat Protoc., 2014). Briefly, CaM was added to the purified channel at a saturating concentration of Ca2+ (9 mM) and incubated at 25°C for 10 min. a 1:1 mixture of d-12 labeled and unlabeled DSS (disuccinimidyl suberate) were added and incubated for 1 hour at 25°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of ammonium bicarbonate. Disulfide bonds were reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and free cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin overnight. Peptides were desalted via solid-phase extraction and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The crosslinked peptides were furhter fractionated with peptide-SEC and four fractions were analyzed with LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (250 x 75 um; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient from 11-40% B (A: 2% ACN, 0.15% FA; B: 80% ACN, 0.15% FA) over 60 minutes, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The samples were acquired in DDA on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a 3 sec cycle time and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS1 Orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000. Charge states between +3 and +7 were selected and the fragmented mass range was set to 350-1500 m/z. Ions were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation in a linear ion trap at a collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the bovine proteome and a contaminant database in Spectromine (v.3; Biognosys) first, to generate a FASTA file for crosslinking. All proteins with at least 5% LFQ intensity of the target proteins were retained in the FASTA file for XL-MS analysis. The FASTA file was reversed and shuffled for the generation of a decoy database. The measurements were further analyzed with xQuest v. 2.1.5 (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc. 2014). Trypsin was selected as the digesting enzymes, with an accepted maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidylation of cysteines was included as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation was included as a variable modifcation. Crosslinked residues were lysines and protein N-termini. A peptide length of 4-40 amino acids was selected, MS1 tolerance of +/- 15 ppm and MS2 tolerance of +/- 0.2 Da. The data was further analyzed and inspected with xQuest/xProphet viewer. Peptides were filtered with +/- 5 ppm tolerance and a minimum of 3 matched ions, as well as a delta score <0.9. Crosslink types were inspected manually and hits at <5% FDR were accepted. Spectra were manually checked for TIC >= 0.1, 3 sequential or 4 bond breakages within each peptide. Interprotein crosslink identifications were additionally required to be observed at least 3 times.

### Publication Abstract
Calmodulin (CaM) regulates many ion channels to control calcium entry into cells, and mutations that alter this interaction are linked to fatal diseases. The structural basis of CaM regulation remains largely unexplored. In retinal photoreceptors, CaM binds to the CNGB subunit of cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels and, thereby, adjusts the channel's Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) sensitivity in response to changes in ambient light conditions. Here, we provide the structural characterization for CaM regulation of a CNG channel by using a combination of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy and structural proteomics. CaM connects the CNGA and CNGB subunits, resulting in structural changes both in the cytosolic and transmembrane regions of the channel. Cross-linking and limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry mapped the conformational changes induced by CaM in&#xa0;vitro and in the native membrane. We propose that CaM is a constitutive subunit of the rod channel to ensure high sensitivity in dim light. Our mass spectrometry-based approach is generally relevant for studying the effect of CaM on ion channels in tissues of medical interest, where only minute quantities are available.

### Keywords
Structural proteomics, Xl-ms, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
aboratory of Biomolecular Research, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland. Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
aboratory of Biomolecular Research, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland. Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.


