### Accession
PXD013753

### Title
Comparative profiling of the synaptic proteome from Alzheimer’s disease patients with focus on the APOE genotype

### Description
Degeneration of synapses in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) strongly correlates with cognitive decline, and synaptic pathology contributes to disease pathophysiology. We recently discovered that the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD, apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 (APOE4), exacerbates synapse loss and synaptic accumulation of oligomeric amyloid beta in human AD brain.  To begin to understand the molecular cascades involved in synapse loss in AD and how this is mediated by APOE, and to generate a resource of knowledge of changes in the synaptic proteome in AD, we conducted a proteomic screen and systematic in-silico analysis of synaptoneurosome preparations from temporal and occipital cortices of human AD and control subjects with known APOE gene status.  Our analysis identified over 5,500 proteins in human synaptoneurosomes and highlighted disease and APOE-associated changes in multiple molecular pathways including a disruption of cellular and synaptic signalling, glial related protein changes important for neuroinflammatory neuron-glia interactions, and changes in proteins important for mitochondrial function in AD that differ with APOE genotype.

### Sample Protocol
Use of human tissue for post-mortem studies has been reviewed and approved by the Edinburgh Brain Bank ethics committee and the ACCORD medical research ethics committee, AMREC (approval numbers 15-HV-016, 11/ES/0022).   Fresh frozen brain tissue for proteomics was provided from superior temporal gyrus (BA41/42) and primary visual cortex (BA17). Tissue was requested from clinically diagnosed AD and control subjects. Brain synaptoneurosomes were prepared. ~300mg of cortical tissue was homogenized on ice in homogenization buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, protease inhibitors, phosphatase inhibitors). The homogenate was filtered with an 80μm nylon filter then through a 5 μm filter and centrifuged at 1000g for 5 min.  The supernatant was removed and the synaptoneurosome pellet resuspended in in label-free buffer [100 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.6) 4% (w/v) SDS] containing 1% protease cocktail inhibitor. Protein determination using the Bicinchoninic acid assay was carried out. Pools containing equal amounts of protein were prepared of each of the 8 groups. Samples were lysed in 4%SDS+100mM tris prior to protein estimation by microBCA. Each sample was then reduced with 100 mM DTT and samples then processed using the FASP protocol. Samples were initially diluted 1:10 into 8M Urea and buffer exchanged to remove the SDS and tris buffer, filters were washed 3 times with 100 mM Tris-HCL pH 8 then another 3 times with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins on the filters are then digested twice at 30oc with trypsin (2 x 1ug), first overnight and then for another 6h in a final volume of 200 µl prior to addition of 200ul of 500mM NaCl. Samples were then desalted using a SPE cartridge (Empore-C18, Agilent Technologies, 7mm/3ml) and the peptides dried in a speedvac. Desalted tryptic peptides were then dissolved in 100 µl 100 mM TEAB. The different 8 TMT labels were dissolved in 41µL of anhydrous acetonitrile, and each label then added to a different sample. The mixtures were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and the labelling reaction was quenched by adding 8µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were mixed, desalted using a SPE cartridge (Empore-C18, Agilent Technologies, 7mm/3ml) and the peptides dried in a speedvac. Samples were then dissolved in 200 μL ammonium formate (10 mM, pH 10) and peptides fractionated using High pH RP HPLC.   A C18 Column from Waters (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 X 150 mm) with a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1X10mm, Waters) are used  on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Buffers A and B used for fractionation consists,  respectively of 10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water and 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile, both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonia.  Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1 min intervals. Column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% buffer B for 20 min at a constant flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. Samples (175 µl) were loaded onto the column at 0.2 ml/min. Peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 2% buffer B to 5%B in 6 min then from 5% B to 60% B in 50 min. The column is washed for 16 min at 100% buffer B and equilibrated at 2% buffer B for 20 min as mentioned above.   The fraction collection started 1 min after injection and stopped after 80 min. The total number of fractions concatenated was set to 20 by non-contiguous pooling and the content of the fractions dried and resuspended in 50 µl of 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nLC-MS/MS. Analysis of peptides was performed using a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer coupled with a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. nLC buffers were as follows:  buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 15 μL of each sample (50ul in total) were loaded at 5 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å) equilibrated in 98% buffer A. The trap column was washed for 6 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 95% buffer A to 40% buffer B in 122 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 132 min. The column was then washed with 95% buffer B for 15 min and re-equilibrated in 98% buffer A for 32 min. Q-Exactive HF was used in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120 000 and automatic gain control value of 3x106) followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 0.7 Da, resolution at 60000, maximum ion injection time at 200 ms and AGC 1x105. To ensure mass accuracy, the mass spectrometer was calibrated on the first day that the runs are performed.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single quantitated dataset using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 18 and Andromeda search engine software 19 with enzyme specificity set to trypsin. Other parameters used were: (i) variable modifications, deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), protein N-acetylation, gln-pyro-glu; (ii) fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (C); (iii) database: uniprot-human_Sept2017 database; (iv) Reporter ion MS2 – TMT labels: TMT8plex_Nter and TMT 8plex-Lys ; (v) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm, ITMS- 0.02 Da; (vi) maximum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (viii) maximum of labelled amino acids, 3; and (ix) false discovery rate, 1%. Peptide ratios were calculated using ‘Reporter Intensity’ Data that was normalised using 1/median ratio value for each identified protein group per labelled sample. Filtered data was utilised for all bioinformatics statistical analyses and filtered by the following criteria: proteins identified by >1 peptide and that demonstrated a ±>20% change between APOEx/4 BA41/42 AD and control subjects.  The Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) was used to test whether synaptic protein sets were enriched in the samples 48.  To obtain further insight into potential pathways changed in AD synapses, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems) was used as previously described 12,13,49 with the interaction data limited as follows: direct and indirect interactions; experimentally observed data only; 35 molecules per network; 10 networks per dataset. Prediction activation scores (z- scores) were calculated in IPA. Expression clustering was performed in Biolayout Express 3D software by applying Markov clustering algorithms to raw proteomic data (MCL 19 2.2) as previously described in 13. All graphs were clustered using Pearson correlation r=0.96.

### Publication Abstract
Degeneration of synapses in Alzheimer's disease (AD) strongly correlates with cognitive decline, and synaptic pathology contributes to disease pathophysiology. We recently observed that the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD, apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 (APOE4), is associated with exacerbated synapse loss and synaptic accumulation of oligomeric amyloid beta in human AD brain. To begin to understand the molecular cascades involved in synapse loss in AD and how this is mediated by APOE, and to generate a resource of knowledge of changes in the synaptic proteome in AD, we conducted a proteomic screen and systematic in silico analysis of synaptoneurosome preparations from temporal and occipital cortices of human AD and control subjects with known APOE gene status. We examined brain tissue from 33 subjects (7-10 per group). We pooled tissue from all subjects in each group for unbiased proteomic analyses followed by validation with individual case samples. Our analysis identified over 5500 proteins in human synaptoneurosomes and highlighted disease, brain region, and APOE-associated changes in multiple molecular pathways including a decreased abundance in AD of proteins important for synaptic and mitochondrial function and an increased abundance of proteins involved in neuroimmune interactions and intracellular signaling.

### Keywords
Alzheimer  synapse  apoe  synaptoneurosome  neurodegeneration

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences
The University of Edinburgh  1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK

### Submitter
Douglas Lamont

### Lab Head
Dr Tara Spires-Jones
The University of Edinburgh  1 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK


