### Accession
PXD012410

### Title
Common, Unique and Systemic Signatures in gender-dependent hepatic tumorigenesis: a TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver cancer and a highly malignant tumor. The frequent activation of Ras signaling pathway and the male prevalence are the distinct characteristics of HCC though the underlying mechanisms remain elucidated. By exploring a mouse model of HCC induced by hepatocyte-specific expression of the Hras12V oncogene and showed significant male prevalence in hepatic tumorigenesis, we performed a high-throughput comparative proteomic analysis based on tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on the protein samples from hepatic tumor tissues (T) and peri-tumor tissues (P) of transgenic males and females and the corresponding normal liver tissues (W) of non-transgenic males and females. In total, 5733 proteins were confidently identified, of which 5193 proteins were quantified. Finally, 1344 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (quantified in all examined samples; 1.5 ≤ quantitative ratios ≤ 0.67; p ≤ 0.05) were selected for further analysis. Vertical comparison within W, P, T of males and females, respectively, showed that the numbers of DEPs in males were much higher than females. Bioinformatics analyses showed the common and unique cluster enriched items between sexes which indicates the common and gender disparity pathways towards HCC. Further expression change pattern analysis revealed HCC positive/negative-related and Ras oncogene positive/negative-related DEPs. Horizontal comparison between males and females showed that Ras oncogene gradually and significantly reduced the responses to sex hormones from hepatocytes to hepatoma cells and therefore shrunk their gender disparity, which may contribute to the cause of the loss of HCC clinical responses to the therapeutic approaches targeting sex hormone pathways. Additionally, FABP5 was found to be a more sensitive biomarker for clinical diagnose and prognosis prediction of HCC patients comparing to AFP. In conclusion, the present study firstly provided a comprehensive proteome profiles and novel insights in male bias hepatic tumorigenesis induced by H-ras12V oncogene.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and Sampling¬Procedures for animal handling and tissue sampling were conducted in compliance with protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Dalian Medical University. C57BL/6J wild type non-transgenic mice (Non-Tg) and H-ras12V transgenic mice (Ras-Tg) were breeding and housed in Laboratory Animal Center of Dalian Medical University. Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Liver tissues of Non-Tg (W), hepatic tumors (T) and its paired normal adjacent liver tissues (P) of Ras-Tg were washed in ice-cold sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in order to remove contaminating blood, then cut into 1 mm3 pieces using tissue scissors. Tissue samples were removed and immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The paired P and T samples of Ras-Tg and W samples of Non-Tg (9 month old males and 15 month old females; n=9 for each group, total 54 tissue samples) were used for proteomic analysis. The validation of identified proteins by Western blot was performed for another set of mice.  ReagentsTMT sixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA); Trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI,USA); Acetonitrile and deionized water were purchased from Fisher Chemical (Fisher Scientific, part of Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA); Formic acid was purchased from Fluka  (Buchs, Switzerland); Trifluoroacetic acid ，iodoacetamide, dithiothreitol, urea, tetraethylammonium bromide and trichloroacetic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,  MO,USA); Complete protease inhibitor cocktail was purchased from Calbiochem ( Darmstadt, Germany).   BCA Protein Assay Kit was purchased from Beyotime (Haimen, China).  Tissue Lysate PreparationThe 54 tissue samples (9 for each group) were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples from the same group were randomly and equivalently mixed to generate 3 composite samples (Fig. 1).   Sample labelingFor digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein samples were then diluted by 100 mM TEAB to the concentration of urea less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Label information of Samples was shown in Fig. 1. Three TMT kits were used for this test. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Protein Identification and Quantification by LC-MS/MSThe tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm longth, 75 μmi.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics MethodsGene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. As GO function enrichment analysis, pathway enrichment analysis of significant proteins was carried out using Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). The significant enrichment compared with differential proteins that tested with P＜0.05 and FDR (False discovery rate)＜0.05 were used as a threshold to select significant KEGG pathways. Wolfpsorta subcellular localization predication soft was used to predict subcellular localization of identified proteins. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification, categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05 were clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.  Western blot analysisLiver tissues were homogenized on ice in 10 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4) with 1 mM EDTA and Roche complete protease inhibitor mixture (PhosSTOP EASYpack, REF: 04906845001), centrifuged at 10, 000 × g for 30 minutes and then the concentration was determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). Protein samples were separated on 12% polyacrylamide gels and transferred to PVDF membranes (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden). After blocking with 5% skim milk, primary and secondary antibodies were used to incubate the members. The details information of antibodies was shown in Supplemental Table 1. Immunoreactive complexes were visualized using ECL reagents (Biotool, Shanghai, China). GAPDH served as a loading control.  ImmunohistochemistryAFP and FABP5 expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma were determined by immunohistochemistry on archived paraffin-embedded sections of tissues (LV1504 tissue array, http://www.alenabio.com/tissue-arrays) using the UltraSensitive™ S-P (Mouse/Rabbit) IHC Kit (KIT-9720; Maixin Biotechnology Development Co. Ltd. Fuzhou, China). A mouse anti-human monoclonal AFP primary antibody (Cat #ab46799, Abcam Cambridge, MA, USA) and FABP5 primary antibody (Cat #39926, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA,USA) and biotinylated goat anti-rabbit/mouse polyclonal IgG secondary antibody were used. The staining intensity was scored by a pathologist. The immunohistochemical studies in mice were performed on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 4-mm-thick tissue sections, using the streptavidin-biotin peroxidase complex method, as described previously(14). The primary antibodies used were same as used in human hepatocellular carcinoma.  Significant component expression and survival correlation analysisFor the differential gene expression analyses and the overall survival plots of the TGCA-LIHC data set we used Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA), a newly developed interactive web server available at http://gepia.cancer-pku.cn/index.html(15). The overall survival significance between the two groups was calculated using Log-rank test, assigning a specific threshold (P-value<0.05).  Statistical AnalysisThe data were presented as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). Differences in means were analyzed by Student’s t-test. The statistical analysis for the IHC staining intensity score was performed by McNemar’s test. Data were considered significant when p <0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**).

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver cancer and is highly malignant. Male prevalence and frequent activation of the Ras signaling pathway are distinct characteristics of HCC. However, the underlying mechanisms remain to be elucidated. By exploring Hras12V transgenic mice showing male-biased hepatocarcinogenesis, we performed a high-throughput comparative proteomic analysis based on tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on the tissue samples obtained from HCC (T) and their paired adjacent precancerous (P) of Hras12V transgenic male and female mice (Ras-Tg) and normal liver (W) of wild-type male and female mice (Non-Tg). The further validation and investigation were performed using quantitative real-time PCR and western blot. Totally, 5193 proteins were quantified, originating from 5733 identified proteins. Finally, 1344 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (quantified in all examined samples; |ratios| &#x2265; 1.5, p &lt; 0.05) were selected for further analysis. Comparison within W, P, and T of males and females indicated that the number of DEPs in males was much higher than that in females. Bioinformatics analyses showed the common and unique cluster-enriched items between sexes, indicating the common and gender-disparate pathways towards HCC. Expression change pattern analysis revealed HCC positive/negative-correlated and ras oncogene positive/negative-correlated DEPs and pathways. In addition, it showed that the ras oncogene gradually and significantly reduced the responses to sex hormones from hepatocytes to hepatoma cells and therefore shrunk the gender disparity between males and females, which may contribute to the cause of the loss of HCC clinical responses to the therapeutic approaches targeting sex hormone pathways. Additionally, gender disparity in the expression levels of key enzymes involved in retinol metabolism and terpenoid backbone/steroid biosynthesis pathways may contribute to male prevalence in hepatocarcinogenesis. Further, the biomarkers, SAA2, Orm2, and Serpina1e, may be sex differences. In conclusion, common and unique DEPs and pathways toward HCC initiated by ras oncogene from sexually dimorphic hepatocytes provide valuable and novel insights into clinical investigation and practice.

### Keywords
Hepatocellular carcinoma; gender disparity; ras oncogene; proteomics; tandem-mass-tag (tmt)

### Affiliations
Department of Comparative Medicine, Laboratory Animal Center, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning 116000, P.R. China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Aiguo Wang
Department of Comparative Medicine, Laboratory Animal Center, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning 116000, P.R. China


