### Accession
PXD043336

### Title
RNA helicase Ighmbp2 regulates THO complex to ensure cellular mRNA homeostasis

### Description
RNA helicases constitute a large protein family implicated in cellular RNA homeostasis and disease development. Here we show that the RNA helicase Ighmbp2, linked to the neuromuscular disorder SMARD1 (DSMA1) associates with polysomes and impacts on translation of cellular mRNAs containing short, GC-rich and highly structured 5’UTRs. Absence of Ighmbp2 causes ribosome stalling at the start codon of target mRNAs, leading to their reduced translation efficiency. The main mRNA targets of Ighmbp2-mediated regulation encode for components of the THO complex that links mRNA production and nuclear export. Accordingly, failure of Ighmbp2 regulation of the THO complex causes perturbations of the cellular transcriptome and its encoded proteome. Ablation of essential THO complex subunits phenocopies these perturbations. Thus, Ighmbp2 is an upstream regulator of the THO complex that impacts on cellular mRNA homeostasis. Of note, Ighmbp2 dependent regulation of the THO complex is also observed in astrocytes derived from DSMA1 patients, suggesting that de-regulated mRNA metabolism contributes to SMARD1 etiology.

### Sample Protocol
50µg protein were dissolved in NuPAGE® LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) was reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 min and alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min. Separation was performed on NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) with MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. The gel was washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 1 h with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 1 h, each gel lane was cut into 15 slices.The excised gel bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 µm ID. PepMap C18, 3 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 120-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400, MS/MS scans were acquired in the Ion Trap analyzer with normal scan rate using CID fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. A TOP10 data-dependent MS/MS method was used; dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 120 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 20,000. AGC was used with AGC target with a value of 5x105 for MS scans and 1x104 for MS/MS scans. Lock mass option was applied for internal calibration in all runs using background ions from protonated decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (m/z 371.10124).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2. Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Human Reference Proteome database (June 2022, UP000005640, 79684 entries). Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR; <1% FDR on protein and peptide spectrum match (PSM) level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Arg6 and Lys4 were set for medium SILAC labels and Arg10 and Lys8 for heavy SILAC labels (control). Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. For quantification of pSILAC-labeled proteins, the median was calculated from log2-transformed normalized peptide medium -to-heavy ratios (M/H) for each protein. Two ratio counts were required for protein quantification. The median M/H protein ratio was calculated from two replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mrna-homeostasis, Ighmbp2, Smard1, Rna helicase, Thoc

### Affiliations
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging University Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Andreas Schlosser

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum Center for Integrative and Translational Bioimaging University Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg


