### Accession
PXD034921

### Title
Direct capture, inhibition and crystal structure of HsaD (Rv3569c) from M. tuberculosis by Cycliphostin & Cyclipostins analogs

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) which is one of the deadliest infectious disease worldwide, is caused by the inhalation of the pathogenic bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Since many years now, the emergence of multiple (MDR), extensively (XDR) and totally (TDR) drug resistant strains amplifies the incidences of TB resulting in failure of treatment and death.  However, no new TB drug classes have been developed or approved for drug susceptible TB since the current 6-month four-drug combination was introduced in the 1970s. Most of the promising new molecules in development are either repurposed drug compounds or new derivatives of known anti-mycobacterial drugs that mainly target the bacteria cell wall biosynthesis.  It is now acknowledged that microbial lipolytic enzymes are involved in bacterial growth, cell wall biosynthesis, carbon sources management and virulence during infections by M. tuberculosis. Although no drug is reported to target specifically enzymes involved in mycobacterial intracellular lipid metabolism; our results have clearly shown that mycobacterial enzymes can be potential therapeutic targets. Consequently, specific inhibitors of such enzymes might turn out to be valuable anti-tuberculous agents. We previously reported that the Cyclophostin & Cyclipostins (CyC) analogs are a new family of potent antimycobacterial molecules which react specifically and covalently with (Ser/Cys)-based enzymes. Competitive ABPP approach with CyC17-pretreated M. tb lysate and the ActivX Desthiobiotin-FP activity-based probe (ABP) allowed identifying 23 distinct proteins as potential targets of this inhibitor, that were all (Ser/Cys)-based enzymes, most of them participating in M. tb lipid metabolism and cell wall biosynthesis. However, this approach for target identification in cell lysates is mostly indirect with the risk of false positive hits, and cannot be applied in vivo for various technical reasons, the main one being the need for a large number of compounds and cells. To overcome these issues, we report here the synthesis of new CyC alkyne-containing inhibitors (i.e., CyCyne) analogous to CyC17, and their use for the direct fishing of target proteins in living M. tb via bio-orthogonal click-chemistry activity-based protein profiling (CC-ABPP) strategy. In particular, we further explore and validate, through a combination of biochemical and structural approaches, the specificity of inhibition of the HsaD activity by the CyC analogs.

### Sample Protocol
From 1 L of culture at the logarithmically growth stage (OD600 ~1.5), M. tb mc26230 cells were harvested at 13,000 rpm for 15 min, and resuspended in 7H9-S (7H9 broth + 10% OADC + 0.5% glycerol + 0.05% Tween 80, and 24 μg/mL D-panthothenate) at a final theoretical OD600 of 40. One mL sample of this homogeneous bacterial suspension was incubated with CyC31yne, CyC32yne (500 μM final concentration) or DMSO (control) at 37°C for 4h under gentle shaking at 75 rpm. Bacteria were harvested (13,000 rpm, 4°C, 15 min) and washed with PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in 750 µL PBS supplemented with EDTA-free protease inhibitors (cOmplete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche) at a 1:1 (w/v) ratio. The bacterial cells were lysed using Mini-Beadbeater-96 (BioSpec). The lysate was cooled down for 5 min and then centrifuged at 4°C and at 1300 rpm for 10 min to remove the cell debris. Supernatants were adjusted to 1 mg/mL of total proteins, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ‒80°C until further use. Both CyC31yne- and CyC32yne-treated M. tb and DMSO-control lysate samples (500 μL – 0.5 mg total proteins) were subjected to click-chemistry reaction by addition of Desthiobiotin-PEG3-N3 (Jena Bioscience, 40 mM in DMSO), TBTA ligand (1.667 mM in tBuOH/DMSO 8:2 v/v) and fresh TCEP solution (50 mM in H2O) to the cells. After gently vortexing of the samples, the cycloaddition reaction was initiated by addition of CuSO4 solution (50 mM in H2O – final concentration: 1.6 mM). The lysates were mixed by vortexing again and incubated for 2h under gentle rotative agitation (15 rpm) at RT in the dark. The proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C by adding 4 mL ice-cold acetone, and pelletized (13,000 rpm, 4°C, 15 min). The supernatant was discarded and the proteins were washed with cold MeOH. After centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 4°C, 10 min), the pellets were resuspended in 0.2% (w/v) SDS in PBS at room temperature by mild sonication. Affinity enrichment was performed with 25 μL Pierce™ High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose Resin (Thermo Scientific ref. 20359). Each M. tb treated-lysate was enriched for labelled proteins by transfer to the previously washed beads (around 250 μg) and incubated under gentle rotative agitation (15 rpm) at RT for 3h. Beads were stringently washed following pull-down: 2x 0.4% (w/v) SDS in PBS, and 1x 10 M urea in PBS. The beads containing bound, biotinylated proteins were resuspended in PBS buffer pH 7.4 containing 50 mM free D-biotin and mixed with 5X Laemmli reducing sample buffer, then heated at 95°C for 5 min. To check for unspecific binding, the DMSO-treated lysate sample was also incubated with the streptavidin-agarose beads, and processed as described above. Mass spectrometry analysis: The protein isolate were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). Running of samples was stopped as soon as proteins stacked as a single band. Protein containing bands were stained with Thermo Scientific Imperial Blue, cut from the gel, and following reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation, digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Extracted peptides were concentrated before mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, CA). For each biological sample, 5 microliters corresponding to 25 % of digested sample were injected in duplicate on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 A pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a LC EASY-Spray column (C18, 50 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 A, 2 µm, 100A particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (2-22% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 100 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 20 min). For peptides ionization in the EASYSpray source, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 250 °C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 375-1500 m/z, with 70 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 3.00×106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms). Following the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the 10 most intense data-dependent precursor ions were successively fragmented in HCD cell and measured in Orbitrap (normalized collision energy of 25 %, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1.00×105, intensity threshold 1.00×104 maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, 17.5 K FWHM resolution, scan range 200 to 2000 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.6.3.4. Analysis was done on two biological replicates, each injected two times on mass spectrometers. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the Mycobacterium Tuberculosis database extracted from UniProt on the 10th of March 2021 and containing 3993 entries. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program (version 1.6.15) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in above 70% of samples in one condition or more. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential, a two-sample t-test was done using permutation-based FDR-controlled at 1 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms; drug susceptibility; activity based-protein profiling; proteomic analysis; biochemical characterization; 3d structure

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, LISM, IMM FR3479, 13009 Marseille, France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jean-François CAVALIER
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, LISM, IMM FR3479, 13009 Marseille, France


