### Accession
PXD026153

### Title
Data for the Blood Proteoform Atlas:DS-46:Immature Dendritic Cell:Purchased from STC

### Description
Human biology is tightly linked to proteins, yet most measurements do not precisely determine their full sequence and post-translational modifications. Here, we present the primary structures of 30,000 unique proteoforms expressed from 1,690 human genes across 21 cell types and plasma from human blood and bone marrow compiled in the Blood Proteoform Atlas (BPA). Our results indicate that while a given protein can be expressed across multiple cell types, the proteoform functions as a more specific indicator of differentiation. These results provide a better biochemical description of protein-level biology expressed through gene transcription and translation. We demonstrate the utility of the BPA by focusing on cell- and proteoform-specific signatures within 58 liver transplant recipients having healthy graft function or undergoing acute organ rejection or dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Human blood cells (erythrocytes, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, platelets, hematopoietic stem cells, natural killers cells, T-cells, naive T-cells, regulatory T-cells, pre-BI, BII, BIII-cells, immature B-cells, naive B-cells, memory B-cell, PBMCs, and plasma) were isolated by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS), immunomagnetic selection, and/or density gradient centrifugation. Cells types were whole analyzed, fractionated on nucleus and cytosol, and or had their proteome equalized with ProteoMiner. Proteoforms were then fractionated using GELFrEE, or a combination of IEX and GELFrEE and submitted to LC-MS/MS on FT-Orbitrap instruments and/or a 21 Tesla FT-ICR-MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed with a publicly available TDPortal v4.0.0 (https://portal.nrtdp.northwestern.edu/) workflow based on the Galaxy Project that generated a report with results validated at 1% and 5% context dependent FDR for protein and proteoform levels. First, the raw files were crawled using a 2-minute retention time tolerance and 0.1 m/z tolerance to group precursors and fragments into “targets”. Those targets were then searched. Both isotopically resolved MS1 and high resolution MS2 (so called “High/High” data type) and isotopically unresolved MS1 and high resolution MS2 (i.e., “Med/High” data) were searched with an absolute mass search with a 2.2 Da precursor tolerance and a 10-ppm fragment tolerance. High/High data files were also searched using a biomarker search with a 10-ppm precursor and a 10-ppm fragment tolerance. All the searches were performed using two databases: (1) a database downloaded on April 2016 from UniProt comprising human entries with histones removed containing 20,110 proteins and 42,264 isoforms that was expanded to about 50 million proteoform candidates during the search; (2) a manually curated histone database based on UniProt human accessions containing 45 protein entries, 47 isoforms entries, and 101,515 proteoforms. Histone proteoforms included in the database were observations curated from literature.

### Publication Abstract
Human biology is tightly linked to proteins, yet most measurements do not precisely determine alternatively spliced sequences or posttranslational modifications. Here, we present the primary structures of ~30,000 unique proteoforms, nearly 10 times more than in previous studies, expressed from 1690 human genes across 21 cell types and plasma from human blood and bone marrow. The results, compiled in the Blood Proteoform Atlas (BPA), indicate that proteoforms better describe protein-level biology and are more specific indicators of differentiation than their corresponding proteins, which are more broadly expressed across cell types. We demonstrate the potential for clinical application, by interrogating the BPA in the context of liver transplantation and identifying cell and proteoform signatures that distinguish normal graft function from acute rejection and other causes of graft dysfunction.

### Keywords
Plasma, Bpa, Top-down proteomics, Blood cell types

### Affiliations
Departments of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chemistry, and Molecular Biosciences, the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, and the Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, United States
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Michael Hollas

### Lab Head
Dr Neil L. Kelleher
Departments of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chemistry, and Molecular Biosciences, the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, and the Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, United States


