### Accession
PXD012545

### Title
Compartmentalization and modulation of reproductive protein networks in response to experimental sexual selection

### Description
Here we directly test the hypothesis that PCSS results in rapid evolution of the entire male accessory gland proteome and protein networks by taking a system-level approach, combining divergent experimental evolution of PCSS in Drosophila pseudoobscura (Dpse), high resolution mass spectrometry (MS) and proteomic discovery, bioinformatics and population genetic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Accessory gland tissue was dissected and proteins extracted in RIPA buffer. Tissue lysate samples containing 50 micrograms/lane were loaded onto 4-12% SDS-PAGE gels, electrophoresed, and subjected to in-gel digestion procedure.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were collected using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer. The .raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer with Sequest HT and the reults were further validated using Scaffold suite along with the additional search engine X!Tandem.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs), the nonsperm component of male ejaculates produced by male accessory glands, are viewed as central mediators of reproductive fitness. SFPs effect both male and female post-mating functions and show molecular signatures of rapid adaptive evolution. Although <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, is the dominant insect model for understanding SFP evolution, understanding of SFP evolutionary causes and consequences require additional comparative analyses of close and distantly related taxa. Although SFP identification was historically challenging, advances in label-free quantitative proteomics expands the scope of studying other systems to further advance the field. Focused studies of SFPs has so far overlooked the proteomes of male reproductive glands and their inherent complex protein networks for which there is little information on the overall signals of molecular evolution. Here we applied label-free quantitative proteomics to identify the accessory gland proteome and secretome in <i>Drosophila pseudoobscura</i>,, a close relative of <i>D. melanogaster,</i>, and use the dataset to identify both known and putative novel SFPs. Using this approach, we identified 163 putative SFPs, 32% of which overlapped with previously identified <i>D. melanogaster</i>, SFPs and show that SFPs with known extracellular annotation evolve more rapidly than other proteins produced by or contained within the accessory gland. Our results will further the understanding of the evolution of SFPs and the underlying male accessory gland proteins that mediate reproductive fitness of the sexes.

### Keywords
Reproductive protein networks

### Affiliations
Caris Life Science
Lab Manager

### Submitter
Matthew Rosenow

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew A Rosenow
Lab Manager


