### Accession
PXD013676

### Title
An Atlas of Human Glycosylation Pathways Enables Display of the Human Glycome by Gene Engineered Cells

### Description
The structural diversity of glycans on cells – the glycome – is vast and complex to decipher. Glycan arrays have played a pivotal role in exploring the informational content of glycans. Current glycan arrays display oligosaccharides generated by chemical and chemoenzymatic synthesis or isolated from biological sources and are used to report glycan hapten binding epitopes. Glycan arrays are limited resources, produced through considerable efforts, and they display individual saccharides without the natural context of other glycans and glycoconjugates at the cell surface. We usedmaps of glycosylation pathways to generate a library of isogenic HEK293 cells with combinatorially engineered glycosylation capacities designed to display and dissect the genetic, biosynthetic and structural basis for glycan binding epitopes in a natural context. This expandable and self-renewable cell-based glycan array reports glycosyltransferase genes required (or blocking) for interactions through logic sequential biosynthetic steps, which not only predicts essential structural features of involved glycans including the glycoconjugate context, but importantly provides instructions for enzymatic synthesis, recombinant production, and genetic strategies to dissect biological functions. The broad utility of this cell-based glycan array and its comprehensive read-out is demonstrated by dissecting glycan-binding specificities of microbial adhesins, and the discovery power is demonstrated by uncovering higher order binding of microbial adhesins to clustered patches of O-glycans organized by their presentation on proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Production of N- and O-glycosylation reporter proteins A reporter for N-glycosylation was designed as a secreted construct of the FcgRIIa N-glycoprotein, encoding the extracellular domain (aa1-217, UniproP12318) fused with a 10xHis tag. Secreted FcgRIIa was transiently produced in suspension HEK293-6E cells. Briefly, 30 ml of HEK293-6E cells were seeded at a cell density of 0.5 × 106 cells/ml and transfected the next day with 30 μg of the secrete FcgRIIa construct and 90 μg of PEI (1:3 ratio) incubated at room temp. for 15 min and cultured for 72 h before harvest. A reporter for GalNAc-type O-glycosylation was designed as a secreted construct of the mucin MUC1 encoding TRs (also used for the mucin display). The reporter was stable expressed in HEK293-6E after G418 selection, and a stable pool of cells were seed at a cell density of 1.0 x 106 cells/ml and cultured 72 h. Secreted FcgRIIa and MUC1 were purified from culture medium by nickel affinity chromatography. Media was mixed 3:1 (v/v) in 4× binding buffer (100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 2 M NaCl) and applied to self-packed nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) affinity resin column (Qiagen), pre-equilibrated in washing buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole). After washing, bound protein was eluted with 200 mM imidazole in washing buffer. The protein containing fractions were identified by SDS-PAGE, and further purified by reverse-phase HPLC with a Jupiter 5 μ C4 300A column (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA), using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and a gradient of 10–100% acetonitrile. Sample preparation for site-specific N-glycopeptide analysis 20 μg of the purified FcgRIIa were dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) buffer, reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 45 min), alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), in dark at RT for 30 min), reduced again (10 mM DTT, 20°C, RT) and digested with 0,8U chymotrypsin (1:25 ratio chymotrypsin:protein) (Roche) (25°C, 4h). The proteolytic digest was desalted by in-house produced modified StageTip columns containing 3 layers of C18 membrane (3M Empore disks from Sigma Aldrich) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Samples were eluted with 50% methanol in 0.1% formic acid (FA), dried in SpeedVac and re-solubilized in 0.1% FA and submitted for LC MS/MS analysis. Sample preparation for total cell lysate N-glycan analysis The packed cell pellets (1x107 cells) were lysed in 1 mg Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters), 50 mM AmBic and homogenized by sonication. Cleared lysates were heated (95°C, 15 min), diluted in 50 mM AmBic to a final concentration of 0.2% Rapigest and sonicated again followed by reduction (10 mM DTT, 60°C, 45 min), alkylation (20 mM iodoacetamide, in dark at RT for 30 min), reduction (10 mM DTT, RT, 20 min) and digested with 25U trypsin (Roche) in 50mM AmBic (37°C, 12 h, 650 rpm). Each tryptic digest was acidified with TFA and incubated at 37°C for 30 min before centrifuging (max speed, RT, 15 min). Sep- Pak C18 columns (Waters) where washed with 100% methanol, 50% methanol 0.1% FA and equilibrated with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before loading the supernatants containing the tryptic digests. After reloading the flow through, the column was washed with 0.1% TFA, twice with 0.1% FA and eluted twice with 50% methanol 0.1% FA. Freeze-dried samples were resuspended in 50 mM AmBic with 8U PNGaseF (Roche) and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The digest was applied to Sep-pak C18 column, as described above, and flow through containing the released N-glycans was collected for further labeling with Rapifluor-MS glycan kit (Waters) as described by manufacturers.  Sample preparation for O-glycopeptide analysis Approximately 50 μg of the purified MUC1 reporter was reduced, alkylated and digested with 10 μg endo-AspN (Roche) (37°C, O/N). The digested sample was fractionated by C18 HPLC, and the MUC1 20mer TR glycopeptide identified and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry LC MS/MS analysis was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-μm particle size, 19-21 cm column length). Each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in gradients from 3 to 32 % B for glycopeptides, and 10 to 40% for released and labeled glycans in 45 min at 200 nL/min (Solvent A, 100% H2O; Solvent B, 80% acetonitrile; both containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–2,000) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at the nominal resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and at the nominal resolution setting of 60,000 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50,000 was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events. Targeted MS/MS analysis was performed by setting up a targeted MSn (tMSn) Scan Properties pane. A target list was composed from top 30 most abundant glycans or glycopeptides from the proposed compositional list Data Analysis Glycan and glycopeptide compositional analysis was performed from m/z features extracted from LC-MS data using in-house written SysBioWare software (Vakhrushev et al., 2009). For m/z feature recognition from full MS scans LFQ Profiler Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used. The list of precursor ions (m/z, charge, peak area) was imported as ASCII data into SysBioWare and compositional assignment within 3 ppm mass tolerance was performed. The main building blocks used for the compositional analysis were: NeuAc, Hex, HexNAc, dHex and the theoretical mass increment of the most prominent peptide corresponding to each potential glycosites. The most prominent peptide sequence related to N-glycosite of interest was determined experimentally by comparing the yield of deamidated peptides before and after PNGase F treatment. One or two phosphate groups were added as building blocks for assignment. To generation the potential glycopeptide list, all the glycoforms with an abundance higher than 10% of the most abundant glycoform were used for glycan feature analysis. All high mannose and hybrid structures were excluded in the TCL data.

### Publication Abstract
The structural diversity of glycans on cells-the glycome-is vast and complex to decipher. Glycan arrays display oligosaccharides and are used to report glycan hapten binding epitopes. Glycan arrays are limited resources and present saccharides without the context of other glycans and glycoconjugates. We used maps of glycosylation pathways to generate a library of isogenic HEK293 cells with combinatorially engineered glycosylation capacities designed to display and dissect the genetic, biosynthetic, and structural basis for glycan binding in a natural context. The cell-based glycan array is self-renewable and reports glycosyltransferase genes required (or blocking) for interactions through logical sequential biosynthetic steps, which is predictive of structural glycan features involved and provides instructions for synthesis, recombinant production, and genetic dissection strategies. Broad utility of the cell-based glycan array is demonstrated, and we uncover higher order binding of microbial adhesins to clustered patches of O-glycans organized by their presentation on proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cell array, Glycoprotein, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen


