### Accession
PXD023023

### Title
Proteomic profiling of stromal reprogramming in canine simple mammary carcinomas using laser-capture microdissected FFPE tissue

### Description
Cancer-associated stroma (CAS) profoundly influences development and progression of tumours including mammary carcinoma (mCA). Spontaneous canine simple mCA represent relevant models of human mCA, notably also with respect to CAS reprogramming. While transcriptomic changes in CAS of mCA are well described, it remains unclear to what extent these differences translate to the protein level. Therefore, we sought to gain insight into the proteomic changes in CAS and compare them with transcriptomic changes in the same tissue. To this end, we analysed CAS and matched normal stroma isolated by laser-capture microdissection (LCM) by LC-MS/MS in a cohort of 14 Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) canine mCAs that we had previously characterized using LCM-RNAseq. Our results reveal clear differences in protein abundance between CAS and normal stroma, which are characterised by changes in the extracellular matrix, the cytoskeleton, and cytokines such as TNF. While the proteomics-based analysis of LCM-FFPE tissue detects fewer targets than RNAseq, the protein and RNA levels show a decent degree of correlation, especially for the most deregulated targets. Moreover, the results from both approaches reveal a comparable picture with regards to pathway activation. Finally, we validate transcriptomic upregulation of LTBP2, IGFBP2, COL6A5, POSTN, FN1, COL4A1, COL12A1, PLOD2, COL4A2, and IGFBP7 in CAS on the protein level and demonstrate their adverse prognostic value for human breast cancer. Given the relevance of canine mCA as model for the human disease, our analysis substantiates these targets as disease-promoting stromal components with implications for breast cancer in both humans and dogs.

### Sample Protocol
CAS and matched normal stroma were isolated from fourteen formalin-fixed paraffin embedded dog mammary carcinoma samples using laser-capture microdissection. After rehydration, the excised tissue pieces, lysis and digestion of samples was performed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). Dried peptides were re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS-solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for LC-MS-Analysis on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Samples were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column and peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1400 m/z) at a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3 000 000, followed by HCD fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. Only precursors with intensity above 250 000 were selected for MS/MS. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot Canis lupus familiaris reference proteome (taxonomy 9615, canonical version from 2019-07-29), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled, and a 2-minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.   Protein fold changes were computed based on peptide intensity values reported in the MaxQuant generated peptides.txt file, using linear mixed-effects models. Pre-processing of the peptide intensities reported in the peptides.txt file was performed as follows: intensities equal zero were removed, non-zero intensities were log2 transformed and modified using robust z-score transformation. Afterward, for each protein, a mixed-effects model was fitted to the peptide intensities, and fold changes and p-values were computed based on this model for each contrast. Next, p-values are adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure to obtain the false discovery rate (FDR). To estimate fold-changes of proteins for which mixed-effects model could not be fitted because of an excess in missing measurements, the following procedure was applied: The mean intensity of over all samples of a condition for every peptides was computed. For the proteins with no measurements in one condition, we imputed the peptide intensities using the mean of the 10% smallest average peptide intensities determined in step one. Then the differences between conditions were estimated for each peptide, and the median of the peptide fold change estimates was used to provide a per protein fold change estimate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Comparative oncology, Tumour stroma, Canine breast cancer, Cancer-associated stroma, Breast cancer, Tumour microenvironment

### Affiliations
Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstr. 260, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Laura Kunz

### Lab Head
Dr Enni Markkanen
Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstr. 260, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland


