### Accession
PXD002094

### Title
Tumor-Associated Macrophages Promote Colorectal Tumor Development Through Remodeling of Its Extracellular Matrix

### Description
Extracellular matrix (ECM) structural and compositional abnormalities are a hallmark of many cancers. Tumor associated macrophages (TAM) are considered pivotal players in mounting pro-tumoral functions; yet, their role in tumor-ECM remodeling remains largely ambiguous. Using an orthotopic murine model of colorectal cancer we defined two major CRC TAM subsets arising from Ly6Chi monocytes recruited in a CCR2-depedent manner. TAM-deficient CRC tumors established Ccr2-/- mice exhibited attenuated growth. Advanced imaging techniques revealed that the enhanced deposition, linearization and cross-linking of collagen fibers typical to tumor growth were absent in the Ccr2-/- tumors. Moreover, the Ccr2-/- tumors displayed altered ECM composition with 348 proteins that were differentially expressed in comparison with WT tumors, among them 46 were ECM related. Integrating transcriptomic and proteomic approaches we defined a TAM signature of ECM remodeling enzymes, structural and affiliated proteins. Specifically, were prominent proteins involved with the synthesis and assembly of collagen type I, IV and XIV. Finally, decellularized 3D ECM fragments extracted from WT tumors, but not from Ccr2-/- tumors or upstream healthy colon, enhanced tumor cell proliferation in vitro and tumor development in the native colonic environment. Collectively, our integrated biophysical-immunologic-omic approaches uncover new mechanistic insights of TAM-mediated remodeling of tumor ECM structure and composition.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue slices from WT or Ccr2-/- mice or normal upstream colons were immersed in ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) 100mM and coarsely homogenized by repeated cycles of boiling, freezing and sonication. Then, the same volume of ammonium bicarbonate with 8M Urea was added to a final concentration of 4M, and samples were vortexed at room temperature O.N. Subsequently, dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 10mM and samples were vortexed at 30oc, 1400 rpm for 30 minutes, followed by addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 25mM and further vortexing for 30 minutes in 30oc and 1400 rpm. Urea was then diluted to concentration of 2M and LysC (Wako Chemicals) was added (1:100 weight:weight) and samples were vortexed at 37oC, 1400 rpm for 2 hrs. Sequentially, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 ratio (weight:weight) for overnight and on the following morning added again in a 1:100 ratio for 4 hrs. The sorted cells  were lysed in 50% v/v TFE buffer. Following reduction and alkylation the proteins were digested with LysC-trypsin Mix(Promega). Peptide mixtures were purified on C18 stage tips. Peptide samples were run on the Q-Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to EASY-nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.3.2 and 1.5.2.18)  and the Andromeda search engine, with 1% FDR threshold on the peptide and protein levels.Quantification was done with the label free approach.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) promote tumor development, invasion, and dissemination by various mechanisms. In this study, using an orthotopic colorectal cancer (CRC) model, we found that monocyte-derived TAMs advance tumor development by the remodeling of its extracellular matrix (ECM) composition and structure. Unbiased transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of (a) TAM-abundant and -deficient tumor tissues and (b) sorted tumor-associated and -resident colonic macrophage subpopulations defined a distinct TAM-induced ECM molecular signature composed of an ensemble of matricellular proteins and remodeling enzymes they provide to the tumor microenvironment. Remarkably, many of these ECM proteins are specifically increased in human CRC versus healthy colon. Specifically, we demonstrate that although differentiating into TAMs, monocytes up-regulate matrix-remodeling programs associated with the synthesis and assembly of collagenous ECM, specifically collagen types I, VI, and XIV. This finding was further established by advanced imaging showing that TAMs instruct the deposition, cross-linking, and linearization of collagen fibers during tumor development, especially at areas of tumor invasiveness. Finally, we show that cancer-associated fibroblasts are significantly outnumbered by TAMs in this model and that their expression of collagen XIV and I is reduced by TAM deficiency. Here, we outline a novel TAM protumoral function associated with building of the collagenous ECM niche.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Colorectal cancer, Murine crc model, Extracellular matrix, Tumor-associated macrophages

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Tamar Geiger
Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University


