### Accession
PXD019448

### Title
The Natural Product NPLC0393 Prevents Liver Fibrosis Through Regulation of the TGF-β1/NDRG2/MAPK Axis

### Description
Liver fibrosis resulting from chronic liver damage constitutes a major health care bur-den worldwide; however, no antifibrogenic agents are currently available. Our previ-ous study reported that the small molecule NPLC0393 extracted from the herb Gyno-stemma pentaphyllum exerts efficient antifibrotic effects both in vivo and in vitro. In this study, a TMT-based quantitative proteomic study using a carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced mouse model of liver fibrosis was performed to identify the potential target of NPLC0393. Combining this study with protein-protein interaction network analysis of differentially expressed proteins between the CCl4 model and NPLC0393 treatment groups, we focused on the function of NDRG2 involved in cell differentia-tion. In vitro studies showed that NPLC0393 prevented the TGF-β1 stimula-tion-induced decrease in the NDRG2 level in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). Functional studies indicated that NDRG2 can inhibit the activation of HSCs by preventing the phosphorylation of ERK and JNK. Furthermore, knockdown of NDRG2 abolished the ability of NPLC0393 to inhibit HSC activation. In conclusion, these results pro-vide information on the mechanism underlying the antifibrotic effect of NPLC0393 and shed new light on the potential therapeutic function of the TGF-β1/NDRG2/MAPK signaling axis in liver fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Liver tissues from a total of nine mice among all three groups were lysed with SDT ly-sis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 0.1 M DTT), and the protein concentra-tion was measured by the tryptophan-based fluorescence quantification method (Thakur et al., 2011). For protein digestion, 50 μg of each sample was processed with the fil-ter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) method, as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2010). In brief, protein samples were loaded in 30-kDa centrifugal filter tubes (Mil-lipore) and washed with 100 µL of UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)). Alkylation of proteins was performed using 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, dissolved in UA buffer) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were washed with 100 µL of UA buffer and washed again with 100 µL of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicar-bonate (TEAB). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) in 50 mM TEAB) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation for the subsequent TMT labeling experiment. TMT 10-plex labeling The peptides obtained from each sample were then labeled with one 10-plex TMT rea-gent set according to the instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Each TMT rea-gent (0.4 mg) was dissolved in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and added to the corresponding peptide samples (resolved in 200 mL of 100 mM TEAB). Control sam-ples were labeled with 126, 127N, and 127C; CCl4 group samples were labeled with 128N, 128C and 129N; and CCl4 + NPLC0393 group samples were labeled with 130N, 130C and 131N. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, 8 mL of 5% hy-droxylamine was added for 15 min to quench the labeling reaction. The labeled pep-tides were combined into a single sample, dried by vacuum centrifugation and subjected to solid-phase extraction and desalting on a C18 column (3M Empore)(Werner et al., 2014). High-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation High-pH RPLC was performed in an Agilent 1100 LC instrument equipped with a C18 column (Waters XBridge BEH300, 250 × 4.6 mm, OD 5 μm, USA) at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min. The pooled peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions using a gradient of mobile phases A (10 mM NH4COOH, pH 10) and B (90% acetonitrile in 10 mM NH4COOH, pH 10). Forty-eight fractions were collected over the entire gradient and combined into 24 samples with similar peptide amounts. The fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.0.1) (Cox et al., 2009). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the International Protein Index (IPI) mouse database (version 3.87). TMT 10-plex-based MS2 reporter ion quantification was selected, with the reporter mass tolerance set at 0.003 Da. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and lysine acetylation were set as the variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme, with two potential missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identification. The raw data of the protein table were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants and were normalized by setting the median intensity to 1.0. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's honest significant difference (HSD) test were performed with R software. A P value of < 0.05 was set as a criterion to identify a significant change.

### Publication Abstract
Liver fibrosis resulting from chronic liver damage constitutes a major health care burden worldwide; however, no antifibrogenic agents are currently available. Our previous study reported that the small molecule NPLC0393 extracted from the herb <i>Gynostemma pentaphyllum</i> exerts efficient antifibrotic effects both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. In this study, a TMT-based quantitative proteomic study using a carbon tetrachloride (CCl<sub>4</sub>)-induced mouse model of liver fibrosis was performed to identify the potential target of NPLC0393. Combining this study with bioinformatic analysis of differentially expressed proteins between the CCl<sub>4</sub> model and NPLC0393 treatment groups, we focused on the function of N-myc downstream-regulated gene 2 (NDRG2) involved in cell differentiation. <i>In vitro</i> studies showed that NPLC0393 prevented the TGF-&#x3b2;1 stimulation-induced decrease in the NDRG2 level in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). Functional studies indicated that NDRG2 can inhibit the activation of HSCs by preventing the phosphorylation of ERK and JNK. Furthermore, knockdown of NDRG2 abolished the ability of NPLC0393 to inhibit HSC activation. In conclusion, these results provide information on the mechanism underlying the antifibrotic effect of NPLC0393 and shed new light on the potential therapeutic function of the TGF-&#x3b2;1/NDRG2/MAPK signaling axis in liver fibrosis.

### Keywords
Tgf-β1，nplc0393, Proteomics, Liver fibrosis, Ndrg2

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


