### Accession
PXD004945

### Title
Glioma proteome -  Quantitative proteomics reveals fundamental regulatory differences in oncogenic HRAS and IDH1 driven astrocytoma

### Description
In the present study, we applied a quantitative MS-based strategy to characterize the proteome and phosphoproteome in HRAS- or IDH1-driven glioma cells. We describe the driving roles of the MEK and PI3K signaling pathways in RAS-NHA cells, and uncover oncogenic signaling in other pathways. We highlight the interplay between the signaling cascades and show that inhibition of MEK and PI3K reverses phosphorylation signaling patterns driven by oncogenic RAS overexpression. Applying a histone hybrid chemical labeling method and high-resolution MS, we identified significant histone methylation, acetylation, and butyrylation changes in IDH1mut-NHA cells. Our results suggest a global transcriptional repressive state, consistent with the down-regulation of the proteome, transcriptome, and the DNA hyper-methylated state in IDH1mut-NHA cells. We provide a unique resource of altered proteins, phosphosites, and histone PTMs in RAS and IDH1 mutant astrocytoma cell lines, providing insight into oncogenesis in glioma beyond the transcriptomic level.

### Sample Protocol
After full incorporation of SILAC labels, cell pellets were collected and stored at -80 C. Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M urea. Protein content was measured before reduction and alkylation and trxptic digestion overnight. Peptides were then enriched for phosphopeptides by TiO2 and further fractionated by high pH reversed phase fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt_2015_07 human database using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with a 1% FDR at the phosphosite, peptide, and protein level using default settings. Data were further processed using Perseus version 1.5.1.6.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma multiformes (GBMs) are high-grade astrocytomas and the most common brain malignancies. Primary GBMs are often associated with disturbed RAS signaling, and expression of oncogenic HRAS results in a malignant phenotype in glioma cell lines. Secondary GBMs arise from lower-grade astrocytomas, have slower progression than primary tumors, and contain IDH1 mutations in over 70% of cases. Despite significant amount of accumulating genomic and transcriptomic data, the fundamental mechanistic differences of gliomagenesis in these two types of high-grade astrocytoma remain poorly understood. Only a few studies have attempted to investigate the proteome, phosphorylation signaling, and epigenetic regulation in astrocytoma. In the present study, we applied quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify the main signaling differences between oncogenic HRAS and mutant IDH1-driven glioma cells as models of primary and secondary GBM, respectively. Our analysis confirms the driving roles of the MAPK and PI3K/mTOR signaling pathways in HRAS driven cells and additionally uncovers dysregulation of other signaling pathways. Although a subset of the signaling changes mediated by HRAS could be reversed by a MEK inhibitor, dual inhibition of MEK and PI3K resulted in more complete reversal of the phosphorylation patterns produced by HRAS expression. In contrast, cells expressing mutant IDH1 did not show significant activation of MAPK or PI3K/mTOR pathways. Instead, global downregulation of protein expression was observed. Targeted proteomic analysis of histone modifications identified significant histone methylation, acetylation, and butyrylation changes in the mutant IDH1 expressing cells, consistent with a global transcriptional repressive state. Our findings offer novel mechanistic insight linking mutant IDH1 associated inhibition of histone demethylases with specific histone modification changes to produce global transcriptional repression in secondary glioblastoma. Our proteomic datasets are available for download and provide a comprehensive catalogue of alterations in protein abundance, phosphorylation, and histone modifications in oncogenic HRAS and IDH1 driven astrocytoma cells beyond the transcriptomic level.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Epigenetics, Mek pi3k inhibition, Primary vs. secondary glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemsitry
Department of pharmaceutical chemistry, school of pharmacy, University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Sophia Doll

### Lab Head
Dr Sophia Doll
Department of pharmaceutical chemistry, school of pharmacy, University of California San Francisco


