### Accession
PXD019634

### Title
Seminal fluid protein divergence among populations exhibiting postmating prezygotic reproductive isolation

### Description
Despite holding a central role for fertilisation success, reproductive traits often show elevated rates of evolution and diversification. The rapid evolution of seminal fluid proteins (Sfps) within populations is predicted to cause mis-signalling between the male ejaculate and female reproductive tract between populations resulting in postmating prezygotic (PMPZ) isolation. Crosses between populations of Drosophila montana show PMPZ isolation in the form of reduced fertilisation success in both noncompetitive and competitive contexts. Here we test whether male ejaculate proteins deriving from either the accessory glands or the ejaculatory bulb differ between populations using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We find more than 150 differentially abundant proteins between populations which may contribute to PMPZ isolation. These proteins include a number of proteases and peptidases, and several orthologs of D. melanogaster Sfps, all known to mediate fertilisation success and which mimic PMPZ isolation phenotypes. Males of one population typically produced greater quantities of Sfps and the strongest PMPZ isolation occurs in this direction. The accessory glands and ejaculatory bulb have different functions and the ejaculatory bulb contributes more to population differences than the accessory glands. Proteins with a secretory signal, but not Sfps, evolve faster than non-secretory proteins although the conservative criteria used to define Sfps may have impaired the ability to identify rapidly evolving proteins. We take advantage of quantitative proteomics data from three Drosophila species to determine shared and unique functional enrichments of Sfps that could be subject to selection between taxa and subsequently mediate PMPZ isolation. Our study provides the first high throughput quantitative proteomic evidence showing divergence of reproductive proteins implicated in the emergence of PMPZ isolation between populations.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty-one-day old males were anaesthetised with ether, the abdomen removed with insect pins, and placed in a drop of phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The whole reproductive tract (Fig. S1) was moved to a second drop of PBS, rinsed, the testes removed from the rest of the reproductive tract and discarded. The ejaculatory duct and bulb were separated from the accessory glands, intact where possible. Each tissue was washed in a third drop of PBS and placed in a LoBind Eppendorf tube containing 15µl lysis buffer (5% w/v sodium deoxycholate; 1% w/v sodium dodecyl sulphate) and protease inhibitor cocktail kept on ice. After reproductive tissues were harvested from 15 males the combined sample was freeze/thawed three times; placed on dry ice for 5 minutes, then placed in a water bath at 20ºC for 30 seconds and vortexed for 30 seconds. Each sample was then centrifuged at 20kG for 5 minutes at 4ºC, supernatant collected and placed in a new Eppendorf and stored at -80ºC until further processing. In total we collected three biological replicates for each tissue and each population. Biological replicate 1 consisted of 30 individuals per population (collected over two days) divided in to two equal volumes after tissue collection and processed separately. Two equal volumes of biological replicate 2 were loaded on to the mass spectrometer and biological replicate 3 was run in singlet, yielding a total of 5 LC-MS/MS runs for each tissue from each population (Fig. S1).   To quantify protein concentration to standardise loading volumes on to the mass spectrometer we ran 1µl of each sample with Laemmli buffer on an SDS-PAGE gel (Fig. S2) and performed densitometry with GelAnalyzer (www.gelanalyzer.com). Protein samples were processed with a HiPPR™ detergent removal kit (Thermo Fisher™, Catalogue number: 88305) and reduced by the addition of 2µl 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) followed by incubation at 60ºC for 1 hour. Samples were allowed to cool then alkylated by addition of 1µl 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 minutes at room temperature. Samples were then proteolytically digested using trypsin added at a ratio of 1:20 trypsin:protein. The digestion step was performed overnight at 37ºC, followed by drying to completion using vacuum centrifugation. All samples were then resuspended in 20µl 3% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid prior to analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  LC-MS/MS was performed by nano-flow liquid chromatography (U3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher™) coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific™).  Peptides were separated on an Easy-Spray C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm) using a 2-step gradient from 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 10% solvent B (0.08% formic acid in 80% acetronitrile) over 5 min then 10% to 50% B over 75 min at 300 nL/min. A 105-minute MS data dependent acquisition (DDA) method was set up on the QExactive HF with settings: The full MS scan was from 375-1500 m/z acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in profile mode. Subsequent fragmentation was Top 10 in the HCD cell, with detection of ions in the Orbitrap using centroid mode, resolution 30,000. The following MS method parameters were used for MS1: Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target 1e6 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms and MS2: AGC target 1e5, IT of 60 ms and isolation window 2 Da. The intensity threshold was 3.3e4, normalized collision energy 27, charge exclusion was set to unassigned, 1, exclude isotopes was on, apex trigger deactivated. The peptide match was set to preferred with dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
We performed quantitative proteomic analysis for label free quantification using the MaxLFQ algorithm to generate relative peptide and protein intensity information (Cox et al. 2014) in MaxQuant (Tyanova et al. 2016). we set carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification and acetylation of N-terminus of proteins and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. For identification a minimum peptide length of 7 was required and a minimum ratio count of two for quantification. False discovery rate was set at 0.01 calculated using a reverse decoy database which we subsequently removed along with contaminants. For protein identification we matched mass spectra to the D. montana predicted proteome. Detailed description of the proteome construction can be found in (Parker et al. 2018). Briefly, the proteome was generated using gene predictions from the Maker2 pipeline (Holt and Yandell 2011) reciprocally blasted against D. virilis proteins (Parker et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Despite holding a central role in fertilization, reproductive traits often show elevated rates of evolution and diversification. The rapid evolution of seminal fluid proteins (Sfps) within populations is predicted to cause mis-signalling between the male ejaculate and the female during and after mating resulting in postmating prezygotic (PMPZ) isolation between populations. Crosses between Drosophila montana populations show PMPZ isolation in the form of reduced fertilization success in both noncompetitive and competitive contexts. Here we test whether male ejaculate proteins produced in the accessory glands or ejaculatory bulb differ between populations using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We find more than 150 differentially abundant proteins between populations that may contribute to PMPZ isolation, including a number of proteases, peptidases and several orthologues of Drosophila melanogaster Sfps known to mediate fertilization success. Males from the population that elicit the stronger PMPZ isolation after mating with foreign females typically produced greater quantities of Sfps. The accessory glands and ejaculatory bulb show enrichment for different gene ontology (GO) terms and the ejaculatory bulb contributes more differentially abundant proteins. Proteins with a predicted secretory signal evolve faster than nonsecretory proteins. Finally, we take advantage of quantitative proteomics data for three Drosophila species to determine shared and unique GO enrichments of Sfps between taxa and which potentially mediate PMPZ isolation. Our study provides the first high-throughput quantitative proteomic evidence showing divergence of reproductive proteins between populations that exhibit PMPZ isolation.

### Keywords
Seminal fluid proteins, Accessory glands, Reproductive isolation, Postcopulatory sexual selection, Drosophila, Proteomics, Ejaculate, Postmating prezygotic isolation, Tandem mass-spectrometry, Speciation

### Affiliations
Syracuse University
Ecology Division  Department of Zoology Stockholm University, Sweden

### Submitter
Martin Garlovsky

### Lab Head
Dr Rhonda R. Snook
Ecology Division  Department of Zoology Stockholm University, Sweden


