### Accession
PXD016211

### Title
Protemics of human cell during HHV-6A reactivation

### Description
HHV-6A is a human herpesvirus that integrates into human sub telomeric regions to acquire latency. This latent virus frequently reactivates causing numerous diseases. The project was aimed to understand changes in host cell prteomics upon virus reactivation, which might helpin understanding the pathophysiology of virus reactivation.

### Sample Protocol
U2-OS cells were grown in MyCoy-5A media containing 10% dialyzed FCS and light amino acids L-8662 ([12C]lysine; Sigma-Aldrich) and A-6969 ([12C]arginine; Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, solvent control treated cells were grown in MyCoy-5A media containing heavy isotope amino acids CNLM-291-H ([13C], [15N]lysine; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and CNLM-539-H ([13C], [15N]arginine; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), whereas Trichostatin-A treated in MyCoy-5A cells were grown in medium heavy amino acids DLM-2640 ([2H]lysine; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and CLM-2265-H ([13C]arginine; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) for 48 h. Next, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 2.5 mM MgCl2, and protease inhibitor cocktail). After incubation on ice for 10 min, cells were lysed using 26G needle followed by mild water bath sonication to ensure complete nuclear lysis of the cells and centrifugation at 13,200 rpm for 20 min to remove cell debris. Heavy and medium pulse-labeled cell lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, based on whole protein content estimated by Bradford assay (500-0006; Bio-Rad Laboratories) before processing for MS.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 45-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied.  A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration. For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 (57), and database searches were performed with the integrated search engine Andromeda. The UniProt human reference proteome database and UniProt HHV6A database were used in combination with a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under the control of the false-discovery rate (FDR; <1% FDR on protein and PSM level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications:  protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Q), and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. For quantification of pSILAC-labeled proteins, the median was calculated of the log2-transformed normalized peptide ratios heavy to medium (H/M) for each protein. Two ratio counts were required for protein quantification. Protein ratios were normalized for each experiment in intensity bins (at least 300 proteins per bin), and outliers were identified by boxplot statistics as significantly altered, if their values were outside a 1.5× or 3× interquartile range (extreme outliers).

### Publication Abstract
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a multifactorial disorder with many possible triggers. Human herpesvirus (HHV)-6 and HHV-7 are two infectious triggers for which evidence has been growing. To understand possible causative role of HHV-6 in ME/CFS, metabolic and antiviral phenotypes of U2-OS cells were studied with and without chromosomally integrated HHV-6 and with or without virus reactivation using the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin-A. Proteomic analysis was conducted by pulsed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture analysis. Antiviral properties that were induced by HHV-6 transactivation were studied in virus-naive A549 cells challenged by infection with influenza-A (H1N1) or HSV-1. Mitochondria were fragmented and 1-carbon metabolism, dUTPase, and thymidylate synthase were strongly induced by HHV-6 reactivation, whereas superoxide dismutase 2 and proteins required for mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acid, amino acid, and glucose metabolism, including pyruvate dehydrogenase, were strongly inhibited. Adoptive transfer of U2-OS cell supernatants after reactivation of HHV-6A led to an antiviral state in A549 cells that prevented superinfection with influenza-A and HSV-1. Adoptive transfer of serum from 10 patients with ME/CFS produced a similar fragmentation of mitochondria and the associated antiviral state in the A549 cell assay. In conclusion, HHV-6 reactivation in ME/CFS patients activates a multisystem, proinflammatory, cell danger response that protects against certain RNA and DNA virus infections but comes at the cost of mitochondrial fragmentation and severely compromised energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Viral reactivation, Hhv-6a

### Affiliations
Senior Researcher, Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Versbacher Strasse 7, 97078 Würzburg, Germany
University of Würzburg

### Submitter
Bhupesh Kumar Prusty

### Lab Head
Dr Bhupesh Kumar Prusty
Senior Researcher, Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Versbacher Strasse 7, 97078 Würzburg, Germany


