### Accession
PXD005210

### Title
Large-Scale Analysis of Breast Cancer-Related Conformational Changes in Proteins using Limited Proteolysis

### Description
Conformational changes in proteins can lead to disease.  Thus, methods for identifying conformational changes in proteins can further improve our understanding and facilitate detection of disease states. Here we combine limited proteolysis (LiP) with Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) to characterize breast cancer-related conformational changes in proteins on the proteomic scale. Studied here are the conformational properties of proteins in two cell culture models of breast cancer, including the MCF-10A and MCF-7 cell lines.  The SILAC-LiP approach described here identified ~200 proteins with cell-line dependent conformational changes, as determined by their differential susceptibility to proteolytic digestion using the non-specific protease, proteinase K. The protease susceptibility profiles of the proteins in these cell lines were compared to thermodynamic stability and expression level profiles previously generated for proteins in these same breast cancer cell lines. The comparisons revealed that there was little overlap between the proteins with protease susceptibility changes and the proteins with thermodynamic stability and/or expression level changes. Thus, the large-scale conformational analysis described here provides unique insight into the molecular basis of the breast cancer phenotypes in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy SILAC-labeled breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and light SILAC-labeled breast cell line MCF-10A were prepared according to established SILAC protocols. Cell lysate for each cell line was generated and divided into two 50 μL aliquots. One aliquot was subjected to limited proteolysis under native conditions followed by tryptic digestion under denaturing conditions (double digestion), while the other aliquot of each cell lysate was only subjected to tryptic digestion (single digestion). The light- and heavy- labeled lysates that were singly digested were combined, as were the light- and heavy- labeled lysates that were doubly digested. Each combined protein sample was submitted to a bottom-up, solution-phase, shotgun proteomics analysis using LC-MS/MS. Ultimately, L/H ratios were obtained for peptides in the double and single digestion, and L/H ratios from double and single digestion for a given peptide were compared. A control experiment for the SILAC-LiP strategy described here was performed using heavy- and light- labeled MCF-7 cell lines.  The control experiment was performed in the same manner as described above.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed with fixed MMTS modification on cysteine and SILAC labeling of lysine (13C614N2) and arginine (13C6), variable (0-1) oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin was set as enzyme with semi-specificity and up to two missed cleavages allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search where initial mass recalibration was performed, and a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance was used for the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Also included were a match between runs and re-quantification of the searched peptides. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%. The rest of the parameters were set at the default settings. The search results were exported to Excel for further data analysis as described below. Only the protein and peptide identifications with non-zero positive ratios (H/L >0) were used in subsequent data analysis steps.     For each biological replicate, the data in the technical replicates were averaged to generate a single H/L ratio for each charge state of each identified peptide. A median H/L ratio was determined for each protein based on all the identified peptides from a given protein in the single digestion group. The H/L ratios of the peptides from a given protein were subsequently divided by the median H/L ratio for that protein, which effectively normalized for protein abundance differences in the two different cell lines (i.e., all the H/L ratios were normalized to 1). These normalized H/L ratios were transformed to log2 values, and the resulting values obtained for a given peptide at all charge states and from five biological replicates were used in subsequent analyses to select peptide hits. Peptide hits were only selected from those that were identified at least twice in both the double and single digestion groups. For peptide hit selection, Student’s two tailed t-test was used to identify hit peptides with significantly different H/L ratios in the doubly and singly digested samples. Hit peptides were selected as those with a p-value less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Conformational changes in proteins can lead to disease. Thus, methods for identifying conformational changes in proteins can further improve our understanding and facilitate detection of disease states. Here we combine limited proteolysis (LiP) with Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) to characterize breast cancer-related conformational changes in proteins on the proteomic scale. Studied here are the conformational properties of proteins in two cell culture models of breast cancer, including the MCF-10A and MCF-7 cell lines. The SILAC-LiP approach described here identified &#x223c;200 proteins with cell-line-dependent conformational changes, as determined by their differential susceptibility to proteolytic digestion using the nonspecific protease, proteinase K. The protease susceptibility profiles of the proteins in these cell lines were compared to thermodynamic stability and expression level profiles previously generated for proteins in these same breast cancer cell lines. The comparisons revealed that there was little overlap between the proteins with protease susceptibility changes and the proteins with thermodynamic stability and/or expression level changes. Thus, the large-scale conformational analysis described here provides unique insight into the molecular basis of the breast cancer phenotypes in this study.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Protein folding, Proteomics, Mcf-10a, Limited proteolysis, Silac, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United States
Duke university

### Submitter
Fang Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United States


