### Accession
PXD009710

### Title
Proteomes of dissected developing barley endosperm layers and microscopy identifies the starchy endosperm as prominent tissue for the storage of ER derived hordeins accompanied by the accumulation of HvPDIL1-1 and its intracellular re-localization

### Description
Barley (Hordeum vulgare) is one of the major food sources for humans and forage source for animal livestock. Barley endosperm is structured into three distinct cell layers: the starchy endosperm, which acts essentially as storage tissue for starch, the subaleurone, which is characterized by a high accumulation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived seed storage proteins (SSP) and finally the aleurone beside the seed coat with a prominent role during seed germination. Prolamins account for more than 50% of the total protein amount in mature seeds. Together with other seed storage proteins (SSPs) they are important for both grain quality and flour quality. Prolamins are synthesized on the rough ER, translocated into the ER lumen and accumulate in distinct, ER-derived protein bodies (PBs) that are most abundant in the SE. PB formation is regulated by the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) that is involved in the disulfide transfer pathway. Here, we used laser microdisection (LMD) to characterize spatio-temporal molecular and morphological differences of the ER during barley endosperm development. We revealed by nanoLC-MS/MS proteomic analyses performed on whole seeds and collected tissues at different seed development stages that the protein level of the protein disulfide isomerase HvPDIL1-1 is spatio-temporally regulated in developing barley endosperm. Our microscopic studies showed that HvPDIL1-1 preferentially accumulates in SE, especially at 12 days after pollination (dap). HvPDIL1-1 re-localized from PBs to the protein matrix at the periphery of starch granules along grain filling process. Detailed analysis of SE proteome dynamics identified clusters of proteins with similar expression pattern as HvPDIL1-1, which were analysed in a protein-protein network. It revealed a strong functional interconnection between transcription and translation, protein folding and amino acid synthesis with sucrose and starch metabolism.   Our data indicate a role of HvPDIL1-1 in the coordination of protein synthesis and prolamins deposition during grain filling processes in developing barley endosperm. These results are discussed in relation to the putative role of HvPDIL1-1 for cereal food end-product quality and recombinant protein production in cereal seeds.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from barley seeds harvested at 6 dap, 10dap, 12 dap and ≥ 20 dap  in three biological replicates, as well as of LMD sections from seeds harvested at 12 dap and ≥ 20 dap in three biological replicates (Figure S1) following an adapted protocol from (Roustan et al., 2017). A phenol-phase protocol extracted proteins. Samples were dissolved in an urea buffer and protein concentration was measured with a Bradford Assay prior to trypsin digestion. Following over-night digestion, peptides were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction (SPE) tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). After SPE, the corresponding eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Peptide pellets were dissolved at a protein concentration equivalent to 0.1 µg/µl in 5 % (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA). 0.5 µg of the mixture was separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 240 min linear gradient from two to 40% of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid (FA) in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% [v/v] FA in 90% [v/v] ACN) with 300 nL/min flow rate generated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system. For the LMD samples, peptides were eluted with a 145 min linear gradient with the same mobile phase and percentage as for the WS proteomics. The peptides were measured with a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo) using the following mass analyzer settings: ion transfer capillary temperature 275°C, full scan range 350-1800 m/z, FTMS resolution 120000. Each FTMS full scan was followed by up to ten data dependent (DDA) CID tandem mass spectra (MS/MS spectra) in the linear triple quadrupole (LTQ) mass analyzer. Dynamic exclusion was enabled using list size 500 m/z values with exclusion width ±10 ppm for 60 s. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned and +1 charged ions were excluded from MS/MS acquisitions. For injection control, automatic gain control (AGC) for full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap was set to 5 x 105 ion population, the maximum injection time (max IT) was set to 200 ms. Orbitrap online calibration using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.10123 from polydimethylcyclosiloxane was used. Multistage activation was enabled with neural losses of 24.49, 32.66, 48.999, 97.97, 195.94, and 293.91 Da for the ten most intense precursor ions. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled and the trap was set to gather five x 103 ions for up to 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.5 (http://www.maxquant.org) and Andromeda search algorithm (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) on the Hordeum vulgare sp. vulgare Uniprot database (124,660 protein entries). Peptides identification was performed using the following settings: Mass tolerance for precursor was set to 5 ppm and for fragment masses up to 0.8 Da. The maximum FDR was set to 0.01%. Three missed cleavages were allowed. The dynamic modifications allowed were: methionine oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation. Carbamidomethyl (C) was allowed as fixed modification. Label-free-Quantification (LFQ) was performed based on at least two peptides per proteins and internally normalized by Maxquant (Cox et al., 2014). Quantification was calculated at peptide level. Further data processing (including one-way ANOVA) was performed with the Perseus 1.5 software (Tyanova et al., 2016). Annotated MS/MS spectra were visualized with MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2015). For statistical analyses we performed a Student's t-Test ((two-tailed distribution, two-sample unequal variance (heteroscedastic)) by the software Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i>) is one of the major food sources for humans and forage sources for animal livestock. The average grain protein content (GPC) of barley ranges between 8 and 12%. Barley hordeins (i.e., prolamins) account for more than 50% of GPC in mature seeds and are important for both grain and flour quality. Barley endosperm is structured into three distinct cell layers: the starchy endosperm, which acts essentially as storage tissue for starch; the subaleurone, which is characterized by a high accumulation of seed storage proteins (SSPs); and the aleurone, which has a prominent role during seed germination. Prolamins accumulate in distinct, ER-derived protein bodies (PBs) and their trafficking route is spatio-temporally regulated. The protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) has been shown to be involved in PB formation. Here, we unravel the spatio-temporal proteome regulation in barley aleurone, subaleurone, and starchy endosperm for the optimization of end-product quality in barley. We used laser microdissection (LMD) for subsequent nanoLC-MS/MS proteomic analyses in two experiments: in Experiment One, we investigated the proteomes of dissected barley endosperm layers at 12 and at &#x2265;20 days after pollination (DAP). We found a set of 10 proteins that were present in all tissues at both time points. Among these proteins, the relative protein abundance of D-hordein, B3-hordein and HvPDIL1-1 significantly increased in starchy endosperm between 12 and &#x2265;20 DAP, identifying the starchy endosperm as putative major storage tissue. In Experiment Two, we specifically compared the starchy endosperm proteome at 6, 12, and &#x2265;20 DAP. Whereas the relative protein abundance of D-hordein and B3-hordein increased between 6 and &#x2265;20 DAP, HvPDIL1-1 increased between 6 and 12 DAP, but remained constant at &#x2265;20 DAP. Microscopic observations showed that these relative protein abundance alterations were accompanied by additional localization of hordeins at the periphery of starch granules and a partial re-localization of HvPDIL1-1 from PBs to the periphery of starch granules. Our data indicate a spatio-temporal regulation of hordeins and HvPDIL1-1. These results are discussed in relation to the putative role of HvPDIL1-1 in end-product quality in barley.

### Keywords
Hordeins, Barley caryopsis, Laser microdissection, Hvpdil 1-1, Shotgun proteomics, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Valentin Roustan

### Lab Head
Dr Verena Ibl
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria


