### Accession
PXD008494

### Title
Osteoarthritis osteoblasts secretome

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common joint disease and this is a major cause of joint pain and disability in the aging population. Its etiology is multifactorial (i.e., age, obesity, joint injury, genetic predisposition), and the pathophysiologic process affects the entirety of the joint (Martel-Pelletier J et al. Osteoarthritis. Nature reviews Disease primers. 2016;2:16072).  Although it is not yet clear if it precedes or occurs subsequently to cartilage damage, subchondral bone sclerosis is an important feature in OA pathophysiology (Goldring SR et al. Changes in the osteochondral unit during osteoarthritis: structure, function and cartilage-bone crosstalk. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2016;12:632-44). It is characterized by local bone resorption and the accumulation of weakly mineralized osteoid substance (Bailey AJ et al. Phenotypic expression of osteoblast collagen in osteoarthritic bone: production of type I homotrimer. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002;34:176-82). Subchondral bone sclerosis is suspected to be linked to cartilage degradation, not only by modifying the mechanical stresses transmitted to the cartilage, but also by releasing biochemical factors with an activity on cartilage metabolism (Sanchez C et al. Osteoblasts from the sclerotic subchondral bone downregulate aggrecan but upregulate metalloproteinases expression by chondrocytes. This effect is mimicked by interleukin-6, -1beta and oncostatin M pre-treated non-sclerotic osteoblasts. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2005;13:979-87; Sanchez C et al. Subchondral bone osteoblasts induce phenotypic changes in human osteoarthritic chondrocytes. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2005;13:988-97; Westacott CI et al J. Alteration of cartilage metabolism by cells from osteoarthritic bone. Arthritis Rheum. 1997;40:1282-91. We have previously demonstrated that osteoblasts isolated from subchondral OA bone exhibited an altered phenotype. More precisely, we showed that osteoblasts coming from the thickening (called sclerotic, SC) of subchondral bone located just below a cartilage lesion produced higher levels of  alkaline phosphatase, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, prostaglandinE2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and transforming growth factor(TGF)-β1 and type I collagen than osteoblasts coming from the non-thickening neighboring area (called non-sclerotic area, NSC) (Sanchez C et al. Phenotypic characterization of osteoblasts from the sclerotic zones of osteoarthritic subchondral bone. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;58:442-55; Sanchez C et al. Regulation of subchondral bone osteoblast metabolism by cyclic compression. Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64:1193-203.)    To compare secretome of cells living in different in vivo conditions is useful, not only to better understand the pathological mechanisms  underlying changes in  OA subchondral bone, but also to identify soluble biomarkers potentially reflecting these changes.   Using our well-characterised human subchondral osteoblast culture model, we compared the secretome of osteoblasts coming from sclerotic and non sclerotic OA subchondral bone. This approach allowed to identify changes in secretome that contribute to explain some subchondral bone abnormalities in OA and to propose osteomodulin and fibulin-3 as potential biomarkers of OA subchondral bone remodelling.

### Sample Protocol
We performed a proteomic analysis of NSC or SC osteoblasts conditioned culture medium, using differential quantitative and relative label free analysis on nano 2D UPLC- SYNAPT Synapt HDMS G2 HDMS system (Waters, Manchester, UK). Matched NSC and SC culture supernatants of five patients were analyzed.  PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION BY LC-ESI-MS/MS The samples were reduced, alkylated, concentrated using Amicon (Millipore) with membrane cut-off of 3kDa. The protein content of the samples was then quantified using RCDC kit (Biorad). Aliquotes of 15 µg for each sample were then purified by precipitation using the 2D-Clean up kit (GE) according to manufacturer recommendations, to eliminate impurities not compatible with mass spectrometry analysis. The protein pellets after the washing steps were further resolubilized in bicarbonate ammonium 50mM. The samples were digested in solution with trypsin (16 hours at 37°C ratio tryspin/total proteins (W/W) (1/50), 3h at 37°C with ratio 1/100 in 80% ACN). The reaction was stopped by addition of formic acid. The samples were evaporated to dryness in a speed vacuum. The samples were dissolved in water 0.1% formic acid then an aliquote corresponding to 3.5 µg of protein digest for each sample was purified using a Zip-Tip C18 High Capacity according to manufacturer recommendations. The samples were evaporated to dryness in a speed vacuum. Digested samples were analyzed (separately) using the 2D-nano-Acquity® UPLC system (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled with the SYNAPT G2 HDMS Mass Spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK). 3.5 µg of lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 12.5 µL of 100mM ammonium formiate buffer (pH10). Samples were spiked with MassPREP™ Digestion Standard Mixtures 1 or 2 (IS1 and IS2) containing an equimolar or different amounts of yeastalcohol dehydrogenase, rabbit glycogen phosphorylase beta, bovine serum albumin and yeast enolase (Waters, Manchester). Finlay, 9 µL of the sample containing 150 fmoles of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase was injected, corresponding to an estimated sample load of 2.5µg.

### Data Protocol
Processing of raw data using ProteinLynx GlobalServer (PLGS 2.5, Waters Corp., Milford, USA) and analysis of ion account tables Raw data processing (deconvolution and deisotoping), protein identification and relative quantification were all performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) v2.5 (Waters Corp., Milford, USA). The processing parameters were set as follows: the MS TOF resolution and the chromatographic peak width were both set to automatic, the low-/elevated-energy detection threshold was set to 150/15 counts, respectively, the identification intensity threshold was 500 counts and the lock mass window at 785.84206 m/z was set to 0.30 Da. For the identification of the proteins, the UniProt human database (UniProt release April 2010) implemented with the sequences of the non-human protein standards spiked as proteins digests before injection in raw serum (accession #: P00489,P00924, P02769, P00330), was used. The searched parameters used were as follows: carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) of peptides as fixed and variable modifications respectively, two possible trypsin missed cleavages were allowed, minimum fragment ion matches per peptide of three and minimum fragment ion matches per protein of seven, minimum two peptides matches per protein and finaly a protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein was set at maximum 4% (which is equivalent to a 1% FDR at the peptide level).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Non-collagenous proteins, Matrix mineralization, Secretome, Osteoarthritis, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
Bone and Cartilage Research Unit, Arthropôle Liège, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, MolSys Research Unit, University of Liege, Liege 4000, Belgium

### Submitter
Gabriel Mazzucchelli

### Lab Head
Dr Yves Henrotin
Bone and Cartilage Research Unit, Arthropôle Liège, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium


