### Accession
PXD015393

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiling unravels rewiring of chromatin organization factors in host cells upon HBV infection

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection leads tdevelopment of fatal liver complications. Due to a lack of effective measure to cure HBV infection, complete eradication of HBV is difficult. Thus, novel HBV therapeutic strategies are needed. Host proteins involved in the HBV infection processes are known to be regulated through phosphorylation. System level changes in phospho-signaling pathway in host during infection remains unclear. To this end, phosphoproteome profiling on HBV infected HepG2-NTCP cells was performed.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2-NTCP used as infection model. Mock and HBV infected HepG2-NTCP were harvested at 7 day post infection. Lysate prepared were tryptic digested and labeled with TMT and combined before phosphopeptides enrichment. Enriched phosphopeptides were analysed with the following criteria. Online reversed phase LC separation was performed on 4 µg of labelled-phosphopeptides using the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The enriched phosphopeptides were separated using an EASY-Spray column (C18, 100 Å, 2 µm, 75 µm x 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) over a 180 min gradient (8-38% mobile phase B) at flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A was 2% acetonitrile,  0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were directly injected into the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the following parameters: spray voltage at 2.5 kV, RF lens level at 60%, and ion transfer tube temperature 275oC. The full scan range of MS1 was defined at 400-1500 m/z at resolution 120 K, with maximum ion injection time 50 ms and automated gain control (AGC) target 4.0e5. Data-dependent MS2 and MS3 (ddMS2 and ddMS3) were configured according to the MSA SPS MS3 method.

### Data Protocol
Generated MS spectra was searched using the Proteome Discoverer Software v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For phosphopeptide identification, SEQUEST HT search engine was used. The search was performed using Percolator against UniProt human reference proteomes database (2017 June release, 92977 entries including isoforms), modified to include all viral proteins of HBV genotype C and D (UniProt, 13 entries, accessed on 2018 May), with FDR of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection persists as a major global health problem despite the availability of HBV vaccines for disease prevention. However, vaccination rates remains low in some regions of the world, driving the need for novel strategies to minimise infections and prevent disease progression. Thus, understanding of perturbed molecular signaling events during early phases of HBV infection is required. Phosphosignaling is known to be involved in the HBV infection processes, yet systems-level changes in phosphosignaling pathways in the host during infection remain unclear. To this end, we performed phosphoproteome profiling on HBV-infected HepG2-NTCP cells. Our results showed that HBV infection drastically altered the host phosphoproteome and its associated proteins, including kinases. Computational analysis of this phosphoproteome revealed dysregulation of the pathways involved in immune responses, cell cycle processes, and RNA processing during HBV infection. Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA) identified the dysregulated activities of important kinases, including those from CMGC (CDK, MAPK, GSK, and CLK), AGC (protein kinase A, G, and C), and TK (Tyrosine Kinase) families. Of note, the inhibition of CLKs significantly reduced HBV infection in HepG2-NTCP cells. In all, our study unravelled the aberrated phosphosignaling pathways and the associated kinases, presenting potential entry points for developing novel therapeutic strategies for HBV treatment.

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus, Hbv host response, Chromatin remodelling, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Principle Investigator of TBP at IMCB
NUS

### Submitter
ZiJie Lim

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Principle Investigator of TBP at IMCB


