### Accession
PXD043640

### Title
Loss of Rnd3/RhoE induces entosis in human hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Entosis is a process that leads to the formation of cell-in-cell structures commonly found in cancers. Here, we identified entosis in hepatocellular carcinoma and the loss of Rnd3 as an efficient inducer of this mechanism. We characterized the different stages and the molecular regulators of entosis induced after silencing of Rnd3. We demonstrated that this process is dependent on RhoA/ROCK pathway, but independent on E-cadherin. The proteomic analysis of entotic cells allowed us to identify LAMP-1 as a protein implicated not only in the degradation final stage of entosis, but also in the full mechanism. By analyzing entosis in human hepatocellular carcinoma samples, we found a relationship between the presence of entotic cells and the metastatic potential of tumors. Altogether, these data suggest the involvement of entosis in liver tumor progression and highlight a new perspective for the entosis analysis in medicine research as a novel therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent biological replicates on total protein extracts from SILAC-labeled cells either transfected with siRNAs targeting Rnd3 or entotic cells were compared by label-free protein quantification. Proteins were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunk in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid for a final concentration of 0.05 µg/µL. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 57 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200), a standard AGC target and an injection time in automatic mode, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, a 20% normalized AGC target and a maximum injection time in dynamic mode. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. Mascot 2.5 algorithm was used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a UniProt Homo sapiens protein database (75796 entries, release September 3, 2020 ; https://www.uniprot.org/ website). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K), SILAC modifications (K, R) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Proteins identification was accepted only with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank=1 and with a protein FDR value less than 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) was carried out with parameters indicated previously. The normalization was carried out on median of ratios. The inference of missing values was applied with 5% of the background noise.

### Publication Abstract
Entosis is a process that leads to the formation of cell-in-cell structures commonly found in cancers. Here, we identified entosis in hepatocellular carcinoma and the loss of Rnd3 (also known as RhoE) as an efficient inducer of this mechanism. We characterized the different stages and the molecular regulators of entosis induced after Rnd3 silencing. We demonstrated that this process depends on the RhoA/ROCK pathway, but not on E-cadherin. The proteomic profiling of entotic cells allowed us to identify LAMP1 as a protein upregulated by Rnd3 silencing and implicated not only in the degradation final stage of entosis, but also in the full mechanism. Moreover, we found a positive correlation between the presence of entotic cells and the metastatic potential of tumors in human patient samples. Altogether, these data suggest the involvement of entosis in liver tumor progression and highlight a new perspective for entosis analysis in medicine research as a novel therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Entosis, Lamp-1, Rhoa/rock, Tumor progression., Hepatocellular carcinoma, Cell-in-cell, Rnd3

### Affiliations
Univ. Bordeaux, INSERM, BRIC, U1312, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Violaine Moreau
Univ. Bordeaux, INSERM, BRIC, U1312, Bordeaux, France


