### Accession
PXD017805

### Title
Skeletal muscle proteome changes following 10 weeks of high load resistance training

### Description
Recreationally-trained college aged males underwent 10 weeks of moderate volume, high-load resistance exercise with PRE and POST vastus lateralis skeletal muscle biopsies.  Protein isolation was performed on tissue samples and the sarcoplasmic protein fraction was analyzed to evaluate changes PRE to POST.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of these protein fractions was performed using our recently published and proteomic-validated “MIST” or “myofibrillar isolation and solubilization technique” (Haun et al., 2019a).  Ice-cold buffer (300 μL; Buffer 1: 25 mM Tris, pH 7.2, 0.5% Triton X‐100, protease inhibitors) was added to tubes containing freeze-dried tissue obtained above (~4-5 mg).  Samples were homogenized using tight-fitting pestles and centrifuged at 1,500 g for 10 minutes at 4°C.  Supernatants (sarcoplasmic fraction) were collected and placed in new 1.7 mL microtubes on ice.  As a wash step, the resultant myofibrillar pellet was resuspended in 300 μL of Buffer 1 and centrifuged at 1,500 g for 10 minutes at 4°C.  The supernatant was discarded and the myofibrillar pellet was solubilized in 400 μL of ice-cold resuspension buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2, 100 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM spermidine, protease inhibitors).  The sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar isolates were then stored at -80ºC until protein concentration determination and proteomic analyses described below.   Proteomics analysis was performed on the sarcoplasmic protein fraction similar to previous work published by our laboratory (Haun et al., 2019a).  Each sample (90 µg) for triplicate technical runs (30 µg for each run) was prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis using EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, samples were transferred into new 1.7 mL tubes and final volumes were adjusted to 100 µL with general cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling; Danvers, MA, USA).  Reduction solution (50 µL) and alkylation solution (50 µL) were added to samples, gently mixed, and incubated at 95°C using a heat block for 10 minutes to reduce and alkylate samples.  After incubation, the sample was removed from the heat block and cooled to room temperature.  A reconstituted enzyme Trypsin/Lys-C Protease Mix solution (50 µL) was added to the reduced and alkylated protein sample and incubated with shaking at 37°C for 2 hours to digest proteins.  Digestion stop solution (50 µL) was then added to samples and peptides were cleaned using a peptide clean-up column according to the kit instructions.  An externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) was used in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLC Nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples (5 µL) were aspirated into a 50 µL loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo µ-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 µm i.d. × 10 cm).  The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 µM × 15 cm nanoviper; Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Mobile phase A was composed of 99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent; Millipore, Austin, TX, USA), and 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  A 60-minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed.  The eluent was directly nanosprayed into the mass-spectrometer.  During chromatographic separation, the Q-Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The MS data were acquired using the following parameters: 20 data-dependent collisional-induced-dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan (350 to 1700 m/z) at 60,000 resolution.  MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution.  Ions with a single charge or charges more than 7 as well as unassigned charge were excluded.  A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used.  All measurements were performed at room temperature, and three technical replicates were run for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software package with SequestHT and Mascot search nodes using the 20180308HumanSwissprot.fasta database and the Percolator peptide validator.  The resulting .msf files were further analyzed by the proteome validator software Scaffold v4.0 (Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
While high-load resistance training increases muscle hypertrophy, the intramuscular protein responses to this form of training remains largely unknown. In the current study, recreationally resistance-trained college-aged males (<i>N</i> = 15; mean &#xb1; SD: 23 &#xb1; 3 years old, 6 &#xb1; 5 years training) performed full-body, low-volume, high-load [68-90% of one repetition maximum (1RM)] resistance training over 10 weeks. Back squat strength testing, body composition testing, and a vastus lateralis biopsy were performed before (PRE) and 72 h after the 10-week training program (POST). Fiber type-specific cross-sectional area (fCSA), myofibrillar protein concentrations, sarcoplasmic protein concentrations, myosin heavy chain and actin protein abundances, and muscle tissue percent fluid were analyzed. The abundances of individual sarcoplasmic proteins in 10 of the 15 participants were also assessed using proteomics. Significant increases (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) in type II fCSA and back squat strength occurred with training, although whole-body fat-free mass paradoxically decreased (<i>p</i> = 0.026). No changes in sarcoplasmic protein concentrations or muscle tissue percent fluid were observed. Myosin heavy chain protein abundance trended downward (-2.9 &#xb1; 5.8%, <i>p</i> = 0.069) and actin protein abundance decreased (-3.2 &#xb1; 5.3%, <i>p</i> = 0.034) with training. Proteomics indicated only 13 sarcoplasmic proteins were altered with training (12 up-regulated, 1 down-regulated, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Bioinformatics indicated no signaling pathways were affected, and proteins involved with metabolism (e.g., ATP-PCr, glycolysis, TCA cycle, or beta-oxidation) were not affected. These data comprehensively describe intramuscular protein adaptations that occur following 10 weeks of high-load resistance training. Although previous data from our laboratory suggests high-volume resistance training enhances the ATP-PCr and glycolytic pathways, we observed different changes in metabolism-related proteins in the current study with high-load training.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
Associate Professor; Director of the Molecular and Applied Sciences Laboratory and Applied Physiology Laboratory
Auburn University

### Submitter
Christopher Vann

### Lab Head
Dr Michael D. Roberts
Associate Professor; Director of the Molecular and Applied Sciences Laboratory and Applied Physiology Laboratory


