### Accession
PXD003843

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Human Brown Adipose Tissue Reveals Utilization of Coupled and Uncoupled Energy Expenditure Pathways

### Description
Human brown adipose tissue (BAT) has become an attractive target to combat the current epidemical spread of obesity and its associated co-morbidities. Currently, information on its functional role is primarily derived from rodent studies. Here, we present the first comparative proteotype analysis of primary human brown adipose tissue versus adjacent white adipose tissue, which reveals significant quantitative differences in protein abundances and in turn differential functional capabilities. The majority of the 318 proteins with increased abundance in BAT are associated with mitochondrial metabolism and confirm the increased oxidative capacity. In addition to uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), the main functional effector for uncoupled respiration, we also detected the mitochondrial creatine kinases (CKMT1A/B, CKMT2), as effective modulators of ATP synthase coupled respiration, to be exclusively expressed in BAT. The abundant expression and utilization of both energy expenditure pathways in parallel highlights the complex functional involvement of BAT in human physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared with the TMT10plex Isobaric Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific, Lot number QD212963) and the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.<br><br>The labeling efficiency of this method was tested with the TMTzero label reagent (Thermo Scientific) followed by mass spectrometric analysis and determined to be higher than 98% (data not shown).

### Data Protocol
The  acquired  raw  data  was  analyzed  with  Proteome  Discoverer  2.1  (Thermo  Scientific)  en  bloc.  For  the  identification  of  the  MS2  spectra,  Sequest  HT  was  utilized,  with  a  10  ppm  precursor  mass  tolerance, 0.8 Da as fragment mass tolerance and as database, the Swissprot part of Uniprot for the species  human  was  used  (version  2016_01;  20145  entries).  As  dynamic  modifications,  oxidation  (DeltaMass="15.99492")  for  all  methionine  residues  was  set  and  acetylation  (DeltaMass="42.01057")  for all protein N-termini. As static modifications were treated, the TMT-label (DeltaMass="229.16293") at the peptide N-terminus and all lysine residius and carbamidomethylation (DeltaMass="57.02146") at all   cysteine   residues.   The   fasle- dicovery-rate   (FDR)   for   the   peptide   and   consecutive   protein   assignments  were  performed  by  the  included  Percolator  software  package,  based  on  a  decoy  database search and a strict cut -off of a 0.01 % FDR was applied on the protein level. Reporter  ion  quantification  was  performed  in  the  MS3  channel  with  a  20 ppm  mass  tolerance  and  corrected for the isotopic impurities provided for TMT lot QD212963. For the area calculations, the top 3  peptides  were  used  and  maximum  fold  change  was  set  to  1000.  No  minimum  vales  were  imputed.  For  the  individual  proteins,  only  unique  and  razor  peptides  were  used  for  quantification.  Overall  the  quantification was normalized by the total peptide amount in each channel. The data was enriched by multiple annotations, including gene ontology (GO) terms directly by Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The  data  was  filtered  to  contain  only  proteins  with  a  FDR  <  0.01  and  being  the  “Master”  or  “Master - candidate”  proteins  in  their  respective  protein  group.  The  dataset  was  exported  to  Spotfire  3.2.2  (Tipco) for further processing. For  the  quantificatio n,  the  normalized  intensities  on  the  protein  level  were  averaged  between  the  technical  replicates.  A  protein  was  only  deemed  as  consistently  and  reproducibly  quantified,  if  a  quantification  value  was  obtained  in  both  technical  replicates  in  more  than  half  of  the  individual  samples.

### Publication Abstract
Human brown adipose tissue (BAT) has become an attractive target to combat the current epidemical spread of obesity and its associated co-morbidities. Currently, information on its functional role is primarily derived from rodent studies. Here, we present the first comparative proteotype analysis of primary human brown adipose tissue versus adjacent white adipose tissue, which reveals significant quantitative differences in protein abundances and in turn differential functional capabilities. The majority of the 318 proteins with increased abundance in BAT are associated with mitochondrial metabolism and confirm the increased oxidative capacity. In addition to uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), the main functional effector for uncoupled respiration, we also detected the mitochondrial creatine kinases (CKMT1A/B, CKMT2), as effective modulators of ATP synthase coupled respiration, to be exclusively expressed in BAT. The abundant expression and utilization of both energy expenditure pathways in parallel highlights the complex functional involvement of BAT in human physiology.

### Keywords
Human, Adipose tissue

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
Head of Proteomics Plattform D-HEST HPT D 77 Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1 8093 Zürich Switzerland

### Submitter
Sebastian Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernd Wollscheid
Head of Proteomics Plattform D-HEST HPT D 77 Auguste-Piccard-Hof 1 8093 Zürich Switzerland


