### Accession
PXD005660

### Title
The interactome of  multiprotein bridging factor 1 in Beauveria bassiana

### Description
Beauveria basiana is a well-known filamentous entomopathogenic fungus. Oxidation tolerance is an important determinant to fungal pathogenicity and biocontrol potential. B. bassiana transcriptional co-activator multiprotein bridging factor 1 (BbMBF1) contributes to fungal resistance to the oxidative stress. The interactome of BbMBF1 was revealed by the qualitative proteomic analysis integrated with the immuno-precipitation. This study is sought to unveil the comprehensive protein interaction of BbMBF1 and isolate the BbMBF1-mediated transcription factor  under oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Beauveria bassiana multiprotein bridging factor 1 mainly functions at the cell nucleus. To culture mycelia under oxidative stress, menadione (a ROS-generating reagent) was added into 50 ml SDB media (4% glucose, 1% peptone and 1% yeast extract) at the final concentration of 0.4 mM, and The SDB media without menadione were used to grow the mycelia free of stress. The mycelia were disrupted by a glass homogenizer on ice and suspended in the pre-cooled buffer A (1 M sorbitol, 7% Ficoll 400, 20% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM CaCl2, and 0.5% Triton X-100). The resultant homogenates were filtered through a Miracloth (Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany), and then centrifuged at 700 g for 10 min. The supernatant was centrifuged at 9,000 g for 30 min and the nuclei were precipitated at the tube bottom. The crude nuclei pellet washed twice with buffer A and collected by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 5 min. To purify the nuclei, the pellet was loaded on the top of 2.0 M sucrose cushion prepared in buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 5 mM MgCl2), and then centrifuged for 20 min at 12,000g. After removing the supernatant, the nuclei were re-suspended in buffer A. Nuclei were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer IV. The protein complex of BbMBF1 is precipitated by co-immunoprecipitation strategy with anti-BbMBF1 antibody.Protein was digested with 10 ng/ul trypsin (dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3) at 37degree Centigrade overnight. Peptides were extracted with solution containing 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% formic acid (FA), and then by 100% ACN. Peptides were dried and dissolved in 0.1% FA.  Peptides were directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and separated at a constant flow rate (300 nl/min) of solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) on a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was installed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The separation was performed with a gradient programm (increasing from 7% to 22% solvent B within 24 min; from 22% to 35% solvent B within 4 min; fro 35% to 80% solvent B within 3 min; and then holding at 80% solvent B for the last 3 min). The separated peptides were analyzed by a Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV. Intact peptides and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 and 17,500 m/z, respectively. Peptides were selected for MS/MS analysis using 30% NCE (normalization collision energy). A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied to the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 104. For MS scans, the m/z values ranged from 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification was processed through Mascot search engine (version 3.2). The tandem mass spectra were searched against the B. bassiana proteome database (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000002762) concatenated with a reverse decoy database as described previously. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine and acetylation on N-terminus protein was specified as variable modifications. Peptide ion score was set as >20.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidation tolerance is an important determinant to predict the virulence and biocontrol potential of Beauveria bassiana, a well-known entomopathogenic fungus. As a transcriptional coactivator, multiprotein bridging factor 1 mediates the activity of transcription factor in diverse physiological processes, and its homolog in B. bassiana (BbMBF1) contributes to fungal oxidation tolerance. In this study, the BbMBF1-interactomes under oxidative stress and normal growth condition were deciphered by mass spectrometry integrated with the immunoprecipitation. BbMBF1p factor has a broad interaction with proteins that are involved in various cellular processes, and this interaction is dynamically regulated by oxidative stress. Importantly, a B. bassiana homolog of yeast AP-1-like transcription factor (BbAP-1) was specifically associated with the BbMBF1-interactome under oxidation and significantly contributed to fungal oxidation tolerance. In addition, qPCR analysis revealed that several antioxidant genes are jointly controlled by BbAP-1 and BbMBF1. Conclusively, it is proposed that BbMBF1p protein mediates BbAP-1p factor to transcribe the downstream antioxidant genes in B. bassiana under oxidative stress. This study demonstrates for the first time a proteomic view of the MBF1-interactome in fungi, and presents an initial framework to probe the transcriptional mechanism involved in fungal response to oxidation, which will provide a new strategy to improve the biocontrol efficacy of B. bassiana.

### Keywords
Multiprotein bridging factor 1, Beauveria bassiana, Interactome

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Sheng-hua Ying

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Hua Ying
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China


