### Accession
PXD035801

### Title
A Proximity Labeling Strategy Enables Spatial Proteomic Analysis of Inter-organelle Membrane Contacts in Living Cells

### Description
Inter-organelle membrane contacts especially mitochondria-endoplasmic reticulum contacts (MERC) conduct important biological functions including exchange of lipids and ions, and modulation of membrane dynamics. Alterations of inter-organelle membrane contacts have been implicated with the pathogenesis of diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases, cancers and type 2 diabetes. However, the protein compositions of inter-organelle contacts remain largely unknown as no biomarker has been discovered and it’s difficult to purify intact inter-organelle contact proteins. Here, we applied a systematic approach to probe the spatial proteome of MERC in living cells by combining the bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay and a proximity labeling strategy based on APEX2. As a result, we discovered 403 highly confident MERC proteins including many well-known MERC proteins and a variety of novel protein species as well. We further validated that WFS1, BAG2, SPTLC1 and GLUD1 are enriched at MERC with high resolution fluorescent imaging. Our study provides a powerful tool to characterize the spatial proteomes of inter-organelle membrane contacts in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and then stained with Coomassie G-250. The whole band was cut and subjected for in-gel digestion. Briefly, the gel was destained with 40% acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 45 min and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 60 min protected from light. The gel pieces were sequentially washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3 and then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. The gels were dried using a SpeedVac and then rehydrated using 100 ng/μL trypsin (Promega, V5113) on ice for 30 min. The proteins were digested at 37°C for overnight and the reaction was quenched with 1.0% TFA. The tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and then the combined digest solution was dried using a SpeedVac. All nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a 100 mm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 mm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on a 75 mm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 mm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides bounded on the column were eluted with a 73-min linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and the solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The segmented gradient was 4–9% B, 3 min; 9–20% B, 22 min; 20–30% B, 20 min; 30-40% B, 15 min; 40-95% B, 3min; 95% B, 10min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 350–1500 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. Data dependent mode was selected as cycle time mode which was set as 2 seconds. The precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 1.6 m/z for fragmentation in the Ion Routing Multipole with normalized collision energy of 28%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at the resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. The target value was 7.50E+04 with a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40 s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Orbitrap Exploris 480 were analyzed with Maxquant (v1.6.7.0) for protein identification against Uniprot human protein database (updated on 03/2020), including common contaminants and reverse protein sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were chosen for variable modifications; carbamidomethyl was chosen for fixed modifications. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both the peptides and proteins. Label free quantification (FLQ) analysis was performed in MaxQuant. The quantifiable data of proteins were considered as 1) no “Reverse”, “Potential contaminant” and “Only identified by site” hits; 2) “MS/MS count” of MERC groups was more than 2 in each replicate. The resulted data was further normalized using the summed quantities of total proteins. The fold changes (fc) of protein abundance between MERC group and other three groups (U2OS, MERC-Ctrl and U2OS-Ctrl) were calculated for the comparative analysis. The final MERC proteins should pass the following strict criteria: 1) averaged fc between MERC and MERC-Ctrl was larger than 2, and at least two replicates with fc larger than 4; 2) averaged fc between MERC and U2OS-Ctrl was larger than 2, and at least two replicates with fc larger than 4; 3) averaged fc between MERC and U2OS was larger than 2, and at least two replicates with fc larger than 4.

### Publication Abstract
Inter-organelle membrane contacts are highly dynamic and act as central hubs for many biological processes, but the protein compositions remain largely unknown due to the lack of efficient tools. Here, we developed BiFCPL to analyze the contact proteome in living cells by a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)-based proximity labeling (PL) strategy. BiFCPL was applied to study mitochondria-endoplasmic reticulum contacts (MERCs) and mitochondria-lipid droplet (LD) contacts. We identified 403 highly confident MERC proteins, including many transiently resident proteins and potential tethers. Moreover, we demonstrated that mitochondria-LD contacts are sensitive to nutrient status. A comparative proteomic analysis revealed that 60 proteins are up- or downregulated at contact sites under metabolic challenge. We verified that SQLE, an enzyme for cholesterol synthesis, accumulates at mitochondria-LD contact sites probably to utilize local ATP for cholesterol synthesis. This work provides an efficient method to identify key proteins at inter-organelle membrane contacts in living cells.

### Keywords
Proteome, Bifc, Apex, Merc

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Maoge Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Xu
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


