### Accession
PXD036424

### Title
Proteomic identification and structural basis for the interaction between sorting nexin SNX17 and PDLIM family proteins

### Description
The sorting nexin SNX17 controls endosome-to-cell surface recycling of diverse transmembrane cargo proteins including integrins, the amyloid precursor protein and lipoprotein receptors. This requires association with the multi-subunit Commander trafficking complex, which depends on the C-terminus of SNX17 through unknown mechanisms. Using affinity enrichment proteomics, we find that a C-terminal peptide of SNX17 is not only sufficient for Commander interaction but also associates with members of the actin-associated PDZ and LIM domain (PDLIM) family. We show that SNX17 contains a type III PSD95/Dlg/Zo1 (PDZ) binding motif (PDZbm) that binds specifically to the PDZ domains of PDLIM family proteins but not to other PDZ domains tested. The structure of the PDLIM7 PDZ domain bound to the SNX17 C-terminus was determined by NMR spectroscopy and reveals an unconventional perpendicular peptide interaction. Mutagenesis confirms the interaction is mediated by specific electrostatic contacts and a uniquely conserved proline-containing loop sequence in the PDLIM protein family. Our results define the mechanism of SNX17-PDLIM interaction and suggest that the PDLIM proteins may play a role in regulating the activity of SNX17 in conjunction with Commander and actin-rich endosomal trafficking domains.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated C-terminal SNX17 wild-type (457HGNFAFEGIGDEDL470) and SNX17 L470G (457HGNFAFEGIGDEDG470) peptides were resuspended at a concentration of 1 mg/mL in 400 μM ammonium hydroxide in a volume of 50 μL and incubated with 20 μL of streptavidin resin (Pierce Thermo) pre-washed with 100 μL PBS and equilibrated with 300 μL of Lysis Buffer. A total of 9 million of (or 10cm at 80% confluency) HEK293T cells were lysed in 1 mL of Lysis Buffer (1% (v/v) digitonin, 20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) Glycerol, 0.1 mM EDTA) and protein concentration measured by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Pierce). The pre-washed peptides bound to streptavidin resin were incubated with lysate containing a total of 1 mg protein for 2 h at 4C with rotating. Lysate was removed by centrifugation and the resin washed with 20x 300 μL of Wash Buffer (0.1% (v/v digitonin, 20mM Tris (pH 7.4), 60mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) Glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA). Protein was eluted from resin using 30 L of 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (ThermoFisher) and 500 mM chloroacetamide (Merck) for 30 min at 37C with shaking. Eluates were diluted to 2 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 1 μg of trypsin (ThermoFisher) overnight at 37C. The digested material was acidified to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and peptides were desalted with in-house made stage-tips containing 2x plugs of 3MTM EmporeTM SDB-XC substrate (SUPELCO) (Hock et al., 2020; Kulak et al., 2014). Stage-tips were activated with 100 % acetonitrile (ACN) and washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% (v/v) ACN prior to binding the peptides. Samples were eluted in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA and dried completely in a SpeedVac. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA , 2% ACN, and transferred to autosampler vials for analysis by high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC)-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher) connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) and nano-electrospray ionisation (ESI) interface by the Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility (MMSPF). Instrument parameters were as follows. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Dionex-C18 trap column 75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 5 μl/min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (Dionex-C18 analytical column 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nl/min using a 65 min (total run length) non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN, 5% DMSO) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN, 5% DMSO). Data was collected in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode using m/z 300–1650 as MS scan range, rCID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion with of 30 seconds was applied for repeated precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.6.10.43 against canonical, reviewed and isoform variants of human protein sequences in FASTA format (Uniprot, January 2019). The default settings: “LFQ” and “Match between runs” were enabled. N- terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications while cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Computation of SNX17DEDL/SNX17DEDG enrichment was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.10.43) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Peptides labelled by MaxQuant as ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’ or ‘potential contaminant’ were removed and only those proteins quantified based on >1 unique peptide were considered for further analysis. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and rows having less than 3 valid values in the enrichment group (SNX17DEDL) were removed and the missing values in the SNX17DEDG control group were imputed to values consistent with the limit of detection. The mean log2 LFQ intensities for proteins detected in each experimental group, along with p-values, were calculated using a two-sided two-tailed t-test. Significance was determined by permutation-based FDR statistics (Tyanova et al., 2016) where the s0 factor was iteratively modified to exclude all identifications enriched in the control (SNX17DEDG) experiment, yielding an s0 of 1 at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The sorting nexin SNX17 controls endosomal recycling of transmembrane cargo proteins including integrins, the amyloid precursor protein, and lipoprotein receptors. This requires association with the Commander trafficking complex and depends on the C terminus of SNX17 through unknown mechanisms. Using proteomics, we find that the SNX17 C terminus is sufficient for Commander interaction and also associates with members of the PDZ and LIM domain (PDLIM) family. SNX17 contains a type III PDZ binding motif that binds specifically to the PDLIM proteins. The structure of the PDLIM7 PDZ domain bound to the SNX17 C terminus reveals an unconventional perpendicular peptide interaction mediated by electrostatic contacts and a uniquely conserved proline-containing loop sequence in the PDLIM protein family. Our results define the mechanism of SNX17-PDLIM interaction and suggest that the PDLIM proteins may play a role in regulating the activity of SNX17 in conjunction with Commander and actin-rich endosomal trafficking domains.

### Keywords
Retriever, Commander, Snx17, Pdz domain, Pdlim, Endosome

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia.
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia.


