### Accession
PXD039514

### Title
Evaluation of therapeutic effects of tetramethylpyrazine nitrone in Alzheimer’s disease mouse model and proteomics analysis

### Description
The pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is multifactorial with characteristic extracellular accumulation of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and intraneuronal aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain. Development of disease-modifying treatment for AD has been challenging. Recent studies suggest that deleterious alterations in neurovascular cells happens in parallel with Aβ accumulation, inducing tau pathology and necroptosis. Therefore, therapies targeting cellular Aβ and tau pathologies may provide a more effective strategy of disease intervention. Tetramethylpyrazine nitrone (TBN) is a nitrone derivative of tetramethylpyrazine, an active ingredient from Ligusticum wallichii Franchat (Chuanxiong). We previously showed that TBN is a potent scavenger of free radicals with multi-targeted neuroprotective effects in rat and monkey models of ischemic stroke. The present study aimed to investigate the anti-AD properties of TBN. We employed AD-related cellular model (N2a/APPswe) and transgenic mouse model (3×Tg-AD mouse) for mechanistic and behavioral studies. Our results showed that TBN markedly improved cognitive functions and reduced Aβ and hyperphosphorylated tau levels in mouse model. Further investigation of the underlying mechanisms revealed that TBN promoted non amyloidogenic processing pathway of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in N2a/APPswe in vitro. Moreover, TBN preserved synapses from dendritic spine loss and upregulated synaptic protein expressions in 3×Tg-AD mice. Proteomic analysis of 3×Tg-AD mouse hippocampal and cortical tissues showed that TBN induced neuroprotective effects through modulating mitophagy, MAPK and mTOR pathways. In particular, TBN significantly upregulated PINK1, a key protein for mitochondrial homeostasis, implicating PINK1 as a potential therapeutic target for AD. In summary, TBN improved cognitive functions in AD-related mouse model, inhibited Aβ production and tau hyperphosphorylation, and rescued synaptic loss and neuronal damage. Multiple mechanisms underlie the anti-AD effects of TBN including the modulation of APP processing, mTOR signaling and PINK1-related mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis was performed according to the protocol described in our previous study (Zhou, Wang, et al., 2019; Zhou, Xiao, et al., 2019). The procedure including sample preparation, Tandem mass Tag (TMT) labeling, NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis and bioinformatics analysis. In briefly, a total of 100 mg protein sample (6 mice in each experimental group, 16.7 μg of protein from per mouse) extracted from hippocampus or cerebral cortex was digested with trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA), and then acidified with pure formic acid (FA) to achieve supernatant (final pH 1-2). Subsequently, the protein samples were labeled with TMT isobaric (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA) after desalted, and then divided into 8 fractions by high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, NJ, USA). The fractions was dried to achieve the lyophilized peptide using a vacuum centrifuge. The peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid with 2% acetonitrile), and then loaded on ChromXP C18 trap column to process the high performance liquid chromatography (Eksigent nanoLC-UltraTM 2D system) and mass spectrometry (SCIEX, Concord, ON).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mgf peaklist with PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), and searched against UniProt-Mus musculus database (released in July 2017). The ratios of altered proteins in each group were set as group AD/WT, group TBN/WT and group TBN/AD. The ratio of TBN/AD were considered to be the fold change. It was defined as significant up-regulation or down-regulation when fold change≥1.2 or <0.83. Bioinformatics analysis were performed by DAVID Bioinformatics resources 6.8 and Cytoscape (3.6.0)

### Publication Abstract
The pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is multifactorial with characteristic extracellular accumulation of amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) and intraneuronal aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain. Development of disease-modifying treatment for AD has been challenging. Recent studies suggest that deleterious alterations in neurovascular cells happens in parallel with A&#x3b2; accumulation, inducing tau pathology and necroptosis. Therefore, therapies targeting cellular A&#x3b2; and tau pathologies may provide a more effective strategy of disease intervention. Tetramethylpyrazine nitrone (TBN) is a nitrone derivative of tetramethylpyrazine, an active ingredient from <i>Ligusticum wallichii Franchat</i> (Chuanxiong). We previously showed that TBN is a potent scavenger of free radicals with multi-targeted neuroprotective effects in rat and monkey models of ischemic stroke. The present study aimed to investigate the anti-AD properties of TBN. We employed AD-related cellular model (N2a/APPswe) and transgenic mouse model (3&#xd7;Tg-AD mouse) for mechanistic and behavioral studies. Our results showed that TBN markedly improved cognitive functions and reduced A&#x3b2; and hyperphosphorylated tau levels in mouse model. Further investigation of the underlying mechanisms revealed that TBN promoted non-amyloidogenic processing pathway of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in N2a/APPswe <i>in vitro</i>. Moreover, TBN preserved synapses from dendritic spine loss and upregulated synaptic protein expressions in 3&#xd7;Tg-AD mice. Proteomic analysis of 3&#xd7;Tg-AD mouse hippocampal and cortical tissues showed that TBN induced neuroprotective effects through modulating mitophagy, MAPK and mTOR pathways. In particular, TBN significantly upregulated PINK1, a key protein for mitochondrial homeostasis, implicating PINK1 as a potential therapeutic target for AD. In summary, TBN improved cognitive functions in AD-related mouse model, inhibited A&#x3b2; production and tau hyperphosphorylation, and rescued synaptic loss and neuronal damage. Multiple mechanisms underlie the anti-AD effects of TBN including the modulation of APP processing, mTOR signaling and PINK1-related mitophagy.

### Keywords
Amyloid beta, Alzheimer’s disease, Tetramethylpyrazine nitrone, Proteomic analysis, Pink1.

### Affiliations
University of Macau
Guangzhou Eighth People’s Hospital Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
xinhua zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Xinhua Zhou
Guangzhou Eighth People’s Hospital Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.


