### Accession
PXD014288

### Title
Sensitivity and protein digestion course of proteomic Filter Aided Sample Preparation

### Description
1. Sensitivity of FASP was tested using SDS lysates from HeLa cells and mouse brain. Peptides were analyzed using a QExactive HF-X instrument. We found that FASP allows effective processing samples at the low and sub-microgram range. 2. Whole cell lysates of Hela cells were processed with FASP using single or double, consecutive or successive, digestion with LysC or trypsin.  The generated peptides were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The results show that short digestion times apparently do not affect the number of identified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 50 g total protein were processed using either FASP or MED FASP method, with some modifications

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant for spetra searches and Total Protein Approach for protein quantification

### Publication Abstract
Sensitivity of FASP was tested using SDS lysates from HeLa cells and mouse brain. Peptides were analyzed using a QExactive HF-X instrument. Whole cell lysates of Hela cells were processed with FASP using single or double, consecutive or successive, digestion with LysC or trypsin. The generated peptides were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. These datasets accompany "Filter Aided Sample Preparation - A Tutorial" (Wi&#x15b;niewski, 2019).

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Fasp

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


