### Accession
PXD011657

### Title
IAP-LC-MS/MS to screen non-histone tri-methylation

### Description
using a high throughput mass spectrometry method to identify non-histone lysine tri-methylaiton proteins

### Sample Protocol
OVCAR5 cell lysates were proteolytically digested, then purified over a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. After dissolving in IAP buffer, the recovered peptides were purified with tri-methylation-specific antibodies. Finally, the enriched peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS to identify the tri-methylation sites in corresponding proteins.

### Data Protocol
Following mass spectrometry data acquisition, RAW files were converted into mzXML format and processed using a suite of soft-ware tools developed in-house for the analysis of large-scale pro-teomics datasets. All precursors selected for MS/MS fragmentation were confirmed using algorithms to detect and correct errors in monoisotopic peak assignment and refine precursor ion mass mea-surement. All MS/MS spectra were then exported as individual DTA files and searched using SEQUEST (v. 28 (rev. 12), 1998–2007) against the human database (20110802_REV_20110627human. fasta, NCBI, June 27, 2011; contains 34,895 forward proteins) and the mouse database (20110802_REV_20110628mouse.fasta, NCBI, June 28, 2011; contains 30,120 forward proteins) and their reversed complements. A precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 1.0 Da (collision-induced dissociation spectra) or 0.02 Da (higher-energy collisional dissociation spectra) were allowed. One tryptic terminus was required, and four missed cleavages were allowed. Static carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02146374) was required, and appropriate lysine or arginine modifications (14.0156500642 for monomethyl and 28.0313001284 for dimethyl) and methionine oxidation (15.9949146221) were dynamically allowed with a maximum of four modifications of one type per peptide. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate using linear discriminant analysis (40) in combination with the target-decoy strategy. Sites of lysine and arginine methylation were determined using a slight variation on the Ascore algorithm (41), with sites scoring 13 consid-ered confidently assigned. In quantification studies, the intensity of enriched methyl peptides was generated using Skyline (version 1.4) (42) in MS1 full-scan mode. The intensity of identified peptides was represented by the peak area of the extracted ion chromatogram of their monoisotopic peaks. The peptide with the highest intensity was picked to represent one meth-ylation site of a protein if multiple peptides were identified for the same site. Extracted ion chromatograms of identified methylated peptides that showed abundance changes. For statistical analysis, a two-tailed t test was performed for all methyl-peptides representing unique methylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ms, Lysine trimethylaiton

### Affiliations
BIDMC, Harvard medical school
Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
jianping guo

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyi Wei
Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School


