### Accession
PXD015692

### Title
Characterizing the interactome of human Arginyl-tRNA Synthethase

### Description
Prior work revealed nuclear-localized aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs)  that checked newly synthesized tRNAs for charging before export to the cytoplasm. To reveal other  functions, we sought to identify nuclear proteins that interact with arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS) in the nucleus. Serine/Arginine Repetitive Matrix Protein 2 (SRRM2), which is stored with RNA splicing apparatus components in nuclear speckle condensates, was found as a consistent interaction partner that co localized with SRRM2 ArgRS in nuclear speckles. Dynamic photo-bleaching experiments showed that, consistent with condensate properties, SRRM2 has a fluctuating appearance in speckles. Knock down of ArgRS impeded SRRM2 speckle trafficking and, coincidently, altered splicing processing of pre-mRNA transcripts. Among the altered spliced variants, those of tRNA synthetase family members were prominent. Thus, nuclear ArgRS shapes the dynamics of a protein in  class of nuclear condensates. Also, the work expands the repertoire of nuclear tRNA synthetase roles to include regulation of RNA splicing, including of aaRS family member transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
Two days prior to the experiment, 1x10¬7 293T or 5x106 HepG2 cells were seeded on a 15 cm tissue culture dish. Cells were lysed for 20 minutes under mild conditions in 1% IGE-PAL CA-630 (Sigma Aldrich) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) with protease (Pierce Protein Biology) and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce Protein Biology). Insoluble components were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000x g for 20 minutes. Protein A/G agarose beads (30 µL, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were equilibrated in TBS. Cell lysate was added to the beads together with 2 µL antibody against ArgRS (Biorbyt). For immunoprecipitation of SRRM2, antibody against SRRM2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was conjugated to beads using the Co-Immunoprecipitation kit (Pierce Protein Biology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Immunoprecipitation was performed for 3 h (ArgRS) or overnight (SRRM2). After incubation, the beads were washed twice with TBS containing 0.1% IGE-PAL CA-630 and twice with TBS only. Proteomes were eluted by incubation in 25 µL 2 M urea, 5 ng/µL trypsin (Pierce Protein Biology), 1 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH=7.5. After 30 minutes at room temperature, 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) was added for alkylation of cysteine residues to a total volume of 125 µL. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C and quenched with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) the next morning. Stage tip desalting was done using C18 spin tips with a 100 µL bed (Pierce Protein Biology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The digested samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The digest was injected directly onto a 20 cm, 100 µm ID column packed with Aqua 3 µm C18 resin (Phenomenex). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 400 nl/min on an Easy nLCII (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1-35% B over 80 minutes, an increase to 80% B over 25 minutes and held at 80% B for 5 minutes prior to returning to 1% B was used for 120 minutes total run time. Column was re-equilibrated with buffer A prior to the injection of sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.5 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 70 K resolution with a mass range of 400 to 1800 m/z. The 10 most abundant ions per cycle were selected for MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was used with exclusion duration of 15 seconds. Three biological replicates were measured sequentially.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed with MaxQuant 1.5.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and Perseus 1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016) as described by Keilhauer et al(Keilhauer et al., 2015) to identify ArgRS interaction partners. In brief, raw files were searched against Homo sapiens reference proteome UP000005640_9606 (UniProt Consortium, 2019) (Uniprot) with the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant. Default settings were used for label-free quantification (LFQ). Phosphorylated peptides (STY) were included when searching for nuclear interaction partners of ArgRS. The resulting protein groups file was loaded into Perseus and filtered for “reverse”, “potential contaminants”, and “only identified by site”. The log2 values of LFQ intensities were calculated and all proteins with less than two valid values/group discarded. Missing values were replaced from a normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8) and Welch’s t-test was used to estimate t-test significance and difference.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to perturbations such as inflammation by sensing changes in metabolite levels. Especially prominent is arginine, which has known connections to the inflammatory response. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, enzymes that catalyse the first step of protein synthesis, can also mediate cell signalling. Here we show that depletion of arginine during inflammation decreased levels of nuclear-localized arginyl-tRNA synthetase (ArgRS). Surprisingly, we found that nuclear ArgRS interacts and co-localizes with serine/arginine repetitive matrix protein 2 (SRRM2), a spliceosomal and nuclear speckle protein, and that decreased levels of nuclear ArgRS correlated with changes in condensate-like nuclear trafficking of SRRM2 and splice-site usage in certain genes. These splice-site usage changes cumulated in the synthesis of different protein isoforms that altered cellular metabolism and peptide presentation to immune cells. Our findings uncover a mechanism whereby an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase cognate to a key amino acid that is metabolically controlled during inflammation modulates the splicing machinery.

### Keywords
Arginine, Trna, Trna syntethase

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA

### Submitter
Haissi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Schimmel
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA


