### Accession
PXD036511

### Title
ER-Golgi membrane contact sites control the formation of plasma membrane lipid nanodomains required for anthrax intoxication

### Description
To promote infections, pathogens exploit host cell machineries including structural elements of the plasma membrane. Studying these interactions and identifying molecular players is an ideal way to gain insights into the fundamental biology of the host cell. Here, we used the anthrax toxin to screen a library of 1500 regulatory, cell surface, and membrane trafficking genes for their involvement in the intoxication process. We found that ER-Golgi localized proteins TMED2 and TMED10 are required for toxin oligomerization at the plasma-membrane of human cells, an essential step dependant on localization to cholesterol-rich lipid nanodomains. Biochemical, morphological and mechanistic analyses showed that TMED2 and TMED10 are essential components of a complex that operates the exchange of both cholesterol and ceramides at ER-Golgi membrane contact sites. Overall, this study of anthrax intoxication led to the discovery that lipid compositional remodelling at ER-Golgi interfaces fully controls the formation of functional membrane nanodomains at the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE gel slices were washed twice in 50% ethanol and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples reduction was performed with 10 mM dithioerythritol for 1 h at 56 °C. A washing-drying step as described above was repeated before performing sample alkylation with 55 mM Iodoacetamide for 45 min at 37 °C in the dark. Samples were washed-dried again and digested overnight at 37 °C using Mass Spectrometry grade trypsin at a concentration of 12.5 ng/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 mM calcium chloride. Resulting peptides were extracted in 70% ethanol, 5% formic acid twice for 20 min with permanent shaking. Samples were further dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C. Peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For TMT labelling, peptides were first reconstituted in 8 μL HEPES 100 mM (pH 8.5) containing 10 ng trypsin-digested Chicken Ovalbumin. Labeling was performed by adding 3 μL of TMT solution (20 µg/μL in pure acetonitrile) and incubating samples at room temperature for 1.5 h. Reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15 min. TMT-labelled samples were then pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent OFF-GEL 3100 system. Resulting fractions were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Each individual fraction was resuspended in 10 μL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer.  A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 μm-100 Å, 2 cm x 75 μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250 nL/min over 150 min. biphasic gradient on a 50cm long in-house packed capillary column (75μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using a 3 seconds cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 37.5% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions were acquired with a resolution 50,000 (at 200 m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 120 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda (Dorfer et al., 2014) and MS Fragger (Kong et al., 2017) in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (Uniprot Release: 2019_06) and common contaminants including chicken Ovalbumin (Uniprot Accession Number: P01012). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation (M) was considered as a variable one. Resulting text files were processed through in-house written R scripts (version 3.6.3) (Schindelin et al., 2012). The unnormalized abundances calculated by Proteome Discoverer were transformed in log2 and subtracted to obtain ratios. The Z-scores of the ratio of ratios [F2 (siTMED2/10/siCtl) / Input (siTMED2/10/siCtl)] were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmed10, Anthrax toxin, Vapa, Osbp, Tmed2, Nanodomains, Membrane contact sites, P24 family

### Affiliations
Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

### Submitter
Muhammad Umair Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr F. Gisou van der Goot
Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


