### Accession
PXD006559

### Title
Proteogenomics of ex vivo-activated platelets.

### Description
Platelets are major players in the process of intravascular thrombus formation. Current therapeutic strategies still fail to prevent thrombotic coronary events in a substantial number of patients, indicating that the complex mechanisms modulating platelet response during activation are not fully elucidated. The evidence that platelets are capable of de novo protein synthesis has raised the issue of whether and how these resident mRNAs are regulated in circulating platelets. Among the several mechanisms potentially involved, mRNA splicing may be relevant. Purified platelet-rich plasmas from healthy volunteers were collected and in vitro activated with collagen or Thrombin Receptor Activating Peptide (TRAP). Transcriptome profiling by RNA-Seq and in silico intron representation analysis were applied to search for the presence of pre-mRNA molecules and splicing events affected by platelet activation. HiRIEF LC-MS allowed platelet proteome characterization at deep coverage to investigate a possible correlation between splicing events and protein levels. By comparing computational and wet-lab analyses it was possible to identify a set of transcripts influenced at both intron and protein level.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet purification and activation  Blood from 15 healthy voluntaries was centrifuged at 160 × g for 15 min at room temperature within 15 minutes from sampling. The obtained platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was then filtered using a specific leukocyte removal system. Purified platelets from each donor were split in 5 aliquots: a first aliquot was processed immediately after preparation and served as control (baseline: T0), two aliquots were treated with collagen (COLL, 60μg/mL) or Thrombin Receptor Activating Peptide (TRAP 25μM) under continuous stirring for 120 minutes at 37°C before processing. Platelet aggregation was verified in all samples by the formation of macroaggregates and confirmed by light transmission aggregometry. After two hours of stimulation, platelets were centrifuged at 2000 x g at 4 °C, washed 3 times with PBS and then stored at -80°C until further processing. Protein extraction and proteomics sample preparation Purified platelets from each of the 15 donors were subjected to total RNA and protein extraction in parallel using the mirVana PARIS kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 600 μl of ice-cold Disruption Buffer were added to each platelet aliquot. From the initial amount (600ul) 250 μl were taken from each aliquot for further protein analyses. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford Protein Assay and EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit. Protein from 5 donors was pooled, yielding 3 replicates for each condition (CTRL, COLL and TRAP). Protein pools were reduced by DTT, alkylated by iodo-acetamide (IAA) and digested by trypsin following the FASP protocol. The resulting peptides were labelled with TMT 10 as follows: 126 – CTRL rep1; 127N – CTRL rep2; 127C – CTRL rep3; 128N – COLL rep1; 128C – COLL rep2; 129N – COLL rep3; 129C – TRAP rep1; 130N – TRAP rep2; 130C- TRAP rep3; 131 – an equimolar pool of all 3 CTRL replicates. After labelling and sample pooling, peptides were cleaned by SCX-SPE and a sample aliquot of 350 µg was subjected to HiRIEF separation using GE Healthcare IPG strip of pI range 3-10, resulting in 72 fractions.  Each fraction was run in LC-MS using a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo) and a nano EASY-Spray analytical column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo) online with a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1600 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 150ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using Sequest under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 against the uniprot human reference proteome database downloaded from uniprot.org on 2015-04-07. Settings included a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 7. Oxidation of Methionine was used as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT6plex on peptide N-terminus and on Lysines used as static modifications. Isobaric tag based quantitative analysis was done using the "Reporter Ions Quantifier" node in PD.

### Publication Abstract
Platelet activation triggers thrombus formation in physiological and pathological conditions, such as acute coronary syndromes. Current therapies still fail to prevent thrombotic events in numerous patients, indicating that the mechanisms modulating platelet response during activation need to be clarified. The evidence that platelets are capable of de novo protein synthesis in response to stimuli raised the issue of how megakaryocyte-derived mRNAs are regulated in these anucleate cell fragments. Proteogenomics was applied here to investigate this phenomeon in platelets activated in vitro with Collagen or Thrombin Receptor Activating Peptide. Combining proteomics and transcriptomics allowed in depth platelet proteome characterization, revealing a significant effect of either stimulus on proteome composition. In silico analysis revealed the presence of resident immature RNAs in resting platelets, characterized by retained introns, while unbiased proteogenomics correlated intron removal by RNA splicing with changes on proteome composition upon activation. This allowed identification of a set of transcripts undergoing maturation by intron removal during activation and resulting in accumulation of the corresponding peptides at exon-exon junctions. These results indicate that RNA splicing events occur in platelets during activation and that maturation of specific pre-mRNAs is part of the activation cascade, contributing to a dynamic fine-tuning of the transcriptome.

### Keywords
Human, Platelet activation, Cytoplasmic pre-mrna splicing, Proteome

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Cancer proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Cancer proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet


