### Accession
PXD026062

### Title
Identification of AcpP-MukB binding sites using cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) complexes contribute ubiquitously to chromosome organization-segregation. SMC proteins have a conserved architecture, with a dimerization hinge and an ATPase head domain separated by a long antiparallel intramolecular coiled-coil. Dimeric SMC proteins interact with essential accessory proteins, kleisins that bridge the two subunits of an SMC dimer, and HAWK/KITE accessory proteins that interact with kleisins. The ATPase activity of the Escherichia coli SMC protein, MukB, is essential for in vivo function and is regulated by interactions with its dimeric kleisin, MukF, and KITE, MukE. Here we demonstrate that, in addition, MukB interacts with Acyl Carrier Protein (AcpP) that has essential functions in fatty acid synthesis. We characterize the AcpP interaction site at the joint of the MukB coiled-coil and show that the interaction is essential for MukB ATPase and for MukBEF function in vivo. Therefore, AcpP is an essential co-factor for MukBEF action in chromosome organization-segregation

### Sample Protocol
BS3 (1 mM) was added to samples of AcpP depleted MukBEF (reconstituted from individually purified proteins) in the presence and absence of recombinant AcpP, AMPPNP (1 mM) was also included. Samples were allowed to react for 2 hrs at RT before quenching with ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM). Samples were then denatured with urea (4 M) in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM) before addition of TCEP (10 mM) followed by 2-Chloroacetamide (50 mM). Samples were then pre-digested with LysC (1 g/100 g of sample) for 2 hrs before overnight digestion with trypsin (1 ug/40 ug of sample). Tryptic digestion was stopped with the addition of formic acid (5%). Digested peptides were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,200rpm at 4°C to remove undigested material. Supernatant was loaded onto handmade C18 stage tip, pre-activated with 100% acetonitrile by centrifugation at 4,000rpm at room temperature. Peptides were washed twice in TFA 0.1%, eluted in 50% acetonitrile / 0.1% TFA and speed-vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended into 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated by nano liquid chromatography  (Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000)  coupled in line a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 PepMac100 precolumn (300µm i.d.x5mm, 100Å, ThermoFischer Scientific) using Solvent A (0.1% Formic acid, HPLC grade water). The peptides were further separated onto an Easy-Spray RSLC C18 column (75um i.d., 50cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a 120 minutes linear gradient (15% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile)) at a flow rate 200nl/min. The raw data were acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Scan range 350-1500m/z, resolution 70,000; AGC target, 3e6, maximum injection time, 50ms). The 20 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% of normalized collision energy. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120ms with fixed mass at 180m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned and 1+ ions. The dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using pLink software version 2.3.9 against a protein sequence database containing 965 protein entries, including 678 Escherichia coli proteins (Uniprot database release of 2020-09), 283 common contaminants and His-tagged MukB-FL (full-length) (DEF-USER1), His-tagged AcpP (DEF-USER2), His-tagged MukE (DEF_USER3) and His-tagged MukF (DEF-USER4) proteins. During pLink2 searches, BS3 crosslinker was selected, cysteines (C) were considered to be fully carbamidomethylated (+57,0215, statically added), methionine (M) to be fully oxidised (+15,9949, dynamically added), all N-terminal residues to be acetylated (+42,0106, dynamically added). Three missed cleavages were permitted. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 20ppm on the precursor and fragment ions. Data was filtered at FDR below 5% at PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Structural Maintenance of Chromosomes (SMC) complexes act ubiquitously to compact DNA linearly, thereby facilitating chromosome organization-segregation. SMC proteins have a conserved architecture, with a dimerization hinge and an ATPase head domain separated by a long antiparallel intramolecular coiled-coil. Dimeric SMC proteins interact with essential accessory proteins, kleisins that bridge the two subunits of an SMC dimer, and HAWK/KITE proteins that interact with kleisins. The ATPase activity of the Escherichia coli SMC protein, MukB, which is essential for its in vivo function, requires its interaction with the dimeric kleisin, MukF that in turn interacts with the KITE protein, MukE. Here we demonstrate that, in addition, MukB interacts specifically with Acyl Carrier Protein (AcpP) that has essential functions in fatty acid synthesis. We characterize the AcpP interaction at the joint of the MukB coiled-coil and show that the interaction is necessary for MukB ATPase and for MukBEF function in vivo.

### Keywords
Structural maintenance of chromosomes, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, Mukb, Acpp

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Marjorie  Fournier

### Lab Head
Dr David Sherratt
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford


