### Accession
PXD016396

### Title
Sus scrofa, skeletal muscle, LC-MSMS

### Description
Skeletal muscle were collected from pigs treated in the control group, the Lys deficiency group and the Lys rescue group. Then, the samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were excised and transferred into new tubes containing tissue lysis buffer (1%SDS, 8mol/L urea) and 1 mmol/L PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich, St.Louis, MO, USA). Then, the lysates were homogenized for 4 min using a TissueLyser (CK1000, Thmorgan, Beijing, China) and incubated on ice for 30 min. The lysates were centrifuged at 12000 g and 4℃ for 15 min, and the supernatants were collected. The concentration of proteins was quantified by using a BCA kit (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Proteins were treated with TECP (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and  iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Then,the peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ regent according to the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Then, the peptides were separated by ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) with a Nano Aquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and analyzed in combination with a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectro meter (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo-Fisher, Waltham MA, USA) and an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) for Nano LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched using Protein Discoverer Software 2.1 against the Sus scrofa musculus database (UniProt, https://WWW.UniProt.org). The false discovery rate (FDR) applied to the control peptide level was defined as lower than 1%. For quantiative analysis, the 0.66<fold change<1.5 and p-value<0.05 were the threshold values used to identify the differentially expressed proteins. All identified proteins were annotated and classified by gene ontology (GO, http://www.geneontology.org), and then, the differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by GOATOOLS 0.6.5 (http://pypi.org/project/goatools/) for the GO enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
As the first limiting amino acid, lysine (Lys) has been thought to promote muscle fiber hypertrophy by increasing protein synthesis. However, the functions of Lys seem far more complex than that. Despite the fact that satellite cells (SCs) play an important role in skeletal muscle growth, the communication between Lys and SCs remains unclear. In this study, we investigated whether SCs participate directly in Lys-induced skeletal muscle growth and whether the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway was activated both in vivo and in vitro to mediate SC functions in response to Lys supplementation. Subsequently, the skeletal muscle growth of piglets was controlled by dietary Lys supplementation. Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis showed activated SCs were required for longissimus dorsi muscle growth, and this effect was accompanied by mTORC1 pathway upregulation. Furthermore, SC proliferation was governed by medium Lys concentrations, and the mTORC1 pathway was significantly enhanced in vitro. After verifying that rapamycin inhibits the mTORC1 pathway and suppresses SC proliferation, we conclude that Lys is not only a molecular building block for protein synthesis but also a signal that activates SCs to manipulate muscle growth via the mTORC1 pathway.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sus scrofa, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University
South China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Cheng-long Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Xiu-qi Wang
College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University


