### Accession
PXD014124

### Title
Improved Sensitivity in Low-Input Proteomics using Micro-Pillar Array-based Chromatography

### Description
Capitalizing on the massive increase in sample concentrations which are produced by extremely low elution volumes, nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS is currently the most sensitive analytical technology for the comprehensive characterization of complex protein samples. However, despite tremendous technological improvements made in the production and the packing of monodisperse spherical particles for nano-flow HPLC, current state-of-the-art systems still suffer from limits in operation at the maximum potential of the technology. With the recent introduction of the µPAC system, which provides perfectly ordered micro-pillar array based chromatographic support materials, completely new chromatographic concepts for optimization towards the needs of ultra-sensitive proteomics become available. Here we report on a series of benchmarking experiments comparing the performance of a commercially available 50 cm micro-pillar array column to a widely used nano-flow HPLC column for the proteomics analysis of 10 ng tryptic HeLa cell digest.  Comparative analysis of LC-MS/MS-data corroborated that micro-pillar array cartridges provide outstanding chromatographic performance and excellent retention time stability, which substantially increase sensitivity in the analysis of low-input proteomics samples, and thus repeatedly yielded almost twice as many unique peptide and unique protein group identifications when compared to conventional nano-flow HPLC columns.

### Sample Protocol
For these experiments, we installed the respective pre- and analytical columns (i.e. µPAC RP18, 50 cm, Pharamfluidics; PepMap C18, 3 μm, 75µm x 50 cm, Thermo) in identical LC-ESI-MS/MS setups, all comprising an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Dionex – Thermo), coupled to the exact same Q Exactive HF-X mass-spectrometer (Thermo). The samples (10 ng/µL HeLa digest, Pierce; in 0.1% formic acid) were injected using a 1µL sample-loop, trapped on a pre-column and then separated by developing two-step linear gradients of increasing length, at a fixed flow-rate of 250 nL/min: from 2% to 20% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 45, 90 and 135 min., followed by 20% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid within 15, 30 and 45 min (i.e. 60, 120 or 180 min total gradient time), respectively. All three gradient programs were completed by a final gradient step from 32 to 78% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, within 5 min. The mass-spectrometer was operated in positive mode and set to the following acquisition parameters: MS1 resolution = 60000, MS1 AGC-target = 1E6, MS1 maximum inject time = 60 ms, MS1 scan range = 350-1500 m/z, MS2 resolution = 15000, 45000 or 60000, MS2 AGC-target = 2E5, maximum inject time = 105 ms, TopN = 10, isolation window = 0.7 m/z, MS2 scan range = 200-2000 m/z, normalized collision energy = 28, minimum AGC target =1E4, intensity threshold 9.5e4, pre-cursor charge states = 2-6, peptide match = preferred, exclude isotopes = ON, dynamic exclusion = 45 s, “if idle…” = do not pick others. All experiments were performed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
all LC-MS/MS raw-data were processed and identified using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.522, Thermo Scientific). For this, MS/MS spectra were extracted from the raw-files and searched against the Swissprot protein database, restricting taxonomy to Homo sapiens and including common contaminant protein sequences (20.341 sequences; 11,361,548 residues) using MSAmanda (Engine version v2.0.0.12368). The search engine parameters were set as follows: peptide mass tolerance= ±7 ppm, fragment mass tolerance= 15ppm, cleavage specificity= trypsin, missed cleavage sites= 2, fixed modifications= carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications= oxidation of methionine. Results of the MS/MS search engine were filtered to 1 % FDR on protein and peptide level using the Elutator algorithm, implemented as node to Proteome Discoverer 2.3. Identified peptide features were extracted and quantified using the in-house-developed Proteome Discover-node apQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Capitalizing on the massive increase in sample concentrations which are produced by extremely low elution volumes, nanoliquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS) is currently one of the most sensitive analytical technologies for the comprehensive characterization of complex protein samples. However, despite tremendous technological improvements made in the production and the packing of monodisperse spherical particles for nanoflow high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), current state-of-the-art systems still suffer from limits in operation at the maximum potential of the technology. With the recent introduction of the &#x3bc;PAC system, which provides perfectly ordered micropillar array based chromatographic support materials, completely new chromatographic concepts for optimization toward the needs of ultrasensitive proteomics become available. Here we report on a series of benchmarking experiments comparing the performance of a commercially available 50 cm micropillar array column to a widely used nanoflow HPLC column for the proteomics analysis of 10 ng of tryptic HeLa cell digest. Comparative analysis of LC-MS/MS-data corroborated that micropillar array cartridges provide outstanding chromatographic performance, excellent retention time stability, and increased sensitivity in the analysis of low-input proteomics samples and thus repeatedly yielded almost twice as many unique peptide and unique protein group identifications when compared to conventional nanoflow HPLC columns.

### Keywords
Nano-lc-esi-ms/ms nano-flow hplc hela cell digest

### Affiliations
IMBA
IMP - IMBA Protein Chemistry Facility Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Otto Hudecz

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
IMP - IMBA Protein Chemistry Facility Dr. Bohrgasse 3 1030 Vienna Austria


