### Accession
PXD028718

### Title
Proteomic analysis of NFIX over-expression in C2C12 myotubes

### Description
Overexpressed either GFP, wild-type (WT) NFIX or a phospho-dead mutant of NFIX in which eight serine residues surrounding S286 were mutated to alanine (S265/267/268/271/272/273/274/275A) was performed C2C12 cells prior to the induction of myogenesis. Cells were harvest 2 days post induction of myogensis with 2% horse serum.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were rapidly washed three times with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and heated at 95°C for 5min. The samples were tip-probe sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min and protein quantified by BCA. Twenty microgram of proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) at 45°C for 5 min. Samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma #11418025001) and LysC (Wako, Japan) at 1:50 ratio of protease:protein at 37°C for 16h. Peptides were purified by SDB-RPS micro-columns as previously described [PMID: 30190555].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, USA) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C. Separation was achieved on a 40 cm x 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Germany) over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3-40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1%v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated with data-independent acquisition with MS1 spectra was acquired over the mass range 350-950 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis of 38 windows (30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, auto injection time, 16 m/z isolation width with 1 m/z overlap between windows).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nfix, Myotubes, C2c12, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


