### Accession
PXD013162

### Title
Proteomics identification and validation of desmocollin-1 and catechol-O-methyltransferase as proteins associated with breast cancer cell migration and metastasis

### Description
Biological treatment of many cancers currently targets membrane bound receptors located on a cell surface. To identify novel membrane proteins associated with migration and metastasis of breast cancer cells, we selected and characterized a more migrating subpopulation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. We applied quantitative mass spectrometry with SILAC labeling to analyze their surfaceome and compared it with that of paternal MDA-MB-231 cells. Among 818 identified proteins (FDR < 0.01), 124 differentially abundant cell surface proteins with at least one transmembrane domain were found. Of these, (i) catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) was successfully verified as a protein associated with lymph node metastasis of triple negative breast cancer as well as tumor grade by targeted data extraction from the SWATH-MS data set of 96 breast cancer tissues, and (ii) desmocollin-1 (DSC1) was verified as a protein connected with lymph node status of luminal A breast cancer, tumor grade and Her-2 receptor by immunohistochemistry in the same set of patients. Kaplan-Meier analysis associated COMT and DSC1 with decreased overall survival in breast cancer subsets. Our findings indicate importance of both proteins for breast cancer development and metastasis

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling and selective biotinylation of membrane proteins with extracellular domain A pair of parental MDA-MB-231 cells and its more migrating clone MDA-MB-231 MIG4 underwent SILAC labelling in RPMI media with either R0K0 “light” [12C6,14N4] arginine (R0) and [12C6, 14N2] lysine (K0), or R6K4 “heavy” labeled [13C6] arginine (R6) and [2H4] lysine (K4) (Sigma Aldrich, MO, USA) supplemented with 10 % dialyzed FBS (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA), 100 IU/mL of penicillin and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin (BioSera, FR). The parental MDA-MB-231 cell line was grown in a light medium, and the more migrating clone MDA MB 231 MIG4 was cultured in a heavy medium for five cell doublings (passages) to allow the complete incorporation of the isotope-labeled amino acids into a proteome. Process of cell surface protein enrichment was performed according to Roesli et al. with several modifications (please see our publication for the adetails). Biotinylated protein purification and digestion for mass spectrometry 400 µl of streptavidin agarose (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was prepared for purification of biotinylated proteins. Agarose was washed using 1 % (w/v) NP-40, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 5 mM GSSG in PBS (buffer A) three times, before the sample pool was added. Samples were tumbled for 2 h. Unbound proteins were washed using buffer A three times, using 10 % (w/v) SDS, 5 mM GSSG in PBS (buffer B) three times, then twice using 2 M NaCl, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 5 mM GSSG in PBS (buffer C) at 40 ºC and twice using 50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5. Proteins attached to the sepharose were eluted using 5 % 2-mercaptoethanol in PBS for 30 min at 30 ºC; this step was repeated 4 times. The eluates were precipitated using 100 % trichloracetic acid (TCA) overnight at -20 ºC. Samples were centrifuged 16000 x g/ 20 min/ 0 ºC after the precipitation. Pellets were dried in Speed-vac (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) and dissolved in 12 µl of a sample buffer (250 mM Tris/ HCl pH 6.8, 10 % (w/v) SDS, 30 % (v/v) glycerol, 5 % (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol and 0.02 % (w/v) bromophenol blue) at 95 ºC for 5 min. Dissolved sample was loaded onto gel (10 % acrylamide, 0.375 M Tris/HCl pH 8.8, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS) and electrophoretic separation ran at constant voltage mode. Electrophoresis continued until the sample completely left the well. The gel was stained using in 0.1 % (w/v) Coomassie blue R-350, 20 % (v/v) methanol and 10 % (v/v) acetic acid overnight. Unbound stain was washed four times using 50 % (v/v) methanol and 10 % (v/v) acetic acid. In-gel digestion was performed according to Shevchenko et al. LC-MS analysis LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixture were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, MA, USA). Trap column was washed with 0.1% FA and the peptides were eluted (flow 300 nl/min) from the trap column onto a Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (2 µm particles, 75 μm × 250 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by the gradient elution (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: ACN:methanol:2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (6:3:1; v/v/v) containing 0.1% FA). The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting up to top 20 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (350-1700 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120 000 (400 m/z) with a target value of 1×106 ions, one microscan and maximum injection time of 200 ms. Low resolution CID MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 10 000 ions in rapid CID scan mode with m/z range adjusted according to actual precursor mass and charge. MS/MS acquisition in the linear ion trap was carried out in parallel to the survey scan in the Orbitrap analyser by using the preview mode. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition and early expiration was disabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 m/z.  References  C. Roesli, B. Borgia, C. Schliemann, M. Gunthert, H. Wunderli-Allenspach, R. Giavazzi, D. Neri, Cancer Res. 2009, 69, 5406.  A. Shevchenko, H. Tomas, J. Havlis, J.V. Olsen, M. Mann, Nat Protoc. 2006, 1, 2856.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed in MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 (www.maxquant.org) using Andromeda database search algorithm. The data analysis parameters were as follows: Database: UniProt human reference proteome database version 2019_07 containing 20660 protein sequences downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640 (complemented by a database of common protein contaminants according to the standard Andromeda settings), enzyme name: Trypsin (cleaving polypeptides at the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine), max. missed cleavage sites 2, taxonomy: Homo sapiens. Target and decoy database search: peptide FDR 0.01, protein FDR 0.01. Tolerances: 20 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.5 Da IT MS/MS fragment match tolerance. Modifications: Dynamic (variable): oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (protein N-term), CAM-thiopropanoyl (K). Static (fixed): carbamidomethyl (C). SILAC quantification: heavy-Arg6, Lys4 labels. Requantification option was applied. Default settings was used for other parameters. Protein fold change (FC) was calculated in MaxQuant software as intensity ratios of heavy-to-light form for all quantified peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Biological treatment of many cancers currently targets membrane bound receptors located on a cell surface. To identify novel membrane proteins associated with migration and metastasis of breast cancer cells, a more migrating subpopulation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line is selected and characterized. A high-resolution quantitative mass spectrometry with SILAC labeling is applied to analyze their surfaceome and it is compared with that of parental MDA-MB-231 cells. Among 824 identified proteins (FDR&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.01), 128 differentially abundant cell surface proteins with at least one transmembrane domain are found. Of these, i) desmocollin-1 (DSC1) is validated as a protein connected with lymph node status of luminal A breast cancer, tumor grade, and Her-2 status by immunohistochemistry in the set of 96 primary breast tumors, and ii) catechol-O-methyltransferase is successfully verified as a protein associated with lymph node metastasis of triple negative breast cancer as well as with tumor grade by targeted data extraction from the SWATH-MS data of the same set of tissues. The findings indicate importance of both proteins for breast cancer development and metastasis and highlight the potential of biomarker validation strategy via targeted data extraction from SWATH-MS datasets.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; mass spectrometry; metastasis; silac; transmembrane protein

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


