### Accession
PXD031765

### Title
Advanced in vitro safety assessment of herbal medicines for the treatment of non-psychotic mental disorders in pregnancy

### Description
When confronted with non-psychotic mental disorders, pregnant women often refrain from using synthetic drugs. Instead, they resort to well-known herbal medicines (phytopharmaceuticals) such as St. John's wort, California poppy, valerian, lavender, and hops, which have proven sedative, anxiolytic, or antidepressant properties. Nevertheless, these herbal medicines are not officially approved in pregnancy due to lack of safety data. Using a variety of in vitro methods (determination of cytotoxicity, apoptosis induction, genotoxicity, effects on metabolic properties, inhibition/induction of differentiation) in a commonly used placental cell line (BeWo b30), we could previously show that extracts from these plants are likely to be safe at usual clinical doses. In the present work, we wanted to deepen our safety assessment of these herbal medicines by (i) looking for possible effects on gene expression and (ii) using the same in vitro methods to characterize effects of selected phytochemicals that might conceivably cause safety issues. Proteomics results were promising as none of the five extracts significantly affected the protein expression by up- or down-regulation. Protopine (contained in California poppy), valerenic acid (in valerian), and linalool (in lavender) were inconspicuous in all experiments and showed no adverse effects. Hyperforin and hypericin (two constituents from St. John's wort) and valtrate (typical for valerian) were the most discernible phytochemicals with respect to the selected safety parameters (cytotoxic and apoptotic effects). A decrease in BeWo b30 viability was evident with hypericin (≥ 1 µM) and valtrate (≥ 10 µM), whereas hyperforin (≥ 3 µM), hypericin (30 µM) and valtrate (≥ 10 µM) induced cell apoptosis. None of the tested phytochemicals resulted in genotoxic effects at concentrations of 0.1 and 1 µM and thus are not DNA damaging. No decrease in glucose consumption or lactate production was observed under the influence of the phytochemicals, except for valtrate (at all concentrations). No compound induced or inhibited BeWo b30 cell differentiation, except for hyperforin (≥ 1 µM) that had an inhibitory effect. This study confirms previous observations suggesting that the extracts from St. John's wort, California poppy, valerian, lavender, and hops are likely to be safe during pregnancy. Attainment of high plasma concentrations of a few relevant compounds – hyperforin and hypericin from St. John's wort and valtrate from valerian – deserves though special attention. Clinical studies during pregnancy are needed to substantiate these in vitro data.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. BeWo b30 cells were seeded into transparent T25 culture flasks at a density of 776’400 cells/6000 µL/flask. After overnight incubation, they were exposed to 30 µg/mL of plant extract (H. perforatum, E. californica, V. officinalis, L. angustifolia, H. lupulus) or untreated control (0.06% DMSO) for 48 h. Cell culture supernatants were then discarded and attached cells were rinsed with PBS and then detached by adding a 0.25% trypsin-EDTA solution, following a 1-2 min incubation (37°C). The trypsinization process was stopped by the addition of cell culture growth medium and the flasks were rinsed carefully. The cell suspensions were centrifuged (at 1300 rpm for 5 min at 23°C). The cell pellets were washed a total of three times (by aspirating the supernatant and resuspending the cell pellet in 10 mL PBS). The cells were then counted and 1’000’000 cells per condition were centrifuged. The corresponding cell pellets were immediately snap-freezed in liquid nitrogen (without buffer) and stored at -80°C for subsequent analysis of proteins. For each sample, proteins were extracted using a tissue homogenizer (TissueLyser II, QUIAGEN) and digested by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics). Briefly, 150 µL of ‘Lyse’ buffer and around 150 mg of glass beads (425-500 µm, Sigma) were added to each cell pellet. After 2 cycles of protein extraction (2 min each, 30 Hz) and incubation for 10 min at 95°C, the solubilization of the extracted proteins was enhanced processing the samples with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound for 1 min setting the ultrasonic amplitude to 85% followed by an additional incubation for 10 min at 95C. After centrifugation for 10 min at 14’000 g the supernatant was used for further processing. The proteins (50 µg in each case) were digested on the membrane by adding 50 µL of the ‘Digest’ solution. After 60 min of incubation at 37 °C the digestion was stopped with 100 µL of Stop solution. The samples were then centrifuged, and the supernatant was transferred to the cartridge. The solutions in the cartridge were removed by centrifugation at 3800 g, while the peptides were retained by the iST-filter. Finally, the peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µL of injection buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Prior to LC-MS analysis, the peptide concentrations were estimated using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer, and the injection amounts normalized to an absorbance of 0.3 at 280 nm. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 1 μL of diluted peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 L/min by a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 77 min, 32% B in 10 min and 95% B for 10 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2008). One separate MaxQuant experiment was setup for each set of sample (B015, B020, B035 and HMEV21). Spectra were searched against a swissprot canonical Homo sapiens proteome (taxonomy 9606, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 min window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. The MaxQuant results were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc.) to validate the peptide and protein identifications. Only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides were considered for follow up analysis. The statistical significance threshold was set to an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.2, and a log2FC > ±1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Hypericum perforatum, Lavandula angustifolia, Humulus lupulus, Valeriana officinalis, Mental health disorders, Safety, Eschscholzia californica

### Affiliations
Head of Research Group University Hospital Zurich Department of Obstetrics Perinatal Pharmacology and Biochemistry Schmelzbergstrasse 12 / PF 125 Path G51a 8091 Zurich
1) Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
2) Division of Pharmaceutical Biology, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Deborah Spiess

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Paula Simões-Wüst
Head of Research Group University Hospital Zurich Department of Obstetrics Perinatal Pharmacology and Biochemistry Schmelzbergstrasse 12 / PF 125 Path G51a 8091 Zurich


