### Accession
PXD029120

### Title
G3BP1 inhibits Cul3SPOP to amplify AR signaling and promote prostate cancer

### Description
SPOP, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, acts as a prostate-specific tumor suppressor with several key substrates mediating oncogenic function. However, the mechanisms underlying SPOP regulation are largely unknown. Here, we have identified G3BP1 as an interactor of SPOP and functions as a competitive inhibitor of Cul3SPOP, suggesting a distinctive mode of Cul3SPOP inactivation in prostate cancer (PCa). Transcriptomic analysis and functional studies reveal a G3BP1-SPOP ubiquitin signaling axis that promotes PCa progression through activating AR signaling. Moreover, AR directly upregulates G3BP1 transcription to further amplify G3BP1-SPOP signaling in a feed-forward manner. Our study supports a fundamental role of G3BP1 in disabling the tumor suppressive Cul3SPOP, thus defining a PCa cohort independent of SPOP mutation. Therefore, there are significantly more PCa that are defective for SPOP ubiquitin ligase than previously appreciated, and these G3BP1high PCa are more susceptible to AR-targeted therapy.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were treated with SDS-PAGE loading buffer supplied with 10 mM DTT for 5 min at 85ºC. The proteins were alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to the final concentration of 15 mM. The samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and the whole lanes were cut out and digested with trypsin in-gel for 2 hours. The resulting peptides were extracted, dried, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid with 5% acetonitrile prior to loading onto a trap EASY-column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an in-house-made nano HPLC column (20 cm x 75 μm) packed with LUNA C18 media. Analysis was performed on a Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode using 90-min gradients in an EASY-LC system (Proxeon) with 95% water, 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) (solvent A), and 95% ACN, 5% water, 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 220 nl/min. The acquisition cycle consisted of a survey MS scan in the normal mode followed by twelve data-dependent MS/MS scans acquired in the rapid mode. Dynamic exclusion was used with the following parameters: exclusion size 500, repeat count 1, repeat duration 10 s, exclusion time 45 s. Target value was set at 104 for tandem MS scan. The precursor isolation window was set at 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS spectrum files were transformed into MGF format by MSConvert software v1.0 and interrogated by a MASCOT 2.4 search engine using human UniProt database version 15 concatenated with reverse sequences for estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) and with a list of common contaminants. The search parameters were as follows: full tryptic search, 2 allowed missed cleavages, peptide charges +2 and +3 only, MS tolerance 1 Da, MS/MS tolerance 0.5 Da. The only permanent post-translational modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable post-translational modifications were protein N-terminal acetylation, Met oxidation and N-terminal Glutamine to pyro-Glutamate conversion. The remaining analysis was performed as mentioned earlier (Poliakov et al., 2011. PMID: 21421797). To summarize, the minimal ion score threshold was chosen such that a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% was achieved. The peptide FDR was calculated as: 2 × (decoy_hits)/ (target + decoy hits). Spectral counts for all detected proteins were assembled using a Python script written in-house. The adjustment of spectral counts was done by the same script as mentioned earlier (Poliakov et al., 2011. PMID: 21421797).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tap-ms, G3bp1, Spop, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Joan and Stanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Chandrani Mukhopadhyay

### Lab Head
Dr Pengbo Zhou
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Joan and Stanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA


