### Accession
PXD011532

### Title
Lichtenberg figures in high voltage electrical injury

### Description
Lichtenberg figures (LF), also known as a ferning pattern or keraunographic marking, is a pathognomonic skin sign for a lightning strike injury. The true pathophysiology of LF remains unknown. This dataset describes a case of LF following a high voltage electrical injury in which a skin biopsy was taken directly from the LF.

### Sample Protocol
After obtaining full patient consent, 4 mm punch biopsies were taken at the time of admission from an erythematous area of LF over right flank and repeated at 3 months from the same fully healed location. This new biopsy was taken from an adjacent area to the still visible minor scar from the earlier biopsy site. Both tissue samples underwent proteomic testing to compare protein expression between the LF and 3-month control samples. Three formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 10-um-thick sections from each sample block were deparaffinized by incubation at room temperature in xylene for 10 min. The deparaffinized tissue section were then rehydrated with a graded series of ethanol and briefly air-dried. The tissue sections were lysed in a buffer consisting of 0.3 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 M DTT, 0.5% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 20 000, and 4% SDS. The samples were incubated at 99C for 90 min. Samples were purified by methanol/chloroform protein precipitation. Protein reduction and alkylation was performed in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) containing 5% sodium deoxycholate by adding 5 mM DTT and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by diluting the solution 5x with mQ water, prior to adding 400 ng trypsin per reaction and incubating overnight at 37C. The digestion was then stopped by adding triflouroacetic acid to a concentration of 0.5%. The peptides were purified by C18 StageTips (3M Empore). Peptides were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, ThermoFisher Scientific) nano-LC system with C18 cartridge column (Dionex) and an in-house packed (3 um ReproSil-Pur C18AQ particles, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) 50 cm 75 um ID emitter-columns (New Objective) using a 60 min 8-50% B gradient where buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B, 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Separated peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min (spray voltage 2.4 kV) to a Q Exactive Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass-spectrometer operating with a top-5 MS/MS strategy with a 0.6 s cycle time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. Only charge states +2 to +6 were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) human database using the tryptic digestion rule. Proteomics raw data from each sample normalized to its detected proteins' average intensity. These sample tissue area- and internally-normalized values were then used in subsequent analyses using a statistically significant cutoff of p<0.05 for each identified protein in any comparison between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactoferrin, Lichtenberg figures, Electric injury, Tissue response

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Mariliis Klaas

### Lab Head
Dr Esko Kankuri
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland


