### Accession
PXD028074

### Title
Karyopherin enrichment and compensation fortifies the nuclear pore complex against nucleocytoplasmic leakage

### Description
Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) discriminate non-specific macromolecules from importin and exportin receptors, collectively termed karyopherins (Kaps), that mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport. This selective barrier function is attributed to the behavior of intrinsically disordered phenylalanine-glycine nucleoporins (FG Nups) that guard the NPC channel. However, NPCs in vivo are typically enriched with different Kaps, and how they impact on the NPC barrier remains unknown. Here, we show that two major Kaps, importinβ1/karyopherinβ1 (Kapβ1) and exportin 1/chromosomal maintenance 1 (CRM1) are required to fortify NPC barrier function in vivo. Their enrichment at the NPC is sustained by promiscuous binding interactions with the FG Nups resulting in a compensatory mechanism that is constrained by their respective cellular abundances and different binding kinetics as evidenced for another Kap, Importin-5. Hence, Kapβ1 and CRM1 engage in a balancing act to reinforce NPC barrier function. Consequently, NPC malfunction and nucleocytoplasmic leakage result from poor Kap enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
1E7 MDCK tissue/cells were collected and lysed in 50 μl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, pH = 8.5) using strong ultra-sonication (10 cycles, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. Then, the peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an RESOLVEX® A200 positive pressure workstation (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland). Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 12% B over 5 min to 35% B over 90 min to 50% B over 25 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 1e4, respectively. Only peptide ions with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5e3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of canis lupus familiaris (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2019/06/11) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 51,776 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were further normalized, statistically analyzed and translated to absolute protein estimates (iBAQ values) using our in-house script (PMID:27345528).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Npc, Prm, Karyopherin, Mdck, Ibaq

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


