### Accession
PXD012048

### Title
Longitudinal Surveys Show that Urethral Catheters Harbor Recurrent Polymicrobial Biofilms with Cooperative and Competitive Behaviors Among Cohabitating Pathogens

### Description
The analysis of catheter biofilms (CBs) from patients with neurogenic bladder disorders revealed persistent colonization by polymicrobial communities. The recurrence of bacterial species in the CBs of sequentially replaced catheters suggests urothelial reservoirs responsible for recolonization of the catheter surface. Proteomic data for CB samples were indicative of chronic inflammation in the patients’ urinary tracts via neutrophil and eosinophil infiltration and epithelial cell exfoliation. These host defense pathways, effective in killing pathogens during uncomplicated urinary tract infection, failed to eliminate CBs. Intermittent antibiotic drug treatment had different outcomes: either replacement of drug-susceptible by drug-tolerant bacteria or transient microbial biomass reduction followed by resurgence of the previously colonizing bacteria. Proteins that sequester iron and zinc such as lactotransferrin, lipocalin-2 and calprotectin were abundant in the patient’s CBs and urine sediments. Indicative of a host-pathogen battle for bivalent metal ions, acquisition and transport systems for such ions were highly expressed by many organisms residing in CBs. Species part of the Enterococcaceae and Aerococcaceae families, generally not well-characterized in their ability to synthesize siderophores, frequently cohabitated biofilms dominated by siderophore-producing Enterobacteriaceae. In support of metal acquisition cooperativity, we noticed positive abundance correlations for a Proteus mirabilis yersiniabactin-type siderophore system and two Enterococcus faecalis ABC transporters. Distinct bacterial strains highly expressed known or putative cytotoxins that appeared to compromise the survival of co-resident bacteria, e.g. a P. mirabilis hemolysin and Pseudomonas aeruginosa type 6 secretion and pyoverdin biosynthesis systems. In conclusion, there is support for cooperative and competitive behaviors among bacteria cohabitating CBs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested using FASP approach, desalted using StageTip and analyzed by LTQ Velos Pro and Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) and MaxQuant-Andromeda suite (version 1.5).

### Publication Abstract
Biofilms composed of multiple microorganisms colonize the surfaces of indwelling urethral catheters that are used serially by neurogenic bladder patients and cause chronic infections. Well-adapted pathogens in this niche are <i>Escherichia coli, Proteus</i>, and <i>Enterococcus</i> spp., species that cycle through adhesion and multilayered cell growth, trigger host immune responses, are starved off nutrients, and then disperse. Viable microbial foci retained in the urinary tract recolonize catheter surfaces. The molecular adaptations of bacteria in catheter biofilms (CBs) are not well-understood, promising new insights into this pathology based on host and microbial meta-omics analyses from clinical specimens. We examined catheters from nine neurogenic bladder patients longitudinally over up to 6 months. Taxonomic analyses from 16S rRNA gene sequencing and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics revealed that 95% of all catheter and corresponding urinary pellet (UP) samples contained bacteria. CB biomasses were dominated by <i>Enterobacteriaceae</i> spp. and often accompanied by lactic acid and anaerobic bacteria. Systemic antibiotic drug treatments of patients resulted in either transient or lasting microbial community perturbations. Neutrophil effector proteins were abundant not only in UP but also CB samples, indicating their penetration of biofilm surfaces. In the context of one patient who advanced to a kidney infection, <i>Proteus mirabilis</i> proteomic data suggested a combination of factors associated with this disease complication: CB biomasses were high; the bacteria produced urease alkalinizing the pH and triggering urinary salt deposition on luminal catheter surfaces; <i>P. mirabilis</i> utilized energy-producing respiratory systems more than in CBs from other patients. The NADH:quinone oxidoreductase II (Nqr), a Na<sup>+</sup> translocating enzyme not operating as a proton pump, and the nitrate reductase A (Nar) equipped the pathogen with electron transport chains promoting growth under hypoxic conditions. Both <i>P. mirabilis</i> and <i>E. coli</i> featured repertoires of transition metal ion acquisition systems in response to human host-mediated iron and zinc sequestration. We discovered a new drug target, the Nqr respiratory system, whose deactivation may compromise <i>P. mirabilis</i> growth in a basic pH milieu. Animal models would not allow such molecular-level insights into polymicrobial biofilm metabolism and interactions because the complexity cannot be replicated.

### Keywords
Longitudinal, Urethral catheters; biofilm; urinary tract infection; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD 20850


