### Accession
PXD021948

### Title
Chemical Tagging of Protein Lipoylation

### Description
Protein lipoylation is a post-translational modification of emerging importance in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. However, effective methods for labeling and analyzing, particularly in large scale, protein lipoylation remain limited. Here, we report the development of iLCL (iodoacetamide-assisted lipoate-cyclooctyne ligation), a chemoselective reaction that enables chemical tagging of protein lipoylation. We demonstrate that the cyclic disulfide of lipoamide but not linear disulfides can selectively react with iodoacetamide to produce sulfenic acid, which can be conjugated with cyclooctyne probes. Using iLCL, lipoylation on recombinant bacterial lipoylated proteins and in cell and tissue lysates is tagged with fluorophores for analysis by in-gel fluorescence scanning and cellular imaging. Furthermore, we apply iLCL for proteomic profiling of lipoylated proteins in both bacteria and mammalian cells. In addition to all of the eight known lipoylated proteins, seven new ones are identified. The iLCL-based tagging method should facilitate the studies and understanding of biological function of protein lipoylation.

### Sample Protocol
1 mL of cell lysates (2 mg/mL) were blocked by NEM and iLCL-labeled with IAA (50 mM for bacterial lysates and 100 mM for mammalian lysates) and 50 μM DBCO-biotin for 8 h. IAA was omitted in the negative control. The resulting mixture was precipitated by adding 8 mL methanol at −80℃ overnight. The precipitants were centrifuged (4℃, 4,500 g, 20 min), washed thrice with 3 mL ice-cold methanol, and re-suspended in 1 mL of 1% SDS. Then, 4 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) and 100 μL of streptavidin-coated agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 20353) were added to the mixture, which was incubated at R.T. for 4 h with gentle rotation. The beads were washed with the following buffer in order: 2% SDS in PBS (wt/vol, pH 7.4), 8 M urea in PBS (pH 7.4), 2.5 M NaCl in PBS (pH 7.4), PBS (pH 7.4) for three times and Milli-Q water for two times. The resulting samples were re-suspended with 200 µL 8 M urea in PBS, followed by addition of 25 µL 200 mM DTT in water (65°C, 15 min) and 30 µL 400 mM iodoacetamide in water (37°C, 30 min, in dark). After changing buffer with 200 µL of 100 mM TEAB (Thermo, catalog No. 90114), 4 µL of trypsin (0.5 µg/µL in trypsin resuspension buffer) and 2 µL of 100 mM CaCl2 were added and the resulting mixture was incubated at 37°C for 16 h. After trypsin digestion, 8 μL of 4% heavy (13CD2O, Sigma) or light (CH2O, Sigma) formaldehyde were added, respectively. Then 8 μL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride was added and the reaction mixtures were left at room temperature with agitation for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by adding 32 μL of 1% NH3 followed by adding 16 μL of formic acid. The supernatant of heavy or light samples was collected, combined, desalted by C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 89870), and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
SwissPort Escherichia coli (strain K12) database and Mus musculus database were downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org). The raw data were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer™ (Thermo Scientific). Carbamidomethyl cysteine, NEM-cysteine, methionine oxidation, and acetyl N-terminal were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. For protein identification, one unique peptide in all of three replicates and two unique peptides in at least one replicate were required. The P value of enrichment significance for each protein was calculated by student t test. The log2 ratios and –log10 P values of the proteins were plotted in Figure 4b and Figure 4c. For analysis of lipoylated sites of ODP2, the raw data were subjected to database searches using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.8.2) with the FASTA file of ODP2 protein (download from Uniprot, P06959). Carbamidomethyl cysteine, iLCL-labeled lysine, methionine oxidation, and acetyl N-terminal were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipoylation, Chemoselective ligation, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University

### Submitter
Qi Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Chen
College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China.


