### Accession
PXD007164

### Title
Correlation of isolate-specific oxidative stress responses at the protein level in Aspergillus flavus with aflatoxin production capability

### Description
Aspergillus flavus is a pathogen of corn, peanut, and other crops which produces carcinogenic mycotoxins known as aflatoxins. Previous studies have shown that drought stress results in exacerbated aflatoxin production. Drought-associated oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) is suspected to contribute to increased aflatoxin production during infection. Here, the responses of field isolates of A. flavus with varying degrees of aflatoxin production capability to H2O2-derived oxidative stress were examined using iTRAQ proteomics. Three isolates: AF13 (highly toxigenic), NRRL3357 (moderately toxigenic), and K54A (atoxigenic), were cultures in aflatoxin conducive yeast extract-sucrose (YES) medium amended with 0, 10, or 20/25mM of H2O2. Identified differentially expressed proteins were used for functional prediction, cellular localization, and pathway analyses to identify molecular mechanisms involved in A. flavus oxidative stress responses relative to aflatoxin production capability. Correlative analyses with previously obtained transcriptome data for the same isolates under the same experimental conditions was also performed with a low degree of correlation (r = 0.1114) observed between the protein and transcript data suggesting possible post-transcriptional regulation of oxidative stress responses. The identified stress responsive mechanisms provide a basis of investigating novel approaches of enhancing host resistance against aflatoxin contamination.

### Sample Protocol
The selected isolates were cultured in stationary liquid cultures in YES medium supplemented with either 0, 10, or 20/25mM H2O2 for 7 days at 32°C in the dark. Three biological replicates were performed. Fungal tissues were collected and ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and used for protein extraction using a modified phenol/methanolic ammonium acetate method (Hurkman and Tanaka, 1986, Plant Physiol., 81:802-806). Proteins were quantified using an EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and quality checked using 1D-PAGE. Proteins were then dissolved, reduced, alkylated, trypsin digested, and labeled using the iTRAQ Reagents – 8-plex kit (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each biological replicate was processed separately using the same strategy. After labeling, each biological replicate was mixed and aliquoted into four technical replicates for LC-MS/MS. Protocols utilized were as described in our previous publication (Yang et al. 2014, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 15:18892-18918). Peptides were fractionated on an Agilent HPLC System 1260 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and MS/MS was performed on a hybrid quadrapole Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus) MS system coupled with an Easy-nLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (v4.5) software (AB Sciex) was used for peptide identification from MS/MS data using Uniprot and NCBI databases. Data normalization was performed and fold changes in expression calculated with default settings. Proteins were found to be differentially expressed if they showed a fold change ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.8 with a p-value ≤ 0.05 in at least one isolate, and were detected in at least two of three replicates. Fold changes and p-values for differentially expressed proteins were averaged across all biological replicates for interpretation and downstream analyses. Functional classification by ontology for biological function and subcellular localization, and pathway enrichment analyses were performed using FungiDB (Stajich et al. 2012, Nuc. Acid Res., 40:D675-D681).

### Publication Abstract
Aspergillus flavus is an opportunistic pathogen of plants such as maize and peanut under conducive conditions such as drought stress resulting in significant aflatoxin production. Drought-associated oxidative stress also exacerbates aflatoxin production by A. flavus. The objectives of this study were to use proteomics to provide insights into the pathogen responses to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-derived oxidative stress, and to identify potential biomarkers and targets for host resistance breeding. Three isolates, AF13, NRRL3357, and K54A with high, moderate, and no aflatoxin production, were cultured in medium supplemented with varying levels of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and examined using an iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantification) approach. Overall, 1,173 proteins were identified and 220 were differentially expressed (DEPs). Observed DEPs encompassed metabolic pathways including antioxidants, carbohydrates, pathogenicity, and secondary metabolism. Increased lytic enzyme, secondary metabolite, and developmental pathway expression in AF13 was correlated with oxidative stress tolerance, likely assisting in plant infection and microbial competition. Elevated expression of energy and cellular component production in NRRL3357 and K54A implies a focus on oxidative damage remediation. These trends explain isolate-to-isolate variation in oxidative stress tolerance and provide insights into mechanisms relevant to host plant interactions under drought stress allowing for more targeted efforts in host resistance research.

### Keywords
Itraq proteomics, Oxidative stress, Aspergillus flavus, Drought stress, Aflatoxin

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS Crop Protection and Management Research Unit Tifton, GA 31794
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Jake Fountain

### Lab Head
Dr Baozhu Guo
USDA-ARS Crop Protection and Management Research Unit Tifton, GA 31794


