### Accession
PXD028953

### Title
Proteomics of extracellular matrix from eIF4E deficient mouse mammary fat pad

### Description
It was demonstrated that mice with eIF4E that cannot be activated by phosphorylation (S209A) produced extracellular matrix (ECM) less conducive to breast cancer tumor invasion and metastasis. To examine whether this could in part bedue to differences in the protein composition we analyzed the proteome of soluble and insoluble ECM fractions derived from the mammary fat pad of mice with either WT or constitutively inactivated (S209A or "KI") eIF4E.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation of proteolytic digestion of ECM proteins iECM and sECM samples were suspended in 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM TRIS pH 7.8. Samples were subsequently heated to 99°C for 10 minutes and subjected to probe-based sonication using a Thermo Sonic Dismembrator at 25 % amplitude for 3 cycles x 5 seconds. Remaining debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 5 minutes. An aliquot of the supernatant was diluted to <1% SDS and used for estimation of protein concentration by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) (Pierce/Thermo). The remainder of the supernatant was transferred into a new reaction tube and disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes. Free cysteines were alkylated using iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 25 mM and subsequent incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes in the dark. An equivalent of 10 µg of total protein was used for proteolytic digestion using suspension trapping (STRAP)60. In brief, proteins were acidified through the addition of phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.3% v/v. The sample was subsequently diluted 6-fold in STRAP loading buffer (9:1 methanol:water in 100 mM TRIS, pH 7.8) and loaded onto an S-TRAP Micro cartridge (Protifi LLC, Huntington NY) and spun at 4000 x g for 2 minutes. Samples were washed three times using 200 µL of STRAP loading buffer. Proteins were then proteolytically digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 hours at 47°C. Peptides were sequentially eluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% formic acid in water, and 50% acetonitrile. Peptide containing samples were then vacuum concentrated, and desalted using homemade R3-STAGE-tip desalting cartridges61. Desalted peptides were vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS acquisition and data analysis Samples were analyzed by data dependent acquisition (DDA) using an Easy-nLC 1200 online coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 2 cm length) in 0.1% formic acid (buffer A). Peptides were separated using a 100-min binary gradient ranging from 3-40% of buffer B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) on the main column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 25 cm length) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350-1,500 at a resolution of 70,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 15 most intense ions (charge states +2 to +4) were isolated with a window of m/z 1.2, an AGC target of 2 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 64 ms and fragmented using a normalized higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) energy of 28. MS/MS were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and the dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. For PRM experiments the same instrumentation and similar settings were used as described above, but this method included a target list of peptides to select for MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
DDA MS raw data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched using Sequest HT against a human UniProt FASTA database (release 23. January 2019; 20,414 target entries). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification.  The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Percolator was used to assess posterior error probabilities and the data was filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% on peptide and protein level. The Minora feature detector node of Proteome Discoverer was used for label free quantitation based on precursor areas. Normalized spectral abundance factors were calculated62 and S209A to WT protein abundance ratios were determined for proteins quantified with at least one unique peptide. The quantitation of the PRM data was performed using Skyline version 20.263.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays critical roles in breast cancer development. Whether ECM composition is regulated by the phosphorylation of eIF4E on serine 209, an event required for tumorigenesis, has not been explored. Herein, we used proteomics and mouse modeling to investigate the impact of mutating serine 209 to alanine on eIF4E (i.e., S209A) on mammary gland (MG) ECM. The proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD028953. We discovered that S209A knock-in mice, expressing a non-phosphorylatable form of eIF4E, have less collagen-I deposition in native and tumor-bearing MGs, leading to altered tumor cell invasion. Additionally, phospho-eIF4E deficiency impacts collagen topology; fibers at the tumor-stroma boundary in phospho-eIF4E-deficient mice run parallel to the tumor edge but radiate outwards in wild-type mice. Finally, a phospho-eIF4E-deficient tumor microenvironment resists anti-PD-1 therapy-induced collagen deposition, correlating with an increased anti-tumor response to immunotherapy. Clinically, we showed that collagen-I and phospho-eIF4E are positively correlated in human breast cancer samples, and that stromal phospho-eIF4E expression is influenced by tumor proximity. Together, our work defines the importance of phosphorylation of eIF4E on S209 as a regulator of MG collagen architecture in the tumor microenvironment, thereby positioning phospho-eIF4E as a therapeutic target to augment response to therapy.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mammary fat pad, Proteome, Extracellular matrix, Breast cancer, Eif4e

### Affiliations
Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Vincent Richard

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H. Borchers
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


