### Accession
PXD042567

### Title
The Cystatin D Interactome Associated to Systemic Mastocytosis

### Description
he aim of the project is to characterize qualitatively and quantitatively the interaction of cystatin D in other protein partner and the formation of a complex in whole saliva of patients affected by different forms of systemic mastocytosis (SM), with and without skin involvement. The different composition of the complex could be useful to distinguish patients from healthy subject and the different forms of systemic mastocytosis. Pools of whole saliva from SM (SM-C and SM+C) patients, and from sex/age matched healthy controls were submitted to immunoprecipitation assay using cystatin D antibody followed by SDS-PAGE in reducing conditions, tryptic digestion, and nano-HPLC-high-resolution-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
32 patients with systemic mastocytosis (SM, 17 males, 15 females, mean age ± SD: 48 ± 12), were enrolled from the Internal Medicine and Immunology outpatient’s clinic of the University of Cagliari. 20 sex/age matched healthy controls (11 males, 9 females, mean age ± SD: 39 ± 10) were enrolled as volunteer among the staff of the Department of Life and Environmental Science, University of Cagliari. The informed consent process agreed with the latest stipulations established by the Declaration of Helsinki. The local review boards approved the study, and in view of its observational nature, a formal ethical committee approval was approved. All the samples of unstimulated whole saliva were collected during the morning (between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.). Donors, in fasting conditions, were invited to sit assuming a relaxed position and to swallow. Whole saliva was collected as it flowed into the anterior floor of the mouth with a soft plastic aspirator for less than 1 min, and transferred to a plastic tube, cooled on ice. Salivary samples were immediately diluted in a 1:1 v/v ratio PBS buffer (270mM NaCl, 5mM KCl, 20mM Na2HPO4, 4mM KH2PO4) containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors (mini-cOMPLETE EDTA-free in 1:2.5 v/v ratio with PBS buffer – Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany), and stored at -80°C until the immune-proteomics analysis. Total protein concentration (TPC) in whole saliva was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA –Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) according to manufacturer instructions. Pools of whole saliva were prepared by using the samples from the three groups of patients (SM, SM-C and SM+C) and from the healthy Ctrls. Two different pools from SM and SM+C samples were prepared utilizing salivary whole samples from different patients, they were named SM1 (16 samples, 8 males, 8 females, mean age ± SD: 48 ± 12) and SM2 (16 samples, 9 males, 7 females, mean age ± SD: 47 ± 13), and SM+C1 (14 samples, 6 males, 8 females, mean age ± SD: 48 ± 12), SM+C2 (14 samples, 7 males, 7 females, mean age ± SD: 47 ± 13). A pool of samples from SM-C patients was prepared and two pools of samples from Ctrls, named respectively Ctrls and NEG, the last for unspecific interactors identification. To prepare the pools, different volumes were used from each sample based on their TPC, so that each sample contributed the same amount of protein. 400μg of total proteins from each pool were treated with preclear solution containing a nonspecific primary Ab and the Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), following manufactory instructions, to reduce non-specific binding to immunoglobulins, and especially to remove mouse monoclonal Abs from IgG subclasses. The pools were, then incubated with the specific primary cystatin D-C26 Ab except for the NEG pool that was incubated with a nonspecific primary Ab, under stirring over night at 4°C. Cracking solution (0.125 M Tris/HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS) was used to break the interaction between AG protein and the Ab and between Ab and proteins. After boiling and centrifugation, the supernatant recovered and its TPC measured by BCA assay with the NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer. 4 μg of each sample were analyzed by SDS-page in reducing conditions and stained with Bio-SafeTM Coomassie G250 stain (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The excised gel slices transferred to fresh tubes, for de-staining and peptide extraction procedures, the protocol of Gundry et al. was applied. Extraction was repeated in twice and followed by drying under vacuum and resuspension of the tryptic peptides in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for the nanoHPLC-ESI-high-resolution MS/MS analysis by a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite apparatus, or stored at -80°C in dried form until the analysis. We analyzed separately the tryptic samples obtained from each excised slice by nano-HPLC-ESI-high-resolution MS/MS, overall, 6 samples for each CoIP (SM1, SM2, SM+C1, SM+C2, SM-C, Ctrls and NEG). Elution solvents were: A, 0.1% FA in water; B, : 0.1% FA in ACN–water 80/20 (v/v). The flow was 300 nl/min. Peptides were trapped at 10 μl/min in 96% solvent A (0.1 % FA). The used gradient was: 0–3 min, 96% solvent A; 3–70 min, 4–50% solvent B; 70–90 min, 50–80% solvent B; 90–92 min, 90% solvent B; 90–100 min, 90% solvent B; 101-120 min, 96% solvent A. Full MS experiments were performed in positive ion mode with a mass range from 350 to 1600 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. The capillary temperature was 275 °C, the source voltage was 1.7 kV. In data-dependent acquisition mode, the ten most abundant ions were acquired and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a 35% normalized collision energy for 10 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, and activation q of 0.25.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were acquired by Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) and analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the search engines MS Amanda (version 2.0, University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria, Research Institute of Molecular Pathology) and SEQUEST HT (University of Washington, in license to Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA). PD software used the Uniprot-KB hu-man protein sequence database (20375 entries, release 2022_01). MS data from gel slices of the same Co-IP (SM1, SM2, SM+C1, SM+C2, SM-C, Ctrls or NEG) were merged in the PD analyses with the following parameters: up to two missed tryptic cleavages; peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance 0.6 Da; FDR were: 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Peptides were filtered for high confidence and a minimum length of 6 amino acids, proteins were filtered for minimum 2 unique peptides, Contaminants from sample manipulation (keratins) were excluded, as were non-specifically bead binding proteins (i.e., hemoglobin and immunoglobulins. The considered post-translational modifications were: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation, C-terminal pyroglutamate, N-terminal acetylation. For the Label Free Quantification (LFQ), the MS data from all the different Co-IPs (SM1, SM2, SM+C1, SM+C2, SM-C, Ctrls and NEG) were merged in the PD analysis keeping the parameters above il-lustrated. In this way, we obtained an accurate and comparable determination of the LFQ abundances of the proteins/peptides identified as interactors of cystatin D-C26 in the Co-IPs from the four groups. The proteins abundances were normalized against the total peptide amount in the Precursor Ion Quantifier node of PD software.

### Publication Abstract
Mastocytosis, a rare blood disorder characterized by the proliferation of clonal abnormal mast cells, has a variegated clinical spectrum and diagnosis is often difficult and delayed. Recently we proposed the cathepsin inhibitor cystatin D-R<sub>26</sub> as a salivary candidate biomarker of systemic mastocytosis (SM). Its C<sub>26</sub> variant is able to form multiprotein complexes (mPCs) and since protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are crucial for studying disease pathogenesis, potential markers, and therapeutic targets, we aimed to define the protein composition of the salivary cystatin D-C<sub>26</sub> interactome associated with SM. An exploratory affinity purification-mass spectrometry method was applied on pooled salivary samples from SM patients, SM patient subgroups with and without cutaneous symptoms (SM+C and SM-C), and healthy controls (Ctrls). Interactors specifically detected in Ctrls were found to be implicated in networks associated with cell and tissue homeostasis, innate system, endopeptidase regulation, and antimicrobial protection. Interactors distinctive of SM-C patients participate to PPI networks related to glucose metabolism, protein S-nitrosylation, antibacterial humoral response, and neutrophil degranulation, while interactors specific to SM+C were mainly associated with epithelial and keratinocyte differentiation, cytoskeleton rearrangement, and immune response pathways. Proteins sensitive to redox changes, as well as proteins with immunomodulatory properties and activating mast cells, were identified in patients; many of them were involved directly in cytoskeleton rearrangement, a process crucial for mast cell activation. Although preliminary, these results demonstrate that PPI alterations of the cystatin D-C<sub>26</sub> interactome are associated with SM and provide a basis for future investigations based on quantitative proteomic analysis and immune validation.

### Keywords
Mastocytosis; high-resolution mass spectrometry; immunoprecipitation assay; cystatin d

### Affiliations
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Simone Serrao

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Tiziana Cabras
Life and Environmental Sciences Department (Biomedical Section) - University of Cagliari


