### Accession
PXD020389

### Title
Proteomics of late signaling responses decipher the roles of Cbl and Cbl-b in neuroblastoma cell differentiation

### Description
We applied quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to study the roles of Cbl and Cbl-b in long-term signaling responses related to neurite outgrowth and differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling in combination with off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionation and LC-MS/MS we analyzed how Cbl and Cbl-b depletion by siRNA affected the proteome, phosphoproteome and ubiquitylome of the neuroblastoma cells.  SILAC proteome SILAC (Light Arg0/Lys0, medium Arg6/Lys4, heavy Arg10/Lys8) SH-SY5Y cells were treated with Cbl and Cbl-b or control (GFP) siRNA for 72 hours. For combined stimulation with ligand cocktail (FGF-2, IGF-1 PDGF-BB, TGFα) cells were treated with ligands for 48 h. Samples were analyzed in triplicates with set-up as described below: Set-up 1, 3 replicates (R1-3): Light: siGFP, Heavy: siCbl/siCbl-b Set-up 2, 3 replicates (E1-3): Light: siGFP + ligand cocktail, Medium: siCbl/siCbl-b, Heavy: siCbl/siCbl-b + ligand cocktail TMT phosphoproteome and proteome SH-SY5Y cells were treated with Cbl and Cbl-b siRNA, control (GFP) siRNA or Retinoic acid (RA) for 24 hours. Samples were prepared in triplicates and labelled with TMT10-plex reagents according to the set-up below: TMT10-126: siGFP E1 TMT10-127N: siCbl/siCbl-b E1 TMT10-127C: Retinoic acid E1 TMT10-128N: siGFP E2 TMT10-128C: siCbl/siCbl-b E2 TMT10-129N: Retinoic acid E2 TMT10-129C: siGFP E3 TMT10-130N: siCbl/siCbl-b E3 TMT10-130C: Retinoic acid E3 TMT10-131: Mix of the 9 samples SILAC Ubiquitin pulldown SILAC (Light Arg0/Lys0, heavy Arg10/Lys8) SH-SY5Y cells were treated with Cbl and Cbl-b or control (GFP) siRNA for 24 hours. Samples were analyzed in duplicates with set-up as described below: Light: siGFP, Heavy: siCbl/siCbl-b

### Sample Protocol
SILAC proteome For SILAC-based proteome analysis, cells were lysed and proteins were in-solution digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Peptides were fractionated into 46 fractions per sample by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase fractionation as described in Batth et al. 2014 and Bekker-Jensen et al. 2017, and fractions were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer. TMT phosphoproteome and proteome For TMT-based phosphoproteome and proteome analysis, cells were lysed and proteins were in-solution digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Samples were labelled with TMT10-plex reagents, mixed and fractionated into 12 concatenated fractions per sample by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase fractionation. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphopeptides were enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) prior to fractionation. Resulting peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer. SILAC Ubiquitin pulldown SILAC-based analysis of ubiquitylated peptides was performed as described in Akimov et al. 2018. Cells were lysed and proteins were in-solution digested with Lys-C prior to immunoprecipitation of ubiquitylated peptides with UbiSite-conjugated matrix followed by trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were fractionated by C18 StageTip high-pH reversed phase fractionation and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were analysed using the MaxQuant software versions 1.5.3.36, 1.5.8.4 and 1.6.0.17 with the integrated Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Cblb, Neuroblastoma, Cbl

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, Copenhagen, 2200, Denmark

### Submitter
Anna-Kathrine Pedersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, Copenhagen, 2200, Denmark


