### Accession
PXD005481

### Title
High-flow LC-MS/MS analyses -  Conventional-Flow Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry for Exploratory Bottom-Up Proteomic Analyses

### Description
The major objective of our study was to find out what are the extra costs and what optimization and adjustment steps of a high-flow LC-MS system have to be undertaken to identify a comparable number of proteins as on a nanoLC-MS system.

### Sample Protocol
A combined rLys-C/trypsin digest of HeLa cell whole lysate was prepared for the study. HeLa cells were lysed by 2% sodium deoxycholate containing 250 U/mL benzonase. One mg of proteins was buffered with triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and reduced by 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine. Thiols were blocked in 15 mM iodoacetamide, which was quenched by 20 mM cysteine. Proteins were digested at 37˚C by rLys-C for 4 hours and by trypsin overnight (both from Promega). The digest was acidified with TFA and deoxycholate was extracted into ethyl acetate. Peptides were desalted on a 100 mg Discovery DSC-18 SPE column. Peptides eluted by 50% ACN, 10% trifluoroethanol and 0.1% TFA were aliquoted, vacuum-dried and kept at -20˚C. Aliquots were re-dissolved in 2% ACN and 0.2% TFA prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were first subjected to MaxQuant v1.5.4.1 for processing. The .APL peak lists were converted to .MGF format. The final search was performed in Proteome Discoverer v1.4 using Mascot v2.2 with two-pass workflow in order to cope efficiently with trypsin autolytic peptides. Per-colator was used for rescoring the Mascot results.

### Publication Abstract
Due to its sensitivity and productivity, bottom-up proteomics based on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has become the core approach in the field. The de facto standard LC-MS platform for proteomics operates at sub-&#x3bc;L/min flow rates, and nanospray is required for efficiently introducing peptides into a mass spectrometer. Although this is almost a "dogma", this view is being reconsidered in light of developments in highly efficient chromatographic columns, and especially with the introduction of exceptionally sensitive MS instruments. Although conventional-flow LC-MS platforms have recently penetrated targeted proteomics successfully, their possibilities in discovery-oriented proteomics have not yet been thoroughly explored. Our objective was to determine what are the extra costs and what optimization and adjustments to a conventional-flow LC-MS system must be undertaken to identify a comparable number of proteins as can be identified on a nanoLC-MS system. We demonstrate that the amount of a complex tryptic digest needed for comparable proteome coverage can be roughly 5-fold greater, providing the column dimensions are properly chosen, extra-column peak dispersion is minimized, column temperature and flow rate are set to levels appropriate for peptide separation, and the composition of mobile phases is fine-tuned. Indeed, we identified 2&#x202f;835 proteins from 2 &#x3bc;g of HeLa cells tryptic digest separated during a 60 min gradient at 68 &#x3bc;L/min on a 1.0 mm &#xd7; 250 mm column held at 55 &#xb0;C and using an aqua-acetonitrile mobile phases containing 0.1% formic acid, 0.4% acetic acid, and 3% dimethyl sulfoxide. Our results document that conventional-flow LC-MS is an attractive alternative for bottom-up exploratory proteomics.

### Keywords
Hela, Narrow-bore column, High-flow, Microbore column

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles University

### Submitter
Juraj Lenco

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


