### Accession
PXD044543

### Title
A small molecule targeting NMHC IIA phosphorylation exerts promising anti-tumor effects on colorectal cancer

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most lethal cancers when it progresses to the advanced/metastatic stage. Treatment options for refractory metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) are limited. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop effective treatment methods for metastatic colorectal cancer. In this study, we screened a library of small molecules for inhibitors of CRC recurrence using CRC cell lines and patient-derived organoids (PDOs) from metastatic, heavily pretreated CRC. The in vivo efficacy of LS-1-2 was evaluated in the HCT116 and the resistant HCT8 cell lines, patient-derived xenografts(PDXs) including refractory mCRC, and a liver metastasis mouse model. Biotin pull-down and liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were performed to identify proteins that interact with LS-1-2. The genome-wide gene expression and quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses were performed to determine the signaling pathway involved in LS-1-2. Molecular docking, molecular dynamics analysis and cellular thermal shift assays were used to predict and validate the binding sites of LS-1-2 on non-muscle Myosin IIA (NMHC IIA). Our results showed that LS-1-2 exhibited broad antiproliferative effects on a series of CRC cell lines and PDOs. The in vivo anti-tumor efficacy of LS-1-2 was demonstrated across cell line- and patient-derived xenografts and in the liver metastatic CRC model. NMHC IIA was identified as a direct target of LS-1-2, and LS-1-2 competitively inhibited the phosphorylation of NMHC IIA at S1943 and S1714 by CK2. NMHC IIA phosphorylation promoted CRC cell proliferation and invasion, which was reduced by LS-1-2. NMHC IIA phosphorylation-mediated YAP activity induced activation of AKT and inactivation of FOXO3a and was suppressed by LS-1-2. In conclusion, our findings suggest that NMHC IIA phosphorylation can be used as a potential molecular target in CRC metastasis, and that targeting NMHC IIA phosphorylation by LS-1-2 may be a promising strategy for the treatment and prevention of CRC metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
The quantitative phosphoproteomic experiments were performed following the protocol of Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou, China). The collected samples were added with 4 times the volume of 10% TCA/acetone and kept at -20 ℃ for 4 h. After centrifuging at 4 ℃ for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed with precooled acetone three times, air dried, and then finally redissolved with 8 M urea. The protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and the protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The protein solution was then reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and then pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% over 8 min, and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting as 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched on the human UniProt database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set at > 40.  We used iGPS1.0 software for predicting kinase-substrate regulations, which is based on the theory that short linear motifs (SLMs) around phosphorylation sites (p-sites) provide the primary specificity. The software utilized GPS2.0 algorithm for the prediction of site-specific kinase-substrate relations (ssKSRs) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) information was used as the major contextual factor to filtrate potentially false-positive hits. A “medium” threshold was chosen and the parameter “Interaction” was set to “Exp./String.” GSEA method was used to predict kinase activities, in which log-transformed phosphorylation levels (or Ratio values) as a rank file and kinase-phosphorylation site regulations were formatted into a .gmt file in a sample (or a comparable group). Normalized enrichment scores (NES) of enrichment results were regarded as kinase activity scores. For each kinase, the kinase was predicted as positive if the predominant change of substrates was an increase in phosphorylation and vice versa.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Refractory metastatic colorectal cancer; nmhc iia; phosphorylation; yap/akt/foxo pathway; ls-1-2

### Affiliations
Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute.
Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute

### Submitter
Dengbo Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Dengbo Ji
Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute.


