### Accession
PXD003071

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals that Parkinson’s disease kinase LRRK2 regulates a subset of Rab GTPases

### Description
Mutations in Park8, encoding for the multidomain Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein, comprise the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson’s disease (PD). G2019S, the most common amino acid substitution activates the kinase two to three-fold. This has motivated the development of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors; however, poor consensus on physiological LRRK2 substrates has hampered clinical development of such therapeutics. We employ a combination of phosphoproteomics, genetics and pharmacology to unambiguously identify a subset of Rab GTPases as key LRRK2 substrates. LRRK2 directly phosphorylates these both in vivo and in vitro on an evolutionary conserved residue in the switch II domain. Pathogenic LRRK2 variants mapping to different functional domains increase phosphorylation of Rabs and this strongly decreases their affinity to regulatory proteins including Rab GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). Our findings uncover a key class of bona-fide LRRK2 substrates and a novel regulatory mechanism of Rabs that connects them to PD.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 10 mM Tris pH 7.5), boiled and sonicated, and precipitated over-night using ice-cold acetone (v/v= 80%). After centrifugation (4000 g) the pellet was washed at least two times with 80% ice-cold acetone before air drying and resuspension (sonication) in either urea (6 M urea, 2 M thiorurea, 50 mM Tris pH 8) or TFE buffer (10% 2-2-2-trifluorethanol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)). Proteins were digested using LysC and trypsin (1:100), over-night at 37°C. Peptides for total proteome measurements were desalted on C18 StageTips and phosphopeptides were enriched as described previously (Humphrey et al, Nature Biotechnology, 2015)

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.6 or 1.5.3.15 (49, 50) with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Searches were performed against the Mouse or Human UniProt FASTA database (September 2014). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein, oxidation of methionine, and/or phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, Tyr residue (PhosphoSTY) as variable modifications. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, and peptides had to be fully tryptic. Quantification was performed by MaxQuant, ‘match between runs’ was enabled, with a matching time window of 0.5-0.7 min. Bioinformatic analyses were performed with Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org) and Microsoft Excel and data visualized using Graph Prism (GraphPad Software Inc) or R studio (https://www.rstudio.com/). Hierarchical clustering of phosphosites was performed on logarithmized (Log2) intensities. Significance was assessed using one sample t-test, two-sample student’s t-test and ANOVA analysis, for which replicates were grouped, and statistical tests performed with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Missing data points were replaced by data imputation after filtering for valid values (all valid values in at least one experimental group). Error bars are mean ± SEM or mean ± SD.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in Park8, encoding for the multidomain Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein, comprise the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). G2019S, the most common amino acid substitution activates the kinase two- to threefold. This has motivated the development of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors; however, poor consensus on physiological LRRK2 substrates has hampered clinical development of such therapeutics. We employ a combination of phosphoproteomics, genetics, and pharmacology to unambiguously identify a subset of Rab GTPases as key LRRK2 substrates. LRRK2 directly phosphorylates these both in vivo and in vitro on an evolutionary conserved residue in the switch II domain. Pathogenic LRRK2 variants mapping to different functional domains increase phosphorylation of Rabs and this strongly decreases their affinity to regulatory proteins including Rab GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). Our findings uncover a key class of bona-fide LRRK2 substrates and a novel regulatory mechanism of Rabs that connects them to PD.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lrrk2, Substrates, Rab gtpases

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried

### Submitter
Martin Steger

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried


