### Accession
PXD028338

### Title
Comparative analysis of gut EVs from mice on high and low fat diet

### Description
Currently, it is an open question how gut senses metabolic alterations and whether this is transmitted to other tissues via EVs. Here, we observed that protein packaging in gut derived EVs (GDE) from a diet induced-prediabetic mouse mode, specifically small intestine, is increased in prediabetes. Proteins related to lipid metabolism and to oxidative stress management were more abundant in prediabetic GDE compared to healthy controls.   Low-fat diet: A1 to A3  high-fat diet: A4 to A6

### Sample Protocol
EV isolation: After sacrifice the small intestine was removed, washed with PBS and cultured overnight, at 37ºC and 5%CO2, in RPMI medium (Sigma) supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin and 10% Fetal Bovine Serum EV-free, to avoid contaminations from serum EVs. In the following day medium was collected. Conditioned medium was submitted to two initial centrifugations (10 min, 500 g and 20 min, 3 000 g) to remove any suspended or dead cells in the medium. To remove large EVs, media was centrifuged (20 min, 12 000 g) and the pellet was discarded. The supernatant enriched in small EVs was again centrifuged (2 h 20 min, 100 000 g), and the EVs enriched pellet was collected. For sucrose cushion purification, this pellet was resuspended in 14 mL filtered phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Corning 15313581, NY, US) and added the top of 4 mL sucrose solution (D2O containing 1.2 g of protease-free sucrose and 96 mg of Tris base adjusted to pH 7.4). A new ultracentrifugation was performed (1 h 10 min, 100 000 g), after which 4 mL of the sucrose fraction was collected using a 18 G needle placed at the bottom of the ultracentrifugation tube (away from the pellet). Finally, 16 mL of PBS were added to the collected sucrose/EVs solution and an overnight (16 h, 100 000 g) ultracentrifugation was performed. The pellet containing the isolated EVs was resuspended in filtered PBS.   Protein Digestion and Fractionation An equal amount of whole cell and EVs lysates was further processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. In short, protein solutions containing SDS and DTT were loaded onto filtering columns ((Millipore, Billerica, MA) and washed exhaustively with 8M urea in HEPES buffer [1]. Proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was performed by overnight digestion with trypsin sequencing grade (Promega).  Mass spectrometry: Peptide samples were analysed by nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano 3000) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, 5 μL of sample was loaded onto a custom made fused capillary pre-column (2 cm length, 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID) with a flow of 5 μL per min for 7 min. Trapped peptides were separated on a custom made fused capillary column (20 cm length, 360 μm outer diameter, 75 μm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 3-μm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch- Entringen, Germany) with a flow of 300 nL per minute using a linear gradient from 92 % A (0.1% formic acid) to 28 % B (0,1% formic acid in 100 acetonitrile) over 93 min followed by a linear gradient from 28 % B to 35 % B over 20 min at a flowrate of 300 nl per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying automatic data-dependent switch between one Orbitrap survey MS scan in the mass range of 400 to 1200 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of the 15 most intense ions observed in the MS scan. AGC target value in the Orbitrap for MS and MSMS scans were 1,000,000 ions at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 for MS scans, and 25,000 ions at m/z 200 for MSMS scans. Peptide fragmentation in the HCD cell was performed at normalized collision energy of 31 eV. Ion selection threshold was set to 5,000 ions for MSMS analysis, and maximum injection time was 100 ms for MS scans and 200 ms for MSMS scans. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds.    References: 1) Wisniewski, J.R.; Zougman, A.; Nagaraj, N.; Mann, M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature methods 2009, 6, 359-362, doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322

### Data Protocol
Database dependent search: Mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm on the peptide level and 10 Da on the fragment ions. A maximum of four missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. M oxidation, N-terminal protein Acetyl, Q Deamidation and N Deamidation were set as variable modifications. The MSMS data was searched against all reviewed mouse proteins from UniProt with concatenation of all the sequences in reverse maintaining only lysine and arginine in place. The data was searched and quantified with both MaxQuant [1] and VEMS [2].  Quantitative analysis Intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) were calculated by dividing total ion counts with the number of theoretical canonical tryptic peptides for a given protein (missed cleavage theoretical peptides were not counted) [3]. Quantitative data from VEMS were analyzed in R statistical programming language. Protein label free expression values were preprocessed by removing common MS contaminants followed by log2(x + 1) transformation, and quantile normalization. The quantitative values were all subjected to statistical analysis utilizing the R package limma [4] where contrast between mice on high and low fat diet was specified. Correction for multiple testing was applied using the method of Benjamini & Hochberg [5].   References: 1) Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367–72.  2) Carvalho AS, Ribeiro H, Voabil P, Penque D, Jensen ON, Molina H, et al. Global mass spectrometry and transcriptomics array based drug profiling provides novel insight into glucosamine induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014;13(12):3294– 3) Schwanhausser, B.; Busse, D.; Li, N.; Dittmar, G.; Schuchhardt, J.; Wolf, J.; Chen, W.; Selbach, M. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 2011, 473, 337-342, doi:10.1038/nature10098. 4) Smyth, G.K. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical applications in genetics and molecular biology 2004, 3, Article3, doi:10.2202/1544-6115.1027. 5) Benjamini, Y.; Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B 1995, 57, 289–300.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) mediate communication in physiological and pathological conditions. In the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes, inter-organ communication plays an important role in its progress and metabolic surgery leads to its remission. Moreover, gut dysbiosis is emerging as a diabetogenic factor. However, it remains unclear how the gut senses metabolic alterations and whether this is transmitted to other tissues via EVs. Using a diet-induced prediabetic mouse model, we observed that protein packaging in gut-derived EVs (GDE), specifically the small intestine, is altered in prediabetes. Proteins related to lipid metabolism and to oxidative stress management were more abundant in prediabetic GDE compared to healthy controls. On the other hand, proteins related to glycolytic activity, as well as those responsible for the degradation of polyubiquitinated composites, were depleted in prediabetic GDE. Together, our findings show that protein packaging in GDE is markedly modified during prediabetes pathogenesis, thus suggesting that prediabetic alterations in the small intestine are translated into modified GDE proteomes, which are dispersed into the circulation where they can interact with and influence the metabolic status of other tissues. This study highlights the importance of the small intestine as a tissue that propagates prediabetic metabolic dysfunction throughout the body and the importance of GDE as the messengers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028338.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Type 2 diabetes, Lipids; diet, Gut, Mice

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal  E-mail: rune.matthiesen@nms.unl.pt |  www.nms.unl.pt

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal  E-mail: rune.matthiesen@nms.unl.pt |  www.nms.unl.pt


