### Accession
PXD008760

### Title
Exoproteome in a perfusion bioreactor containing antibody-producing CHO cells at various cell densities

### Description
Chinese Hamster ovary (CHO) cells are the main platform used to produce recombinant proteins in the biopharmaceutical industry and are commonly cultured in either fed-batch or perfusion mode. However, the optimization of the complex biological systems used in such processes is extremely challenging. Omics approaches can reveal otherwise unknown characteristics of these systems and identify culture parameters that can be manipulated to optimize the cultivation process.  Here we have applied proteomic profiling to a monoclonal antibody (mAb) production operated in perfusion mode to explore how cell biology and reactor environment change as the cell density reaches ≥ 200 x 106 cells/mL. The proteomics data show an increase of structural proteins as cell density increase, signs of oxidative stress and changes in glutathione metabolism at very high cell densities. Additionally, metabolomic profiling was carried out. See article “High cell density culture has a maintained exoproteome and metabolome” for more information.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant samples from seventeen days (3, 5, 10, 12, 14, 18, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 30, 38, 39, 40, 41 and 45) were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by the previously described filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al, 2009) using a 10kDa cut-off filter (PALL). Briefly, each sample was diluted 1:2 in 8 M Urea and applied to the filter for washing, reduction and alkylation according to the original protocol. After overnight digestion using porcine trypsin (Sigma) in a 1:50 E:S (w/w) ratio, peptides were extracted and desalted using in-house prepared StageTips packed with Empore C18 Bonded Silica matrix (3M, Saint Paul, MN) (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Three layers of octadecyl membrane were placed in 200-µl pipette tips. The membrane was activated by addition of 100% ACN, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 2000 rcf. The membrane was equilibrated by addition of 0.1% FA, MQ followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 2000 rcf. The samples were acidified by addition of 7 ul 10% FA prior addition onto the membrane, followed by centrifugation for 1 min at 2000 rcf. The membrane was washed twice with 0.1% FA, MQ, and the peptides were eluted in two steps using 60% ACN, MQ. Desalted peptides were subjected for BCA analysis and then vacuum‐dried and stored at -20°C before LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography was performed using an UltiMate 3000 binary RS nano system (Thermo Scientific) with an EASY-Spray ion source. All samples were stored in their lyophilized state and resuspended by the autosampler prior injection as 1 µg peptides were loaded onto column. Three technical replicates were used for each sample and material was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å), washed 5 min at 0.250 µl/min with solvent A (95% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), and thereafter separated using a PepMap 800 C18 column (15 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm). The gradient went from solvent A to solvent B (90% ACN, 5% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) at a constant flow of 0.250 µl/min, up to 43% solvent B in 40 min, followed by an increase up to 55% in 10 min and thereafter a steep increase to 100% B in 2 min. Online LC–MS/MS was performed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A Top5 MS-method with master scans performed at 60,000 resolution (mass range 300–1,600 m/z, AGC 3e6) was followed by five consecutive MS/MS events at 30,000 resolution (AGC 1e5, underfill ratio 0.1%) with normalized collision energy set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4, Cox & Mann, 2008) using the standard settings, and the Andromeda search engine using the Cricetulus griseus reference proteome (Uniprot‐ID: # UP000001075, downloaded in January 2017) together with Immunoglobulin heavy constant gamma 1 (sp|P01857|IGHG1_HUMAN). The iBAQ values for the technical replicates were combined and normalized by removing contaminants and reverse hits and the remaining values were divided by the total iBAQ intensity for their corresponding day. Pearson correlations of the sample distribution were calculated with proteins without missing values (950 in total). Spearman correlations were used to determine correlations between proteins, cell density and pCO2. Proteins without missing values were used. Changes in abundance for individual proteins between cell density groups were calculated by Welch’s t-test and a doubling or halving in intensity together with an adjusted p-value (FDR) below 0.05 was considered a significant change. Comparisons were skipped if less than three non-missing values were encountered for any group.

### Publication Abstract
The optimization of bioprocesses for biopharmaceutical manufacturing by Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells can be a challenging endeavor and, today, heavily relies on empirical methods treating the bioreactor process and the cells as black boxes. Multi-omics approaches have the potential to reveal otherwise unknown characteristics of these systems and identify culture parameters to more rationally optimize the cultivation process. Here, the authors have applied both metabolomic and proteomic profiling to a perfusion process, using CHO cells for antibody production, to explore how cell biology and reactor environment change as the cell density reaches &#x2265;200&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>6</sup> &#x2009;cells&#x2009;mL<sup>-1</sup> . The extracellular metabolic composition obtained in perfusion mode shows a markedly more stable profile in comparison to fed-batch, despite a far larger range of viable cell densities in perfusion. This stable profile is confirmed in the extracellular proteosome. Furthermore, the proteomics data shows an increase of structural proteins as cell density increases, which could be due to a higher shear stress and explain the decrease in cell diameter at very high cell densities. Both proteomic and metabolic results shows signs of oxidative stress and changes in glutathione metabolism at very high cell densities. The authors suggest the methodology presented herein to be a powerful tool for optimizing processes of recombinant protein production.

### Keywords
Bioreactor, Monoclonal antibody (mab), Perfusion, Exoproteome, Lc-ms/ms, Chinese hamster ovary (cho), High cell density

### Affiliations
KTH (Royal Institute of Technology)
School of Biotechnology, AlbaNova University Center, Royal Institute of Technol-ogy (KTH), 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Magnus Lundqvist

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Rockberg
School of Biotechnology, AlbaNova University Center, Royal Institute of Technol-ogy (KTH), 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden


