### Accession
PXD034918

### Title
DNA sequence and chromatin modifiers cooperate to confer epigenetic bistability at imprinting control regions

### Description
DNA methylation is essential for embryonic development and implicated in the regulation of genomic imprinting. Genomic imprinting is established in the germline through parent-specific methylation of distinct cis-regulatory DNA sequences, called imprinting control regions (ICRs). Which factors bind to the opposing chromatin states at ICRs within the same nuclear environment was not systematically addressed. By using a proximity labelling approach with the methylation sensitive transcription factor ZFP57, we identified ATF7IP and other major components of the epigenetic maintenance machinery at ICRs.

### Sample Protocol
TurboID samples were prepared as described in Villaseñor et al., 2020. In brief, cells were grown as quadruplicates on 15 cm plates, incubated with 50 μM biotin (Sigma Aldrich) for 12 h upon 70 % confluency, and harvested with trypsinization. Nuclei were extracted, immunoprecipitation was performed with Streptavidin M-280 Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific), washed with high stringent salt concentrations, and peptides were eluted from beads by on-bead digestion. Peptides were cleaned-up using C18 stage tips (provided by Functional Genomics Center Zurich, FGCZ).

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition was performed as described in Villaseñor et al., 2020, on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with block randomized samples. MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) was used for protein identification and label-free quantification (Cox and Mann, 2008), based on the mouse reference proteome (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL) version 2018_12 combined with manually annotated contaminant proteins, with a protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) values set to 1%. Perseus was used for statistical analysis as described in Villaseñor et al., 2020 (Tyanova et al., 2016). For this, only proteins were kept that were identified in 3 out of 4 samples per group. Missing values were imputed from a 1.8 standard deviations left-shifted Gaussian distribution with a width of 0.3. A t-test was used to identify potential interactors using a FDR threshold of < 0.05 and a S0 value of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic imprinting is regulated by parental-specific DNA methylation of imprinting control regions (ICRs). Despite an identical DNA sequence, ICRs can exist in two distinct epigenetic states that are memorized throughout unlimited cell divisions and reset during germline formation. Here, we systematically study the genetic and epigenetic determinants of this epigenetic bistability. By iterative integration of ICRs and related DNA sequences to an ectopic location in the mouse genome, we first identify the DNA sequence features required for maintenance of epigenetic states in embryonic stem cells. The autonomous regulatory properties of ICRs further enabled us to create DNA-methylation-sensitive reporters and to screen for key components involved in regulating their epigenetic memory. Besides DNMT1, UHRF1 and ZFP57, we identify factors that prevent switching from methylated to unmethylated states and show that two of these candidates, ATF7IP and ZMYM2, are important for the stability of DNA and H3K9 methylation at ICRs in embryonic stem cells.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Epigenetic, Genomic imprinting

### Affiliations
Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity (IBB)  Department of Biology  Faculty of Science  Utrecht University  Kruytbuilding N806  Padualaan 8, 3584 CH  Utrecht  The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Tuncay Baubec

### Lab Head
Dr Tuncay Baubec
Institute of Biodynamics and Biocomplexity (IBB)  Department of Biology  Faculty of Science  Utrecht University  Kruytbuilding N806  Padualaan 8, 3584 CH  Utrecht  The Netherlands


