### Accession
PXD026790

### Title
Evaluation of mass spectrometry MS/MS spectra for the presence of isopeptide crosslinked peptides

### Description
Isopeptide crosslinked proteins can be the product of transglutaminase or of exposure to organophosphorus toxicants (OP).  Transglutaminase links glutamine to lysine with loss of ammonia.  OP toxicants induce a link between glutamic acid and lysine with loss of water.  Our goal was to establish criteria to distinguish real from false isopeptide crosslinks reported by software searches of mass spectrometry data.  We used fragmentation spectra of tryptic peptides from MAP-rich tubulin Sus scrofa as a test system for detection of naturally-occurring isopeptide crosslinks.  Data were analyzed with Protein Prospector.  Criteria for the assignments included the presence of at least 1 crosslink specific product ion, fragment ions from both peptides, Protein Prospector scores ≥20, and best fit of the MS/MS data to the crosslinked peptide as opposed to a linear peptide.  Out of 301,364 spectra, 15 potential transglutaminase-type crosslinked peptide candidates were identified.  Manual evaluation of these MS/MS spectra reduced the number to 1 valid crosslink between Q112 of NFH and K368 of Tau.  Immunopurification with anti-isopeptide 81D1C2 confirmed that MAP-rich tubulin contained only one isopeptide.   Support for this isopeptide bond was obtained by showing that transglutaminase was capable of incorporating dansyl-aminohexyl -QQIV into K368.  A model of the KIETHK-QLEAHNR isopeptide was synthesized with the aid of transglutaminase.  MS/MS spectra of the model validated our interpretation of the native isopeptide.  An OP-induced isopeptide bond between K163 of tubulin alpha-1A and E158 of tubulin beta-4B was induced by treating MAP-rich tubulin with 100 µM chlorpyrifos oxon.  This crosslink was supported by the criteria described above and by the presence of diethoxyphospho-lysine 163 in the tubulin alpha-1A peptide.  The information obtained in this work is valuable for future studies that aim to understand why exposure to OP is associated with increased risk of neurodegenerative disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protocol 1 -- SDS Gel slices from MAP-rich Tubulin Samples of MAP-rich tubulin were reduced and denatured with dithiothreitol/SDS in a boiling water bath for 3 min.  Denatured samples were run on gradient 4-22% polyacrylamide gels and stained with Coomassie Blue.  Five bands containing visible protein were cut from each lane, ranging from 15 kDa to the top of the separating gel.  Three separate samples were prepared.  A total of 29 gel slices were analyzed. Proteins were digested with trypsin in-gel.  Peptides were extracted from the gel, dried, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and submitted for mass spectral analysis. Peptide separation was performed with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) at 36°C.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm x 2 cm; Thermo Scientific cat# 165535) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min and washed with 100% solvent A for 10 minutes.  Then, they were transferred to a Thermo Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm with 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific cat# ES803) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient from 5 to 50% solvent B in 20 min, followed by another linear gradient from 50 to 100% solvent B in 40 minutes.  The column was washed with 100% solvent B for 30 minutes before being re-equilibrated with 5% solvent B for 25 minutes. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Data were collected using data dependent acquisition.  A survey full scan MS (from 350-1800 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000.  The AGC target was set at 4x105 and the ion filling time was set at 100 msec.  The 25 most intense ions with charge state of 2-6 were isolated in a 3 sec cycle and fragmented using HCD (high-energy collision induced dissociation) with 35% normalized collision energy.  Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.  The AGC target for MS/MS was set at 5x104, ion filling time at 60 ms, and dynamic exclusion at 30 sec with a 10 ppm mass window.  Data were reported in *.raw format. Protocol 2 -- in-solution digestion of MAP-rich Tubulin MAP-rich tubulin solutions at 0.5 mg/ml were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and dialyzed against 20 mM NH4bicarbonate. Protein concentration was adjusted to 1.3 mg/ml and digested with trypsin.  Isopeptide crosslink containing peptides were enriched by immunopurification with Dynabeads-Protein G conjugated to isopeptide antibody 81D1C2. Bound peptides were released with 0.1% formic acid and submitted to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Data were acquired as described above. Protocol 3 -- Dansyl cadaverine/DansylQQIV labeled MAP-rich Tubulin MAP-rich tubulin was treated with 1 mM dansyl cadaverine or 1 mM dansyl amino hexyl QQIV in the presence of human transglutaminase, 2.5 mM calcium chloride, and 1 mM dithiothreitol at pH 8.5.  Proteins were separated by SDS PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue.  Seven bands were cut from the gel ranging from 15 kDa to the top of the stacking gel.  Gel slices were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and the resultant peptides were submitted to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer as described above. Protocol 4 -- Chlorpyrifos oxon induced isopeptide formation. MAP-rich tubulin at 0.5 mg/ml was incubated with 0.1 mM chlorpyrifos oxon at pH 8, 37°C, for 48 hours.  The sample was resolved on SDS PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue. Protein bands were cut from the gel, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin in-gel.  Peptides extracted from the gel were submitted to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer and data acquired as described above.

### Data Protocol
The *.raw data files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer were converted to *.mgf files using MSConvert (ProteoWizard Tools from SourceForge) and were analyzed using Protein Prospector/Batch-Tag Web.  A specialized database was used that consisted of  proteins: tubulin alpha-1A chain (NP_001302639), tubulin beta-4B chain (XP_003122400), microtubule-associated protein 2 isoform X8 (XP_013839898), microtubule-associated protein 1B isoform X1 (XP_003134080), microtubule-associated protein Tau isoform X16 (XP_020922473), and neurofilament heavy polypeptide isoform (XP_005670835).  For isopeptide crosslinks between lysine (K) and glutamine (Q), the search parameters were as follows.  1) Database: User protein.  2) User Protein Sequences: FASTA files from NCBI Protein Database for the user proteins were pasted into this window. 3) Precursor Charge Range: 2, 3, 4, 5.  4) Masses: monoisotopic.  5) Parent Tol: 20 ppm.  Frag Tol: 30 ppm.  6) Instrument: ESI-Q-high-res.  7) Digest: Trypsin.  8) Max missed cleavages: 3.  9) Constant Mods: Carbamidomethyl (C).  10) Variable Mods: Oxidation (M).  11) Expectation Calc Method: None.  12) Mass Modifications: range -18 to 3883 Da.  (Formation of the isopeptide bond between K and Q is accompanied by loss of 17 Da due to loss of ammonia.  The -18 mass modification allows for loss of water (-18) and loss of ammonia (-17).  13) Check mark in boxes K and Q.  14) Check mark in box Uncleaved.  Checking the Uncleaved box avoids false candidates in which a C terminal lysine is reported as the crosslinked lysine.  Such reports are false because trypsin does not cleave modified lysines.  15) Crosslinking; Link Search Type: User Defined Link.  16) User Defined Link Parameters; Link AAs: K, Protein N-term>Q.  17) Bridge Elem Comp: N-1 H-3. For isopeptide crosslinks between lysine and glutamate or aspartate, search parameters 1) to 12), 14) and 15) were identical to those in the search for KQ crosslinked peptides above.  13) Check mark in boxes D, E, and K.  16) User Defined Link Parameters; Link AAs: E, D, Protein C-term>K, Protein N-term.  17) Bridge Elem Comp: H-2 O-1. For dansyl-aminohexyl QQIV adducts, search parameters 1) to 11), 13) and 14) were identical to parameters in the search for dansyl cadaverine adducts above.  12) Mass Modifications: range 815 to 816 Da.  Check mark in box K.  15) User Defined Variable Modifications; Mod 1 Label: dansylQQIV; Specificity: K; Mod 1 Elem Comp:  C39H57N7O10S. For dansyl cadaverine adducts, parameters 1) to 11) and 13) were identical to those in the search for KQ crosslinked peptides above. 12) Mass Modifications: range 318 to 320 Da.  Check mark in box Q.  14) Crosslinking; Link Search Type: No Link.  15) User Defined Variable Modifications: Mod 1 Label: dansyl cadaverine; Specificity: Q; Mod 1 Elem Comp: C17H22N2O2S.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Map-rich tubulin, Dansyl-aminohexyl qqiv, Crosslinks, Dansyl cadaverine, Isopeptide, Neurodegenerative disease, Transglutaminase, Protein prospector

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, United States

### Submitter
Lawrence Schopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Oksana Lockridge
Eppley Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, United States


