### Accession
PXD010581

### Title
The ERK5 signalling pathway employs a KLF2-ZSCAN4 auto-regulatory module to induce embryonic 2-cell stage genes

### Description
The ERK5 MAP kinase signalling pathway was recently discovered as a driver of naïve pluripotency in mouse Embryonic Stem Cells (mESCs). However, the molecular functions of ERK5 in mESCs have not been investigated. Here, we employ combinatorial mESC proteomics to identify ERK5 target genes and substrates. Global proteomic profiling reveals ZSCAN4 and other 2-cell stage genes as transcriptional targets of the ERK5 pathway. ZSCAN4 expression is specifically induced by ERK5-dependent transcription of the core pluripotency factor KLF2. Additionally, ERK5 directly phosphorylates tandem KLF2 Thr-Pro/Ser-Pro motifs identified by phosphoproteomics to recruit the FBXW7-CUL1 E3 ligase, promoting KLF2 ubiquitylation and degradation. ERK5 phosphorylation of KLF2 thereby provides negative-feedback control to restrain transcriptional induction of ZSCAN4. Our data uncover an auto-regulatory module by which ERK5 co-opts KLF2 to pattern ZSCAN4 expression. This study provides the first molecular insight into ERK5 functions in mESCs, and suggests a novel role for ERK5 signalling in stem cell rejuvenation

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Cells were lysed in 8M Urea, 50mM TEAB pH (8.5), sonicated and protein quantification was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Protein). A volume corresponding to 5 mg of proteins for each sample was left to reduce by adding TCEP for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated by adding 84 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then diluted to 1M Urea and digested overnight at 37 °C by adding porcine trypsin (1:50, w/w) (Pierce). Peptides were desalted  and concentrated via the C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters).  Phosphopeptide Enrichment As the proportion of phosphopeptides identified from nonphosphopeptide enriched proteome is routinely <5%, a sufficient amount of starting material is needed in order to produce a sufficient phosphopeptide population amenable to LC-MS. Tryptic peptides (10 mg per TMT channel) were resuspended in 1 mL of 2M Lactic acid/50% acetonitrile and centrifuges 15 000 xg for 20 min. Supernatants were placed in an Eppendorf Lobind Tube containing 24 mg of titanium dioxide beads (GL Sciences) and vortexed for 1h at room temperature. Beads were washed twice with 2M lactic acid/50% acetonitrile and once with 0.1% TFA in 50% Acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 150 L of 60 mM Ammonium hydroxide (pH > 10.5), then acidified with 40 L of 20% formic acid and desalted via C18 Macro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus).  Tandem Mass Tagging Labeling Isobaric labeling of phosphorylated peptides was performed using the 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Scientific). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 41 μL of acetonitrile and 20 μL was added to the corresponding fractions, previously dissolved in 50 μL of 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. The reaction was quenched by addition of 4 μL of 5% hydroxylamine after 1 hour incubation at room temperature. According to the different temperature points, labelled peptides were combined, acidified with 200 μL of 1% TFA (pH  2) and concentrated using the C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters).   Basic High-Reversed Chromatography fractionation (bHRP) TMT labeled phosphorylated peptides were subjected to basic High-Reversed Chromatography fractionation (bHRP). Labeled peptides were solubilized in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 8.0) and separated on a Gemini C18 column (250 × 3 mm, 3m C18 110 Å pore size)(Phenomenex). Using a DGP-3600BM pump system equipped with a SRD-3600 degasser (Thermo Scientific) a 40 min gradient length from 1% to 90%  of acetonitrile (flow rate of 0.25 mL/min), separated the peptide mixtures into a total of 40 fractions. The 40 fractions were merged into 16 samples, acidified with 1 %TFA (pH  2), desalted via C18 Macro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus), dried under vacuum centrifugation and re-suspended in 2% ACN / 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS) Samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC Systems chromatography (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 PepMap, serving as a trapping column (2 cm x 100 µm ID, PepMap C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) followed by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size)(Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2.4-20% (ACN, 0.1% FA) over 175 min followed by a step from 20-28% ACN, 0.1% FA over 30 min at 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric identification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated “Top Speed” data dependant mode, operated in positive ion mode. FullScan spectra were acquired in a range from 400 m/z to 1600 m/z, at a resolution of 120 000 (at 200 m/z), with an automated gain control (AGC) of 300,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Charge state screening is enabled to exclude precursors with a charge state of 1. The intensity threshold for a MS/MS fragmentation is set to 104 counts. The most intense precursor ions are isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 35% and activation Q of 0.25. MS/MS fragments ions were analysed in the Orbitrap mass analyser with a 50 000 resolution at 200 m/z. The detection of MS/MS fragments is set up as the “Universal Method”, using a maximum injection time of 300 ms and a maximum AGC of 2,000 ions

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and quantitative data analysis of TMT data Protein identification and TMT quantification were performed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.1.7 (Cox J., et al, 2008, PMID: 19029910) with the following parameters: stable modification carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N terminus) and deamidation (NQ). Search was conducted using the Uniprot Human database including common contaminants. Mass accuracy was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for orbitrap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 5 amino acids. TMT quantification of identified proteins referred to razor and unique peptides, and required a minimum ratio count of 2. Normalized ratios were extracted for each protein/conditions and were used for downstream analyses A student’s t-test (two-tailed, homoscedastic) was performed on the calculated ratios and proteins with p<0.05 and a fold-change >2-fold were considered significantly altered in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erk5, Tmt, Phosphoproteomic, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Prof Matthias Trost Chair of Proteomics Newcastle University Faculty of Medical Sciences Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences Framlington Place Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Prof Matthias Trost Chair of Proteomics Newcastle University Faculty of Medical Sciences Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences Framlington Place Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE2 4HH, UK


