### Accession
PXD022283

### Title
Alterations in the CO2 availability induce alterations in the phospho-proteome of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
Cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes that perform plant-like oxygenic photosynthesis. They evolved an inorganic carbon-concentrating mechanism to adapt to low CO2 conditions. Quantitative phospho-proteomics was applied to analyze regulatory features during the acclimation to low CO2 conditions in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Overall, more than 2500 proteins were quantified, equivalent to approximately 70% of the Synechocystis theoretical proteome. Proteins with changing abundances correlated largely with mRNA expression levels. Functional annotation of the non-correlating proteins revealed an enrichment of key metabolic processes fundamental for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Furthermore, 105 phospho-proteins harboring over 200 site-specific phosphorylation events were identified. Subunits of the bicarbonate transporter BCT1 and the redox switch protein CP12 were among phospho-proteins with significantly reduced phosphorylation levels at lower CO2, whereas the serine/threonine protein kinase SpkC revealed increased phosphorylation levels. The corresponding spkC mutant was characterized and showed decreased ability to acclimate to low CO2 conditions. Possible phosphorylation targets of SpkC including a BCT1 subunit were identified by phospho-proteomics. Collectively, our study highlights the importance of post-transcriptional regulation of protein abundances as well as post-translational regulation by protein phosphorylation for the successful acclimation towards low CO2 conditions in Synechocystis and possibly among cyanobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted in SDS buffer supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors and precipitated as described previously in Method B (Spät et al., 2015). Protein yields varied between replicates and were between 3 and 6 mg. Proteins were then predigested with Lys-C for 3 h prior to trypsin digestion. Resulting peptide solutions were loaded onto SepPak C18 1cc cartridges (Waters) for desalting and dimethylation labeling as described elsewhere (Boersema et al., 2008). Labeling efficiencies exceeded 95% in all cases. Dimethyl-labeled samples were mixed in equal ratios (light/intermediate/heavy label) based on measured protein concentrations from Bradford assay and adjusted based on pilot mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses of each mixed sample. For proteome analyses, each sample mix was subjected to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography, resulting in nine individually measured fractions (details described in Spät et al., 2018). For each replicate, phospho-peptide enrichment was performed by TiO2 chromatography with Sachtopore NP 5 µm spheres for five consecutive rounds as described before (Spät et al., 2018). Additional phospho-peptide enrichment based on magnetic bead purification (Ti4+ IMAC or TiO2 coated microparticles; ReSyn Bioscience) was test-wise performed when sufficient sample amounts were present according to the manufacturers protocol. All samples were purified by StageTips prior to MS analysis (Rappsilber et al., 2007) using nanoHPLC-MS/MS on Q Exactive HF, HF-X or Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometers (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was performed with MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.8.0; Tyanova et al., 2016) using a customized target-decoy Synechocystis proteome database. Detected phosphorylation event ratios were normalized by underlying protein ratios. Perseus software suite (version 1.6.5.0) was used for statistical analysis on phospho-proteome data.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes that perform plant-like oxygenic photosynthesis. They evolved an inorganic carbon-concentrating mechanism to adapt to low CO<sub>2</sub> conditions. Quantitative phosphoproteomics was applied to analyze regulatory features during the acclimation to low CO<sub>2</sub> conditions in the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Overall, more than 2500 proteins were quantified, equivalent to c.&#xa0;70% of the Synechocystis theoretical proteome. Proteins with changing abundances correlated largely with mRNA expression levels. Functional annotation of the noncorrelating proteins revealed an enrichment of key metabolic processes fundamental for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Furthermore, 105 phosphoproteins harboring over 200 site-specific phosphorylation events were identified. Subunits of the bicarbonate transporter BCT1 and the redox switch protein CP12 were among phosphoproteins with reduced phosphorylation levels at lower CO<sub>2</sub> , whereas the serine/threonine protein kinase SpkC revealed increased phosphorylation levels. The corresponding &#x394;spkC mutant was characterized and showed decreased ability to acclimate to low CO<sub>2</sub> conditions. Possible phosphorylation targets of SpkC including a BCT1 subunit were identified by phosphoproteomics. Collectively, our study highlights the importance of posttranscriptional regulation of protein abundances as well as posttranslational regulation by protein phosphorylation for the successful acclimation towards low CO<sub>2</sub> conditions in Synechocystis and possibly among cyanobacteria.

### Keywords
Bicarbonate transport, Phosphorylation, Spkc, Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Protein kinase, Mutant, Cyanobacteria, Carbon acclimation

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Rostock, A.-Einstein-Str. 3, Rostock D-18059, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hagemann
Institut für Biowissenschaften, Abteilung Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Rostock, A.-Einstein-Str. 3, Rostock D-18059, Germany


