### Accession
PXD009771

### Title
A Comparative Liver Label-Free Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Proteomic Profile Highlights Putative Metabolic Differences Between two Pig Breeds

### Description
Pig breeds have different attitude to traits like growth rate, carcass composition and reproduction parameters as well as other traits.  These traits considered as external traits or end phenotypes are the outcome of complex biological processes and interactions.  The main goal of pig breeding programs and the basis for crossbreeding is finding a balance between these traits.  In pig production, Large White and Duroc breeds are commonly used to optimise respectively fertility and growth ability and differ on several production traits, indeed the first breed as a high fertility characters whereas Duroc is used as terminal sire for her growth performance and good carcass quality traits.   In this study, we have used a quantitative label-free LC-MS proteomics approach to characterise and compare the liver proteome of two heavy Italian pig breeds, Italian Duroc and Italian Large White to identify difference due to their different genetic background. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 703094.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Protein extraction and digestion were performed according to a slightly modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol [Nat Meth, (2009) 6(5), 359-362].  Chemicals and waters used for protein extraction, digestion and for the preparation of buffers and solutions were of analytical grade.  Briefly, proteins were extracted from approximately 100 mg of liver tissue homogenised in 1 mL of extraction buffer [0.1% SDS (Affymetrix/Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), 100 mM Tris/HCl (Affymetrix/Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) pH 7.6, 10 mM DTT (Affymetrix/Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA)].  Liver samples were homogenised for 2 min using a homogenizer (G50 Tissue Grinder, Coyote Bioscience, Inc., China) in an Eppendorf tube immerse into liquid nitrogen.  The lysates were vortexed at room temperature for 3 min and then centrifuged at 16000 × r.c.f. at 4 °C for 5 min.  Samples were heated at 56 °C for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16000 × r.c.f. at 20 °C for 20 min.  The supernatants were transferred into new labelled tubes, were mixed, aliquoted and stored at -20 °C until usage.  Qubit™ Fluorometric Quantitation was used to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Protein samples were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich/Merck, USA) and then digested with trypsin according to the FASP method.  Samples were then purified from any contaminants using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), vacuum dried and stored at -20 °C.  All 10 peptide samples (five from Italian Duroc and five from Italian Large White pigs) were collected for mass spectrometry analysis.    Mass spectrometry analysis Dry peptides from each samples were resuspended in 25 µL of a mixture of water:acetonitrile:formic acid 97:3:2 and sonicated for 10 min at room temperature, then centrifuged at 12100 x r.c.f. for 10 min.  Analyses were performed on an ESI-Q-TOF Accurate-Mass spectrometer (G6520A, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), controlled by MassHunter software, Agilent (v. B.04.00) (https://www.agilent.com/en/products/software-informatics/masshunter-suite/masshunter/masshunter-software) and interfaced with a CHIP-cube to an Agilent 1200 nano-pump (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).   Chromatographic separation was performed on a high-capacity loading chip (Agilent Technologies) with a 75 µm internal diameter (I.D.), 150 mm, 300 Å C18 column, prior to a desalting step through a 500 nL trap column.  The injected samples (8 μL) ware loaded onto the trap column with a 4 μL/min 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA):acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2 v/v) phase flow.  After 3 min, the precolumn was switched in-line with the nanoflow pump (400 nL/min, phase A: water:ACN:FA (96.9:3:0.1 v/v/v), phase B: ACN:water:FA 94.5:5:0.1 v/v/v), equilibrated in 1% (v/v) B.  The peptides were eluted from the RP column through the following gradient: 1% for one min, 1->5% B in 7 min, 5->30% B over a period of 142 min, 30–60% B in 20 min, 60->90% B in 0.1 min, then held at 90% B for 8 min, and switched back to 1% B for column reconditioning, for a total runtime of 190 min.  Eight µL of each samples were run twice; analytical controls (a mix of baker’s yeast enolase and bovine serum albumin tryptic digests) were run daily to monitor chromatographic performances.  Ions were formed in a nano-ESI source, operated in positive mode, 1860 V capillary voltage, with the source gas heated at 350 °C and at a 5 L/min flow.  Fragmentor was set to 160 V, skimmer lens operated at 65 V.  Centroided MS and MS2 spectra were recorded from 250 to 1700 m/z and 70 to 1700 m/z, respectively, at scan rates of 8 and 3 Hz.  The six most intense multi-charged ions were selected for MS2 nitrogen-promoted collision-induced dissociation.  The collision energy was calculated according to the following expression: CE(V)=3.6∙(m/z)/100-3.  A precursor active exclusion of 0.22 min was set, and the detector was operated at 2 GHz in extended dynamic range mode.  Mass spectra were automatically recalibrated with two reference mass ions.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative profiling Raw data were converted into mascot generic format using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis (v. B.05.00, Agilent Technologies), were searched with MASCOT (Version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK) against an implemented version of the pig peptide atlas repository database (Proteomics, (2016). 16(4), 634-644.) and a database with common contaminants (cRAP, v.1.0) for peptide identification. The following search parameters were used: 40 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass error allowed, two missed cleavage allowed for trypsin, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modifier of cysteine residues, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and methionine oxidation as variable modification. The false discovery rate was estimated through an internal decoy database search. The peptide identification results were imported into an in-house TPP server (Trans Proteomic Pipeline, v. 5.1.0), rescored and validated with PeptideProphet [Anal Chem, (2002) 74(20), 5383-5392].  Protein inference was then achieved by ProteinProphet [Anal Chem, (2003) 75(17), 4646-4658].   Re-scored search results relative label-free quantification was performed with Skyline [Bioinformatics, (2010) 26(7), 966-968].  PepXML files and raw mzXML data were imported in Skyline; the protein database fasta was filtered keeping the proteins with a ProteinProphet score ≥0.9. MS1 data were correlated to the corresponding peptide identifications, matches were filtered (idotP ≥ 0.9) and quantificated.  Quantification data were exported and elaborated using InfernoRDN (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/InfernoRDN).

### Publication Abstract
The liver is a complex organ governing several physiological processes that define biological mechanisms affecting growth, feed efficiency and performance traits in all livestock species, including pig. Proteomics may contribute to a better understanding of the relationship between liver functions and complex production traits in pigs and to characterize this species as biomedical model. This study applied, for the first time, a label-free liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) proteomic approach to compare the liver proteome profiles of two important heavy pig breeds, Italian Duroc and Italian Large White. Liver specimens were collected (after slaughtering) from performance tested pigs of these two breeds, raised in standard conditions. The label-free LC-MS method captured a total of 501 proteins of which 200 were subsequently considered in the between breeds comparison. A statistical pipeline based on the sparse Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA), coupled with stability and significance tests, was applied for the identification of up or down regulated proteins between breeds. This analysis revealed a total of 25 proteins clearly separating Italian Duroc and Italian Large White pigs. Among the top proteins differentiating the two breeds, 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, mitochondrial (ACAA2) and histone H2B type 2-F (HIST2H2BF) were up-regulated in Italian Duroc pigs and carboxylesterase 3 (CES3) and ketohexokinase (KHK) were up-regulated in Italian Large White pigs. Fatty acid synthase (FASN), involved in fatty acid metabolism and encoded by a gene located in a QTL region for fatty acid composition, was up-regulated in Italian Large White pigs. The in silico protein interaction analysis showed that 16 of these proteins were connected in one big module. Bioinformatic functional analysis indicated that differentially expressed proteins were involved in several biological processes related to the metabolism of lipids, amino-acids, carbohydrates, cofactors and antibiotics/drugs, suggesting that these functions might distinguish Italian Duroc and Italian Large White pigs. This pilot comparative proteomic analysis of the porcine liver highlighted several biological factors that could determine the peculiar production potentials of these two heavy pig breeds, derived by their different genetic backgrounds.

### Keywords
Duroc, Label-free lc-ms, Liver, Proteomics, Large white

### Affiliations
Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences Viale Fanin 46, 40127, Bologna, Univerity of Bologna Italy
University of Bologna

### Submitter
Alessio Di Luca

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Fontanesi
Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences Viale Fanin 46, 40127, Bologna, Univerity of Bologna Italy


