### Accession
PXD016274

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis for A LysR-type transcriptional regulator LcrX in Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. glycines

### Description
- Identification of proteins whose expression was affected by lcrX knockout and LcrX-overexpressing strains in Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. glycines str. 8ra - Shotgun proteomic analysis was used - Four strains were used with three biological replicates (total 12 samples). Two samples are the wildtype strains carrying an empty vector: One (XagW+V) for comparison with lcrX-KO strain and the other (XagW_V) for comparison with LcrX-overexpressing strain. The third sample is lcrX-KO strain (Xag2894KO). The last sample is LcrX-overexpressing strain (Xag2894OE).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins/peptide preparation Proteomic analysis with two sets, Xag(EV) vs. Xag(LcrX) and Xag(EV) vs. Xag∆lcrX(EV), were independently performed by label-free shotgun comparative proteomic analysis. Previously established protocols were used for protein extraction and peptide quantification (Park et al., 2017). Bacterial cells were grown in XVM2 medium and grown again to a final concentration, an OD600 of 0.5 and harvested by centrifugation at 7300 ×g for 15 min at 28°C. After removing the supernatants, the pellet was washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), re-suspended in lysis buffer (6 M Guanidine-HCl, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8), and disrupted with an Ultrasonic Processor (Colo Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA). After sonication, the samples were centrifuged at 8,000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C, and then the supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined with a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The alkylation process was carried out in the presence of 100 mM iodoacetamide. Total proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid, washed with acetone, and then re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8). To digest the proteins, 5 µg of trypsin was used with 300 µg of total proteins. The digested samples were cleaned up using the Sep-Pak Vac 1cc tC18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The digested protein samples were quantified with a BCA protein assay kit.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry  Two microgram samples of digested peptides from three biological replicates in each strain were analyzed by split-free nano liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC II; Thermo Fisher Scientific) linked to an LTQ Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To separate the peptides, we used a 7.5-cm column packed with MAGIG C18AQ 200A (5 µm) material (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA). The samples were injected over 420 min with a gradient and flow rate that was maintained at 300 nL/min with water/acetonitrile gradient (solvent A: 100% H2O + 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 100% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid; 7% B for 5 min, 35% B for 380 min, 80% B for 10 min, and final at 7% B for 25 min). To obtain the full mass spectra, six data-dependent scans were carried out over m/z 300–2000 mass ranges. Charge state selection was allowed for 2+ and 3+ ions. Dynamic exclusion was permitted in one repeat count, 0.5 min repeat duration, and 3 min exclusion duration. The six most intense ions were sequentially selected from each full mass scan. This analysis was repeated using three biological replicates for each sample.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo proteome discoverer (ver. 1.3.0.399) combined with the SEQUEST search algorithm was used to evaluate the MS/MS spectra using the Xag strain 8ra database from the National Center for Biotechnology Information database. The target-decoy strategy was also used in this analysis to improve the confidence of identification (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Trypsin was assigned as the enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. For all peptides, 100 ppm was used for mass accuracy, and 0.01 was used for the false discovery rate, with a probability score >20. The Scaffold 4 program (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) was used to identify proteins that matched a minimum of two unique peptides. Comparative analyses were carried out using peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) (Choi et al., 2008) and proteins commonly detected in the three biological replicates were selected for comparison. PSMs from selected proteins were normalized to the total PSMs from all proteins in each sample. As a comparison parameter, the average value of the PSMs from three biological replicates was used to identify differentially abundant proteins (>2-fold) in Xag(EV) vs. Xag(LcrX) or Xag(EV) vs. Xag∆lcrX(EV). The Student’s t-test was used for statistical analysis. Differentially abundant proteins were classified by clustering the orthologous group (COG) analysis (Lu et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Xanthomonas axonopodis</i> pv. <i>glycines</i> (<i>Xag</i>) is a Gram-negative bacterium that causes bacterial pustule disease in soybean. To acclimate to new environments, the expression of genes in bacteria is controlled directly or indirectly by diverse transcriptional factors. Among them, LysR type transcriptional regulators are well-characterized and abundant in bacteria. In a previous study, comparative proteomic analysis revealed that LysR type carbohydrate-related transcriptional regulator in <i>Xag</i> (LcrX) was more abundant in XVM2, which is a minimal medium, compared with a rich medium. However, the functions of LcrX in <i>Xag</i> have not been characterized. In this study, we generated an LcrX-overexpressing strain, <i>Xag</i>(LcrX), and the knockout mutant strain, <i>Xag&#x394;lcrX</i>(EV), to elucidate the functions of LcrX. Bacterial multiplication of <i>Xag</i>(LcrX) in soybean was significantly impaired, indicating that LcrX is related to virulence. Comparative proteomic analysis revealed that LcrX is mainly involved in carbohydrate metabolism/transport and inorganic ion transport/metabolism. Based on the results of proteomics analysis, diverse phenotypic assays were carried out. A gel electrophoresis mobility shift assay demonstrated that LcrX specifically bound to the putative promoter regions of genes encoding putative fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase and protease. Through a 96-well plate assay under various conditions, we confirmed that the growth of <i>Xag</i>(LcrX) was dramatically affected in the presence of various carbon sources, while the growth of <i>Xag&#x394;lcrX</i>(EV) was only slightly changed. Biofilm formation activity was reduced in <i>Xag</i>(LcrX) but enhanced in <i>Xag&#x394;lcrX</i>(EV). The production of siderophores was also decreased in <i>Xag</i>(LcrX) but not altered in <i>Xag&#x394;lcrX</i>(EV). In contrast, LcrX was not associated with exopolysaccharide production, protease activity, or bacterial motility. These findings provide new insights into the functions of a carbohydrate-related transcriptional regulator in <i>Xag</i>.

### Keywords
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. glycines, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Lysr type transcriptional regulators

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea
Chung-Ang University

### Submitter
Sang-Wook Han

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Wook Han
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea


