### Accession
PXD008257

### Title
Vaccination agaisnt intracellular pathogen for aquaculture

### Description
Secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs) is a common feature pf both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. Isolated EVs have been shown to contain differetn types of molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids and reported to be key players in intercellular communication. Little is known of EVsecretion in fish and the effect of infection on EVs realise and content. In the present study, EVs were isolated from serum of healthy and Piscirickettsia salmonis infected Atlantic salmon in order to evalaute the effect of infection on EV secretion.

### Sample Protocol
The EVs were isoalted from serum of salmon using a comercial kit. Then the tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1%formic acid/2%acetonitrile and analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnamo-UHPLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nano electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant and identifications were filtered to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Raw data files were converted into mgf format and anlyzed using X!Tandem version 2.2.1 and Scaffold4. MS/MS spectra were searched agaisnt the salmon and P. salmonis proteome. The three protein identification output files from each sample were combined to produce a single merged output file. The analysis was restricted to proteins reproducibly identified in all three replicates, making hte minimum number of peptides used to identify each protein an average value of 2 per replicate.

### Publication Abstract
Secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs) is a common feature of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. Isolated EVs have been shown to contain different types of molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids, and are reported to be key players in intercellular communication. Little is known, however, of EV secretion in fish, or the effect of infection on EV release and content. In the present study, EVs were isolated from the serum of healthy and <i>Piscirickettsia salmonis</i> infected Atlantic salmon in order to evaluate the effect of infection on EV secretion. <i>P. salmonis</i> is facultative intracellular bacterium that causes a systemic infection disease in farmed salmonids. EVs isolated from both infected and non-infected fish had an average diameter of 230-300 nm, as confirmed by transmission electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking, and flow cytometry. Mass spectrometry identified 180 proteins in serum EVs from both groups of fish. Interestingly, 35 unique proteins were identified in serum EVs isolated from the fish infected with <i>P. salmonis</i>. These unique proteins included proteasomes subunits, granulins, and major histocompatibility class I and II. Our results suggest that EV release could be part of a mechanism in which host stimulatory molecules are released from infected cells to promote an immune response.

### Keywords
P. salmonis, Salmon, Serum

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
School of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Leidy Lagos

### Lab Head
Dr Hanne C. Winther-Larsen
School of Pharmacy, University of Oslo, Norway


