### Accession
PXD001046

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of superior and inferior spikelets in hybrid rice during grain filling and response of inferior spikelets to drought stress using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification

### Description
The biological functions of differently expressed proteins between superior and inferior spikelet grains were investigated based on the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification to further clarify the mechanism of rice grain filling at the proteomic level, as well as the response of inferior spikelets to drought dress (-20 kPa or -40 kPa). Compared with superior spikelets, inferior ones had lower sink strength due to the lower sink activities (lower expressions of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase, granule-bound starch synthase, starch branching enzyme and pullulanase) and smaller sink sizes (lower abundances of structural proteins). The slower and later grain filling resulted from the weaker decomposition and conversion of photoassimilate and the slower cell division. Moderate drought stress (-20 kPa) promoted the grain filling of inferior spikelets through regulating the proteins associated with photoassimilate supply and conversion. These proteins may be important targets for rice breeding programs that raise the rice yield under drought condition. The findings offer new insights into rice grain-filling and provide theoretical evidences for better quality control and scientific improvement of super rice in practice.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of superior and inferior spikelets of rice-----Water stress treatment(-20 kPa or -40 kPa)------ Protein extraction and digestion------ iTRAQ Reagent Labeling and Liquid Chromatography (LC)------ Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Tandem MS (MS/MS) Analysis by Q Exactive------ Sequence Database Searching and Data Analysis

### Data Protocol
Only the protein identification that was inferred from the unique peptide identification in two independent experiments was considered. Statistical analysis was conducted using a one-way ANOVA. P-values ≤ 0.05 by Tukey’s test were considered significant. Among the statistically significant proteins detected by the ANOVA test (p<0.05), proteins with expression levels that changed less than 1.5-fold or 1.2-fold were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
We provide the raw data for protein and peptide identification and quantization of superior and inferior spikelets in hybrid rice during grain filling. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the Proteome Xchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001046. Our data presented here is also related to the article "Comparative proteomics analysis of superior and inferior spikelets in hybrid rice during grain filling and response of inferior spikelets to drought stress using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification "in the Journal of Proteomics [1].

### Keywords
Hybrid rice; grain filling; drought stress; itraq; proteome

### Affiliations
SUZHOU ACADEMY OF SCIENCE
suzhou academy of agricultural sciences

### Submitter
Minghui Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Minghui Dong
suzhou academy of agricultural sciences


