### Accession
PXD013777

### Title
Immunoglobulin V-gene usage among human serum IgA with or without specificity to the autoantigen transglutaminase 2

### Description
To study V-gene usage among antigen-specific and non-antigen-specific serum IgA antibodies in celiac disease patients, purified antibody fractions were subjected to proteomic analysis. Patients either had eastablished, untreated disease with severe intestinal inflammation or "potential" celiac disease characterized by presence of antibodies but no or mild inflammation. Quantification of the fraction of antibodies using different IGHV segments revealed that antibodies specific to the autoantigen transglutaminase 2 (TG2) displayed a bias toward usage of IGHV5-51 in agreement with previous observations. The fraction of antibodies using IGHV5-51 correlated with the degree of intestinal inflammation, indicating that production of hallmark IGHV5-51 anti-TG2 antibodies coincides with onset of clinical celiac disease.

### Sample Protocol
Total IgA was purified from 1 ml of serum obtained from 12 celiac patients using Peptide M-agarose. The TG2-specific fraction was obtained by incubation with biotin-TG2 coupled to streptavidin-agarose. The flow-through was saved as the non-TG2-specific fraction, whereas the TG2-specific fraction was eluted from the beads with 20 mM HCl after extensive washing. Both the TG2-specific fraction and the TG2 flow-through fraction were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide before they were digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were purified on C18 and analyzed using an Easy nLC1000 nano-LC system connected to a quadropole Orbitrap (Q Exactive) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) by searching against a database containing germline amino acid sequences of all human immunoglobulin genes. The database was generated from sequences obtained from the International ImMunoGeneTics Information System (IMGT).

### Publication Abstract
B cells play important roles in autoimmune diseases through autoantibody production, cytokine secretion, or antigen presentation to T cells. In most cases, the contribution of B cells as antigen-presenting cells is not well understood. We have studied the autoantibody response against the enzyme transglutaminase 2 (TG2) in celiac disease patients by generating recombinant antibodies from single gut plasma cells reactive with discrete antigen domains and by undertaking proteomic analysis of anti-TG2 serum antibodies. The majority of the cells recognized epitopes in the N-terminal domain of TG2. Antibodies recognizing C-terminal epitopes interfered with TG2 cross-linking activity, and B cells specific for C-terminal epitopes were inefficient at taking up TG2-gluten complexes for presentation to gluten-specific T cells. The bias toward N-terminal epitopes hence reflects efficient T-B collaboration. Production of antibodies against N-terminal epitopes coincided with clinical onset of disease, suggesting that TG2-reactive B cells with certain epitope specificities could be the main antigen-presenting cells for pathogenic, gluten-specific T cells. The link between B cell epitopes, antigen presentation, and disease onset provides insight into the pathogenic mechanisms of a T cell-mediated autoimmune condition.

### Keywords
Human, Celiac disease, Iga, Autoantibodies, Serum

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
KG Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, University of Oslo, NO-0372 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Rasmus Iversen

### Lab Head
Dr Ludvig M. Sollid
KG Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, University of Oslo, NO-0372 Oslo, Norway


