### Accession
PXD026843

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF115 regulates phagosome maturation and host response to infection

### Description
Phagocytosis is an essential process for the microbicidal function of professional phagocytes, in which phagosome maturation plays a critical role. Macrophage activation by interferons (IFN) increases their microbicidal activity, but delays phagosomal maturation. Here, we investigated the role of ubiquitylation in phagosome functions. We show that phagosomal proteins are ubiquitylated and that phagosomes contain diverse ubiquitin chain types, including atypical ubiquitin chains. IFN-γ activation of macrophages substantially enhanced phagosomal ubiquitylation of both innate immune response proteins and vesicle trafficking proteins. We identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF115, which is enriched on phagosomes of IFN-γ activated macrophages, as an important regulator of phagosomal maturation. Loss of RNF115 protein or ubiquitin ligase activity facilitated enhanced phagosomal maturation, and increased cytokine responses to Staphylococcus aureus. Our data suggests that both innate immune signalling and phagolysosomal trafficking are controlled through ubiquitylation. In conclusion, we identify RNF115 and ubiquitylation as important regulators of innate immune signalling from the phagosome during bacterial infections.

### Sample Protocol
Phagosomes were isolated from RAW264.7 murine macrophages under resting conditions or after IFN-γ treatment as previously described (Desjardins et al., 1994, Trost et al., 2009). Phagosomes were solubilised in 25 μl of 1% RapiGest (Waters) in 50 mM tris-HCl pH 8.0, supplemented with 5 mM of TCEP. Samples were then heated at 65°C for 5 min, cooled to room temperature, and alkylated in the dark for 20 mins using 10 mM IAA. The alkylation reaction was subsequently quenched using 20 mM DTT for 20 mins. Protein concentration was determined using the EZQ protein quantitation kit (Molecular Probes), and 10 μg protein sample was diluted 10x in 50 mM tris-HCl to reach a final concentration of 0.1% RapiGest. Proteins were digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin:protein by incubation at 37°C for 12 h under constant agitation. After proteolytic digestion, the RapiGest was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1%, incubating the samples at 37°C for 1 h, followed by centrifugation (14,000 xg for 30 min). Peptides were desalted using C18 Micro Spin columns (Nest Group), dried using a SpeedVac concentrator, and stored at -80°C. For diGly enrichments, phagosome samples were prepared as described above except that 300 μg starting material was used for proteolytic digestion, and desalting was performed using tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters). Di-Gly enrichment was performed using the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ɛ-GG) kit (Cell Signalling Technology, cat. no. 5562) as described by (Udeshi et al., 2013). Enriched samples were desalted using StageTips (Thermo-Fisher), and stored at -80°C. Phagosomes from resting BMDMs were isolated as described above, lysed in 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5, and 10 μg protein was processed for proteomic analysis using the suspension trapping (S-Trap) sample preparation method (ProtiFi) as previously described (Heap et al., 2021). Samples were dried and stored at -80°C. Peptides from RAW264.7 murine macrophage phagosomes and di-Gly enrichments were dissolved in 2% AcN containing 0.1% TFA, and analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (2 μg) were injected on a PepMap trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, C18), followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm, 3 μm, C18). Solvent A was 3% AcN containing 0.1% FA and solvent B was 80% AcN containing 0.1% FA. The gradient used for analysis of samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 25% B in 115 min, 25-35% B in 30 min, 35-99% B in 5 mins, maintained at 99% B for 10 min, followed by a decrease to 3% B in 5 min and equilibration at 3% Bfor 10 min. Separation was performed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap (OT) in the range of 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. An automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2E5, and an ion injection time of 50 ms was used. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the OT at resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z after fragmentation using high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). An HCD collision energy of 35% was used, the AGC target was set to 1E4, and an ion injection time of 300 ms was allowed. The number of MS/MS events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 2.5s fixed duty cycle. Peptides from murine BMDM macrophage phagosomes were dissolved in 2% AcN containing 0.1% TFA , and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (1 µg) were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% FA and solvent B was 80% AcN containing 0.1% FA. The gradient used for analysis of samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 180 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% B in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% B for 10 min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1,600 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 4E5 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap using Rapid scan mode after HCD fragmentation. An HCD collision energy of 30% was used, the AGC target was set to 1E4 and dynamic injection time mode was allowed. The number of MS/MS events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3s fixed duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 (RAW264.7 macrophage phagosomes) and 1.6.3.4 (BMDM macrophage phagosomes), and searched against the reviewed Mus musculus Uniprot proteome database (UP000000589) containing isoforms. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and N-ethylmaleimide on cysteine were allowed as variable modifications for RAW264.7 macrophage phagosome proteome searches, while di-Gly modified lysine was included for the RAW264.7 macrophage phagosome di-Gly-modified proteome searches. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification for BMDM phagosome proteome searches. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site modifications were removed before downstream analysis. Statistical testing was performed in the R statistical programming language (https://www.r-project.org/) using the LIMMA (Ritchie et al. 2015) and DEqMS (Zhu et al. 2020) packages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Rnf115, E3-ligase, Phagosome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom


