### Accession
PXD029404

### Title
Rabies virus indected Mouse brains LC-MSMS

### Description
Acetylation is the PTM that strongly interlinked with glucose metabolism, so we performed Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to detect acetylated proteins in RABV-infected mouse brains to further investigate the reason how Rabies virus (RABV) infection promotes glucose uptake. To reveal the changes in lysine acetylation due to RABV infection, the brains of mice infected with different RABV strains were harvested for a quantitative proteomic assay.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissues were homogenized by ultrasonication in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM NAM, 3 µM TSA, and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min to remove the debris. Then, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20°C and centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded. After washing with cold acetone three times, the protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, PA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was first reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Then, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to final urea concentration of less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, CA, USA) and then was vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 1 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer's protocol of the 6-plex TMT kit (Thermo ,MA, USA). To enrich the acetylated peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then were incubated with prewashed anti-acetyllysine antibody conjugated agarose beads (PTM-104, PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned by using C18 ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and then were directly loaded onto a reversed-phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo, MA, USA). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo, MA, USA). Gradient elution was performed by increasing solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 7% to 25% over 40 min, 25% to 40% over 12 min, 40% to 80% over 4 min and then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 NL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a Q ExactiveTM Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, MA, USA) coupled with an ultraperformance liquid chromatography system. Intact peptides were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting of 28; ion fragments were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5×104 ions were accumulated for the generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. The fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software package with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, lysine acetylation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were specified at 1%. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. TMT-6plex was selected as the quantification method. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS analysis, the samples were separated using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography system. The mobile phase consisted of a 10 mM ammonium acetate aqueous solution (liquid A) and acetonitrile (liquid B). The sample was placed in an automatic sampler at 4°C, the column temperature was 45°C, the flow rate was 300 L/min, and the sample volume was 2 μl. The gradient of the relevant liquid phase was set as follows: from 0 to 18 min, liquid B changed linearly from 90% to 40%; liquid B changed linearly from 40% to 90% from 18 min to18.1 min. Then, liquid B was maintained at 90% from 18.1 min to23 min. A QC sample was set for a certain number of experimental samples at every interval in the sample queue to test and evaluate the stability and repeatability of the system. A standard mixture of energy metabolites was used in the sample cohort for chromatographic retention time correction. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a 5500 QTRAP mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, MA, USA) in anion mode. 5500 QTRAP ESI Source conditions were set up as follows: source temperature-450℃, ion source Gas1-45℃, ion source Gas2-45℃, curtain gas-30℃, and ionSapary Voltage Floating-4500 V. MRM mode was used to detect the ion pairs to be measured. Multiquant analysis was used to extract the chromatographic peak area and retention time. Standard energy metabolites were used to correct the retention time for metabolite identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Mouse

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yueming Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China.


