### Accession
PXD021823

### Title
Systematic analysis of intronic microRNAs reveals cooperativity within the multi-component FTX locus to promote colon cancer development

### Description
Approximately half of all microRNAs reside within intronic regions and are often co-transcribed with their host genes. However, most studies on intronic microRNAs focus on individual microRNAs, and conversely most studies on protein-coding and non-coding genes frequently ignore any intron-derived microRNAs. We hypothesize that the individual components of such multi-genic loci may play cooperative or competing roles in driving disease progression, and that examining the combinatorial effect of these components would uncover deeper insights into their functional importance. To address this, we perform systematic analyses of intronic microRNA:host loci in colon cancer. We observe that the FTX locus, comprising of a long non-coding RNA FTX and multiple intronic microRNAs, is highly upregulated in cancer and demonstrate that cooperativity within this multi-component locus promotes cancer growth. In addition, we show that FTX interacts with DHX9 and DICER and delineate its novel roles in regulating A-to-I RNA editing and microRNA expression. These results show for the first time that a long non-coding RNA can regulate A-to-I RNA editing, further expanding the functional repertoire of long non-coding RNAs. We further demonstrate the inhibitory effects of intronic miR-374b and -545 on the tumor suppressors PTEN and RIG-I to enhance the proto-oncogenic PI3K-AKT signaling. Finally, we show that intronic miR-421 may exert an autoregulatory effect on miR-374b and -545. Taken together, our data unveil the intricate interplay between intronic microRNAs and their host transcripts in the modulation of key signaling pathways and disease progression, adding new perspectives to the functional landscape of multi-genic loci.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 min prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin. The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105 min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
Approximately half of all miRNA reside within intronic regions and are often cotranscribed with their host genes. However, most studies of intronic miRNA focus on individual miRNA, while conversely most studies of protein-coding and noncoding genes frequently ignore any intron-derived miRNA. We hypothesize that the individual components of such multigenic loci may play cooperative or competing roles in driving disease progression and that examining the combinatorial effect of these components would uncover deeper insights into their functional importance. To address this, we performed systematic analyses of intronic miRNA:host loci in colon cancer. The <i>FTX</i> locus, comprising of a long noncoding RNA <i>FTX</i> and multiple intronic miRNA, was highly upregulated in cancer, and cooperativity within this multicomponent locus promoted cancer growth. <i>FTX</i> interacted with DHX9 and DICER and regulated A-to-I RNA editing and miRNA expression. These results show for the first time that a long noncoding RNA can regulate A-to-I RNA editing, further expanding the functional repertoire of long noncoding RNA. Intronic miR-374b and miR-545 inhibited tumor suppressors <i>PTEN</i> and <i>RIG-I</i> to enhance proto-oncogenic PI3K-AKT signaling. Furthermore, intronic miR-421 may exert an autoregulatory effect on miR-374b and miR-545. Taken together, our data unveil the intricate interplay between intronic miRNA and their host transcripts in the modulation of key signaling pathways and disease progression, adding new perspectives to the functional landscape of multigenic loci. SIGNIFICANCE: This study illustrates the functional relationships between individual components of multigenic loci in regulating cancer progression.<i>See related commentary by Calin, p. 1212</i>.

### Keywords
Micrornas, A-to-i editing, Colon cancer, Post-transcriptional regulation, Long noncoding rna

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


