### Accession
PXD031989

### Title
Proteomic comparison of Biomphalaria glabrata excretory-secretory proteins at different time-points of Schistosoma mansoni infection

### Description
Schistosomiasis, caused by infection with Schistosoma trematode parasites, is one of the deadliest neglected tropical diseases in the world. The Schistosoma lifecycle involves the miracidia infection of an intermediate molluscan host, such as Biomphalaria glabrata. Dispersing B. glabrata attractant chemicals has been considered a method of minimising host infections. The attractiveness of B. glabrata is known to be reduced following infection; however, it remained unclear how the duration of infection affects attractiveness. Identifying excretory-secretory proteins (ESPs) abundant in attractive snail conditioned water (SCW) may facilitate the identification of attractants. This study obtained SCW ESPs from naïve snails and at different time-points post-miracidia exposure (PME; 16h-, 1 week, 2 weeks and 3 weeks), to identify those ESPs mediating Schistosome mansoni miracidia behavioural changes. The ESPs were quantitatively identified from all SCW samples using a label-free proteomic method and genome-derived protein databases of B. glabrata and S. mansoni. We found that changes in miracidia behaviour were similar upon exposure to naïve and 3W-PME SCW, including increased circling and quantity of miracidia in the field of view. Of the ESPs identified, 21 were shared in SCW of naïve and 3W-PME, and considered attractant candidates, including acetylcholine-binding protein and immune-related proteins such as biomphalysins and thioester-containing protein 1. Some biological processes were exclusive to attractant candidates, including obsolete pathogenesis and transmembrane transport activity. This suggests that compromised production of these proteins may diminish host attractiveness to miracidia. Additionally, several immune proteins were identified exclusively at 16-PME and 1W-PME, providing further information into changing B. glabrata immune responses throughout infection. These findings provide a list of attractant candidates to potentially decrease B. glabrata infection and minimise schistosomiasis.

### Sample Protocol
B. glabrata and Swiss mice maintenance conditions and ethics guidelines The conduct and procedures involving animal experimentation were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane (Project number P242). This study was performed in accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The Swiss mice used in this study were subject to Biosecurity Quarantine Control and hence held in a quarantine containment area within a Specific Pathogen Free Animal Facility. S. mansoni were maintained with an Australian Department Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Biosecurity permit. B. glabrata snails (NMRI strain) were maintained in an aerated tank of calcium carbonate conditioned-water (pH-neutral) at 27°C in a 12- h alternating cycle of light and darkness. Their diet consisted of algae tablets and lettuce.  Snail conditioned water collection and semi-purification of biomolecules SCW was collected from naïve B. glabrata and 16h-PME, 1W-PME, 2W-PME and 3W-PME. B. glabrata snails (60 for each treatment) were washed four times with freshly prepared calcium carbonate-conditioned Milli-Q water to remove any contaminants from the tank and separated into three 200 mL beakers, each containing 20 snails. Snails were incubated in 20 mL of pH-neutral spring water at room temperature for 2 h. Snails were removed and returned to the aquarium, 20 mL of methanol was added to the water samples and mixed thoroughly. The mixture was filtered through a 0.45 µm Durapore PVDF filter (Bedford, MA, USA) to remove contaminants. Filtered samples were immediately frozen on dry ice until lyophilisation using a Savant SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA).  In-solution trypsin digestion for control SCW and sample preparation for LC-MS/MS Protein concentrations in all B. glabrata SCW triplicates, naïve and post-miracidia exposure, were quantified using the BCA (Bicinchoninic Acid) method (44). A total of 25 µg of protein in 100 µL of 6M urea was used from each sample. Aliquots of 1.5 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to each sample, which were then incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Aliquots of 6 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide were added to each sample and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. Volumes of 6 µL of 200 mM DTT were added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. The urea was diluted with 775 µL Milli-Q water, vortexed, and 20 µL of 100 µg/mL trypsin was added to each sample. The samples were digested at 37°C for 16h. A 15 µL aliquot of 10% formic acid was added to decrease the pH below 3. A Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridge (Waters) was prepared for each SCW replicate to concentrate the samples. The protocol used was that prescribed for the product (Sep-Pak C18 Plus Short Cartridge, 360 mg Sorbent per Cartridge, 55-105 µm). An 8 mL aliquot of 0.5% acetic acid in 70% acetonitrile, 30% Milli-Q water was run through the column and the solution was frozen at -80°C before lyophilisation. Each lyophilised sample was resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid and frozen at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  uHPLC tandem QTOF MS/MS analyses Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 25 μL of 1% formic acid in Milli-Q water and analysed by LC-MS/MS attached to an ExionLC liquid chromatography system (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and a QTOF X500R mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) equipped with an electrospray ion source. A 15 µL sample of each of the B. glabrata SCW sample was injected into a 100 mm × 1.7 μm Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 100 uHPLC column (Phenomenex, Sydney, Australia) equipped with a SecurityGuard column for mass spectrometry analysis. Linear gradients of 5-35% solvent B over a 10-min period at a flow rate of 400 µL/min, followed by a gradient from 35% to 80% solvent B over 2 min and 80% to 95% solvent B in 1 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B remained at 95% for a 1 min period for washing the column after which it was decreased to 5% for equilibration prior to the injection of the subsequent sample. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water while solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. The ion spray voltage was set to 5500 V, the declustering potential was set to 100 V, the curtain gas flow was set at 30, ion source gas 1 was set at 40, the ion source gas 2 was set at 50 and spray temperature was set at 450°C. The mass spectrometer acquired the mass spectral data in an Information Dependant Acquisition, IDA mode. Full scan TOFMS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1400 and for product ion ms/ms 50-1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 cps and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion. The data were acquired and processed using SCIEX OS software (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification LC-MS/MS data were imported to PEAKS studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0) with the assistance of MSConvert module of ProteoWizard (3.0.1) (45). For the current study, the proteomic data were analysed with the most up-to-date database (BglaB1.6), to provide a better comparison between ESPs from different B. glabrata SCW (https://www.vectorbase.org/organisms/biomphalaria-glabrata) (18). MS/MS spectra of ESPs were also analysed with reference to the S. mansoni protein database (https://parasite.wormbase.org/Schistosoma_mansoni_prjea36577/Info/Index). De novo sequencing of peptides, database searches and characterising specific PTMs were used to analyse the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and [-10*log(P)] was calculated accordingly where P was the probability that an observed match was a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisotopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including lysine acetylation, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and conversion of glutamic acid and glutamine to pyroglutamate. ESPs were considered to be present at a specific time-point with high confidence only when they were present in at least two of the three replicates   Quantitative protein analysis Semi-quantitative analysis of ESPs of all B. glabrata SCW triplicates, naïve and post-miracidia exposure, was carried out using the label-free quantification module PEAKS Q of PEAKS Studio v7.0, based on the relative intensities of featured peptides detected in replicates. The contents of extracted ESPs in different replicate samples were measured using BCA method on a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) for the purpose of normalisation. Biological triplicates of each time-point were used in tandem repeats for LC-MS/MS procedure as described above, and the relative concentrations of ESPs were compared and presented as the final results. The mass shift between different runs was set to 20 ppm, and 0.3 min was used for evaluating the retention time shift tolerance. Featured peptides with FDR threshold 1%, including PTMs mentioned above, were included in the quantitative analysis. The result of peptides was first filtrated based on: (i) ratio versus quality-score and a fold change of 8 was used; (ii) ratio versus average-area (MS signal intensity) set to a fold change of 8; (iii) charge of featured peptides set to between 2 and 5; (iv) fold change of peptide ≥1; and (v) featured peptide detected in more than one sample of the triplicate. Furthermore, protein results were filtered with FDR ≤ 1%, the number of unique peptides ≥1 and fold change ≥1.5. The abundance of proteins was normalised and compared, and proteins were clustered using one minus Pearson correlation.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomiasis, caused by infection with <i>Schistosoma</i> digenetic trematodes, is one of the deadliest neglected tropical diseases in the world. The <i>Schistosoma</i> lifecycle involves the miracidial infection of an intermediate freshwater snail host, such as <i>Biomphalaria glabrata</i>. Dispersing snail host-derived <i>Schistosoma</i> miracidia attractants has been considered a method of minimising intermediate host infections and, by extension, human schistosomiasis. The attractiveness of <i>B. glabrata</i> to miracidia is known to be reduced following infection; however, the relationship between duration of infection and attractiveness is unclear. Excretory-secretory proteins (ESPs) most abundant in attractive snail conditioned water (SCW) are key candidates to function as miracidia attractants. This study analysed SCW from <i>B. glabrata</i> that were na&#xef;ve (uninfected) and at different time-points post-miracidia exposure (PME; 16h, 1-week, 2-weeks and 3-weeks PME) to identify candidate ESPs mediating <i>Schistosoma mansoni</i> miracidia behaviour change, including aggregation and chemoklinokinesis behaviour (random motion, including slowdown and increased turning rate and magnitude). Miracidia behaviour change was only observed post-addition of na&#xef;ve and 3W-PME SCW, with other treatments inducing significantly weaker behaviour changes. Therefore, ESPs were considered attractant candidates if they were shared between na&#xef;ve and 3W-PME SCW (or exclusive to the former), contained a predicted N-terminal signal peptide and displayed low identity (&lt;50%) to known proteins outside of the <i>Biomphalaria</i> genus. Using these criteria, a total of 6 ESP attractant candidates were identified, including acetylcholine binding protein-like proteins and uncharacterised proteins. Tissue-specific RNA-seq analysis of the genes encoding these 6 ESPs indicated relatively high gene expression within various <i>B. glabrata</i> tissues, including the foot, mantle and kidney. Acetylcholine binding protein-like proteins were highly promising due to their high abundance in na&#xef;ve and 3W-PME SCW, high specificity to <i>B. glabrata</i> and high expression in the ovotestis, from which attractants have been previously identified. In summary, this study used proteomics, guided by behavioural assays, to identify miracidia attractant candidates that should be further investigated as potential biocontrols to disrupt miracidia infection and minimise schistosomiasis.

### Keywords
Biomphalaria glabrata, Schistosoma mansoni, Lc-ms/ms, Excretory-secretory proteins

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Centre for Bioinnovation, University of the Sunshine Coast


