### Accession
PXD034516

### Title
SILAC Phospho-proteomics: Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Pseudokinases can modulate activity of protein kinases, among other modes of influencing biological pathways. We tested a hypothesis that knockdown of  Tb427tmp.160.4770 (a Pseudokinase) perturbs the Phospho-proteome of T. brucei. To discover changes in the trypanosome phospho-proteome, stable isotope labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was performed, followed by enrichment of phosphopeptides with immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), and phospho-peptide detection/quantitation using mass spectroscopy. Trypanosomes (p2T7-Tb4770) were cultured in heavy (13C6-L-Arginine, 2H4-L-Lysine) or light isotopes (L-Arginine, L-Lysine) for SILAC. Trypanosomes grown in heavy medium were induced with tetracycline for knockdown of Tb427tmp.160.4770. Induced (Tet+, H) and uninduced (Tet-, L) samples were combined and  processed together for IMAC and mass spectroscopy

### Sample Protocol
p2T7-Tb427tmp.160.4770/SM trypanosomes were cultured in heavy(H) medium (13C6-L-Arginine, 2H4-L-Lysine), and control (uninduced) trypanosomes were grown in light (L) medium (L-Arginine, L-Lysine) for five days. Trypanosomes grown in heavy medium were induced with tetracycline to knock down protein expression of Tb427tmp.160.4770. Twenty-four hours after induction of knockdown, trypanosomes (4x107/ sample) were pelleted (3000 xg, five minutes) and washed in 10 mL of PBSG containing 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4). The entire Tet+ (H) sample was then combined with the entire control Tet- (L) sample, resuspended in 500 μL lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 8 M urea, 1 mM Na3VO4), and lysed by sonication (Q Sonica Q55, Newtown, Ct) (performed in three, 15 second intervals at 60 amps with resting on ice for 30 seconds between intervals). Alkylation of protein was carried out with 9 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes, protected from light. The sample was diluted five-fold into: 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6) and 1 mM Na3VO4. Proteins were then digested with 100 μL of trypsin immobilized agarose bead slurry (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Ma) for 48-hours at room temperature. To isolate digested peptides, the mixture was diluted 10-fold in 0.1% trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) in preparation for reverse-phase chromatography. The entire mixture (22 mL) was loaded onto a SepPak C18 reverse-phase column and washed with 1) 0.1% TFA and 2) 1% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, 3 mL each. Peptides were eluted from the column with 25% and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, 6 mL total. The eluate was dried under N2 gas. Phospho-peptides were enriched and analyzed as described previously (Guyett et al., 2017). Phospho-peptide enrichment was done on an FeCl3 -charged immobilized metal affinity column (IMAC; Andersson and Porath, 1985) made in house at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (Seattle, Wa). LC-MS/MS of phospho-peptide samples was done by dividing each sample into two technical replicates for analysis. Each replicate was diluted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water and resolved on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Liquid chromatography was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was operated in a data dependent MS/MS mode over the m/z range of 400- 1500 (Guyett et al., 2017)

### Data Protocol
Technical replicates were combined and analyzed together using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific). The data were searched using SEAQUEST against T. brucei protein database v. 4.2 (tritrypdb.org), which included additional common contaminants. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation (+ 15.995 Da), 6 X 13C (+ 6.020 Da) on arginine, 4 X 2H (+ 4.025) on lysine, and phosphorylation (+ 79.966) on serine, threonine and tyrosine. The search results were run through Percolator for scoring. The results were filtered for peptides identified with a false-discovery rate of 0.05. Phosphorylation sites were evaluated and probability values were calculated using phosphoRS v. 3.1. Phosphorylation sites were considered real if the PhosphoRS site probability was greater than 80%. Peak abundance of light and heavy isotope peptides were determined as an average of the two technical replicates. The ratio of heavy to light peak abundance was determined for each biological sample.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma brucei causes human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) and nagana in cattle. During infection of a vertebrate, endocytosis of host transferrin (Tf) is important for viability of the parasite. The majority of proteins involved in trypanosome endocytosis of Tf are unknown. Here we identify pseudokinase NRP1 (Tb427tmp.160.4770) as a regulator of Tf endocytosis. Genetic knockdown of NRP1 inhibited endocytosis of Tf without blocking uptake of bovine serum albumin. Binding of Tf to the flagellar pocket was not affected by knockdown of NRP1. However the quantity of Tf per endosome dropped significantly, consistent with NRP1 promoting robust capture and/or retention of Tf in vesicles. NRP1 is involved in motility of Tf-laden vesicles since distances between endosomes and the kinetoplast were reduced after knockdown of the gene. In search of possible mediators of NRP1 modulation of Tf endocytosis, the gene was knocked down and the phosphoproteome analyzed. Phosphorylation of protein kinases forkhead, NEK6, and MAPK10 was altered, in addition to EpsinR, synaptobrevin and other vesicle-associated proteins predicted to be involved in endocytosis. These candidate proteins may link NRP1 functionally either to protein kinases or to vesicle-associated proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Kennesaw State University
College of Science and Mathematics, Kennesaw State University, USA

### Submitter
Gaurav Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Kojo-Mensa Wilmot
College of Science and Mathematics, Kennesaw State University, USA


