### Accession
PXD045013

### Title
Cysteine-rich with EGF-like domains 2 (CRELD2) is an endoplasmic reticulum stress-inducible angiogenic growth factor promoting ischemic heart repair

### Description
Tissue repair after myocardial infarction (MI) is guided by incompletely defined autocrine and paracrine-acting proteins. Deciphering these signals and their upstream triggers is essential when considering infarct healing as a therapeutic target. Searching for previously unknown growth factors involved in infarct repair, we performed a bioinformatic secretome analysis in cardiac endothelial cells and identified cysteine-rich with EGF-like domains 2 (CRELD2), an endoplasmic reticulum stress-inducible protein with poorly characterized function. CRELD2 was abundantly expressed and secreted in the heart after MI in mice and patients. Creld2-deficient mice and wild-type mice treated with a CRELD2-neutralizing antibody displayed impaired de novo microvessel formation in the infarct border zone and developed severe postinfarction heart failure. CRELD2 protein therapy, conversely, improved heart function after MI. Exposing human coronary artery endothelial cells to recombinant CRELD2 induced angiogenesis, associated with a distinct phosphoproteome signature. These findings identify CRELD2 as a novel angiogenic growth factor and unravel a link between endoplasmic reticulum stress and ischemic tissue repair.

### Sample Protocol
HCAECs (1.2 × 10^6 cells per replicate) were solubilized with ice-cold urea buffer containing cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Roche), and frozen overnight at -80 °C. After thawing, samples were dispersed and centrifuged. Employing a filter-aided sample preparation protocol, 300 µg protein from the supernatant were loaded onto a 10 kDa Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter (Merck). After carbamidomethylation of free cysteines, proteins were trypsin-digested overnight. Phosphopeptides were enriched (Pierce TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kits) and fractionated (Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit; all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). The five fractions per replicate and condition were each reconstituted in high-performance liquid chromatography loading buffer and separately analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Generated spectra were analyzed with MaxQuant software, applying the integrated Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt knowledgebase. Phosphorylation (S/T/Y), oxidation (M), deamidation (N/Q), and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Potential contaminants, reverse database hits, and phosphopeptides with a localization probability below 0.75 were excluded. Phosphosites not detectable in all four replicates from at least one experimental condition were filtered out. Missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of all measured log2-transformed intensities using Perseus software, applying a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 separately for each replicate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Cysteine-rich with egf-like domains 2, Phosphoproteomics, Endothelial cells, Creld2, Tissue repair

### Affiliations
Hanover Medical School - Division of Molecular and Translational Cardiology
Hannover Medical School, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Division of Molecular and Translational Cardiology, Hans Borst Center for Heart and Stem Cell Research, Hannover

### Submitter
Felix Polten

### Lab Head
Professor Kai Christoph Wollert
Hannover Medical School, Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Division of Molecular and Translational Cardiology, Hans Borst Center for Heart and Stem Cell Research, Hannover


