### Accession
PXD007726

### Title
A novel USP9X substrate TTK contributes to tumorigenesis in non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
The X-linked deubiquitinase, USP9X, is implicated in multiple cancers by targeting various substrates. Increased expression of USP9X is observed in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is correlated with poor prognosis. However, the molecular mechanism for USP9X regulating tumor cell survival and tumorigenesis in NSCLC is less defined. In this study, chemical labeling quantitative proteomic screening was applied to analyze A549 cells with or without USP9X RNA interference, and the resulting data suggested that TTK is a potential substrate of USP9X. Further experimental evidences confirmed that USP9X stabilized TTK via direct interaction and deubiquitination of TTK. Moreover, knockdown of USP9X or TTK inhibited cell proliferation, migration and tumorigenesis, and the immunohistochemical analysis of clinical NSCLC samples showed that the protein expression levels of USP9X and TTK were significantly elevated and positively correlated in tumor tissues. In summary, our data demonstrated that the USP9X-TTK axis may play a critical role in NSCLC, and could be considered as the potential therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Filter-aided sample preparation The A549 cells were washed three times with cold PBS and cells were lysed in SDT lysis buffer (0.2% SDS (m/v), 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH=7.6). The lysates were homogenized with sonication and centrifuged at 15,000g for 30 min. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration of which was determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission assay as described previously (45). FASP was performed as described previously (43).  TMT labeling Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and their concentration determined by the BCA assay. 3 shGFPs control samples and 3 USP9X shRNAs knock down samples (50ug, each) were labelled by TMT 6-plex reagents (0.8 mg, each) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with reporters at m/z = 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, respectively. Each sample containing 50 μg of peptide in 50 μL volume of TEAB buffer was combined with 41 μL of its respective 6-plex TMT reagent and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Then 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was add to the sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. Equal amounts of each TMT-labelled samples were combined in new microcentrifuge tube and dried down by SpeedVac.  High pH Fractionation Half of TMT-labeled peptides mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column on a Agilent 1290 HPLC operating at 0.2 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate and buffer B consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% acetonitrile; both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide as described previously (44). A CBS-B programed multifunction automatic fraction collecting instrument (Huxi instrument, Shanghai, China) was coupled to the HPLC and used to collect eluted peptides. The total number of fractions collected was 36 and concatenated to 19 (pooling equal interval RPLC fractions). Ammonium hydroxide and/or ammonium formate were evaporated in a SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software MaxQuant (32) (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.5.8.0). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the Uniprot human database (2016/12/24 download). Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Quantification was carried out in MaxQuant using TMT 6plex reporter ion intensity.

### Publication Abstract
The X-linked deubiquitinase, USP9X, is implicated in multiple cancers by targeting various substrates. Increased expression of USP9X is observed in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and is correlated with poor prognosis. However, the molecular mechanism for USP9X regulation of tumor cell survival and tumorigenesis in NSCLC is less defined. <b>Methods:</b> In this study, chemical labeling, quantitative proteomic screening was applied to analyze A549 cells with or without USP9X RNA interference. Functional <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> experiments were performed to confirm the oncogenic effects of USP9X in NSCLC and to investigate the underlying mechanisms. <b>Results:</b> The resulting data suggested that dual specificity protein kinase TTK is a potential substrate of USP9X. Further experimental evidences confirmed that USP9X stabilized TTK via direct interaction and efficient deubiquitination of TTK on K48 ubiquitin chain. Moreover, knockdown of USP9X or TTK inhibited cell proliferation, migration and tumorigenesis, and the immunohistochemical analysis of clinical NSCLC samples showed that the protein expression levels of USP9X and TTK were significantly elevated and positively correlated in tumor tissues. <b>Conclusions:</b> In summary, our data demonstrated that the USP9X-TTK axis may play a critical role in NSCLC, and could be considered as a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc); quantitative proteomics; deubiquitinase; usp9x; ttk

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


