### Accession
PXD026985

### Title
The role of Rpl3l in translation in cardiomyocytes

### Description
Ribosome immunoprecipitates of cardiomyocytes isolated from Rpl3l-/- and Rpl3l+/+ mouse hearts were analysed using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosome immunoprecipitates of cardiomyocytes isolated from Ribotag-Rpl3l-/- and Ribotag-Rpl3l+/+ mouse hearts were analysed using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Ribosome immunoprecipitates of cardiomyocytes isolated from Ribotag-Rpl3l-/- and Ribotag-Rpl3l+/+ mouse hearts were analysed using mass spectrometry. The samples were processed in biological triplicates. The MaxQuant software suite (v1.6.0.16) was used for peptide identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The existence of naturally occurring ribosome heterogeneity is now a well-acknowledged phenomenon. However, whether this heterogeneity leads to functionally diverse 'specialized ribosomes' is still a controversial topic. Here, we explore the biological function of RPL3L (uL3L), a ribosomal protein (RP) paralogue of RPL3 (uL3) that is exclusively expressed in skeletal&#xa0;muscle and heart tissues, by generating a viable homozygous Rpl3l knockout mouse strain. We identify a rescue mechanism in which, upon RPL3L depletion, RPL3 becomes up-regulated, yielding RPL3-containing ribosomes instead of RPL3L-containing ribosomes that are typically found in cardiomyocytes. Using both ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) and a novel orthogonal approach consisting of ribosome pulldown coupled to nanopore sequencing (Nano-TRAP), we find that RPL3L modulates neither translational efficiency nor ribosome affinity towards a specific subset of transcripts. In contrast, we show that depletion of RPL3L leads to increased ribosome-mitochondria interactions in cardiomyocytes, which is accompanied by a significant increase in ATP levels, potentially as a result of fine-tuning of mitochondrial activity. Our results demonstrate that the existence of tissue-specific RP paralogues does not necessarily lead to enhanced translation of specific transcripts or modulation of translational output. Instead, we reveal a complex cellular scenario in which RPL3L modulates the expression of RPL3, which in turn affects ribosomal subcellular localization and, ultimately, mitochondrial activity.

### Keywords
Rpl3, Cardiomyocytes, Rpl3l

### Affiliations
CRG
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Eva Maria Novoa

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Maria Novoa Pardo
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain


