### Accession
PXD041837

### Title
Involvement of extracellular vesicles in the progression, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of whole-body ionizing radiation-induced immune dysfunction.

### Description
Acute radiation syndrome (ARS) is a severe condition that develops after exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation that features immune suppression and organ failure. Currently, there are no diagnostics to identify the occurrence or severity of radiation exposure. There are also no current treatments or preventative strategies to mitigate ARS. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are mediators of intercellular communication that contribute to immune dysfunction across diseases. We investigated if EV cargo would be able to identify whole body irradiation (WBIR) exposure and if EVs promote ARS immune dysfunction. We hypothesized that beneficial EVs derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-EVs) would blunt ARS immune dysfunction and might serve as prophylactic radioprotectants. Mice received WBIR (2 or 9 Gy) with assessment of EVs at 3 and 7 days after exposure. LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of WBIR-EVs found dose-related changes as well as candidate proteins that were increased with both doses and timepoints (34 total) such as Thromboxane-A Synthase and lymphocyte cytosolic protein 2. Suprabasin and Sarcalumenin were increased only after 9 Gy suggesting these proteins may indicate high dose/lethal exposure. Analysis of EV miRNAs identified miR-376 and miR-136, which were increased up to 200- and 60-fold respectively by both levels of WBIR and select miRNAs such as miR-1839 and miR-664 that were increased only with 9 Gy. WBIR-EVs (9 Gy) were biologically active and blunted immune responses to LPS in RAW264.7 macrophages, inhibiting canonical signaling pathways associated with wound healing and phagosome formation. Accordingly, WBIR-EVs also blunted RAW macrophage phagocytosis. When given 3 days after exposure, MSC-EVs slightly modified immune gene expression changes in the spleens of mice in response to WBIR and a combined radiation plus burn injury exposure (RCI). MSC-EVs normalized the expression of certain key immune genes such as NFκBia and Cxcr4 (WBIR), Map4k1, Ccr9 and Cxcl12 (RCI) lowered plasma TNFα cytokine levels after RCI, though most gene changes were not influenced. When given prophylactically (24 and 3 hours before exposure), MSC-EVs prolonged survival to the 9 Gy lethal exposure. Thus, EVs are important participants in ARS. EV cargo might be used to diagnose WBIR exposure, and MSC-EVs might serve as radioprotectants to blunt the impact of toxic radiation exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles were isolated from plasma of mice and humans following burn injury. The plasma was centrifuged at 10,000g for 30min. The supernatant was collected and spun down at 21,000g for 60 min. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was washed with 350ul of PBS. Samples were pelleted by centrifuging at 21,000g for 60 min. The PBS was removed and 60ul of Tris-Cl at a pH of 7.5 was added to the samples, which were then prepared for proteomics analysis.  Protein lysates were dried down via vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 8M urea and reduced with 5mM DTT at 56C for 30min, and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were then diluted to 1M urea and subjected to digestion with and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37C at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptides were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Thermo desalting spin columns. Eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation and peptide concentration was determined via Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Assay. All samples were normalized to 0.1 ug/ul and a pooled sample was created for each set (based on species – mouse or human) by combining equal volumes of each sample within that batch to assess technical reproducibility. All samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC/MS/MS analysis: Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 60 min gradient. The gradient for separation consisted of 5 - 40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode, where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using SequestHT within Proteome Discoverer (v.2.5, Thermo Fisher), as two separate datasets based on species (mouse or human) along with their respective pooled replicates. Data were searched against either the reviewed human database from Uniprot (downloaded Jan 2022, containing 20,360 sequences) or the reviewed Mus musculus database from Uniprot (downloaded Jan 2021, containing 17,051 sequences). The following settings were used: enzyme specificity set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) of 1% and 5% were used to filter peptides and proteins, respectively. Proteins with less than two peptides and/or > 50% missing values across the samples were excluded from the results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation, Immune dysfunction, Acute radiation syndrome, Extracellular vesicles, Proteome, Lc/ms-ms, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
UNC Proteomics Core, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Surgery, University of Florida

### Submitter
Angie Mordant

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Maile
Surgery, University of Florida


