### Accession
PXD000160

### Title
Soybean root tip proteins under flooding with ABA

### Description
Flooding is a serious problem for soybean cultivation because it markedly reduces growth. We found that treatment with ABA enhances survival ratio of soybean under flooding stress. To investigate the role of ABA in soybean under flooding stress, proteomic changes were analyzed. Total protein and nuclear protein fractions from root tips of soybean seedlings that treated with flooding or flooding with ABA were analyzed. Protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase. Resulting peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D × 120 mm, nano HPLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The elution was done with a linear acetonitrile gradient 8-30% in 120 min for gel free proteomics in 0.1% formic acid. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent repetitive selection of peptides.Identification of proteins were performed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0.2, Matrix Science) using soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 8.0)and a common contaminants database (262 sequences). Parameters used in Mascot searches were follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. Automatic decoy database search was performed in the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot percolator to improve accuracy and sensitivity in the peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. The Mascot results were used for differential analysis using SIEVE software (version 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Flooding is a serious problem for soybean cultivation because it markedly reduces growth. To investigate the role of phytohormones in soybean under flooding stress, gel-free proteomic technique was used. When 2-day-old soybeans were flooded, the content of abscisic acid (ABA) did not decrease in the root, though its content decreased in untreated plant. When ABA was added during flooding treatment, survival ratio was improved compared with that of soybeans flooded without ABA. When 2-day-old soybeans were flooded with ABA, the abundance of proteins related to cell organization, vesicle transport and glycolysis decreased compared with those in root of soybeans flooded without ABA. Furthermore, the nuclear proteins were analyzed to identify the transcriptional regulation. The abundance of 34 nuclear proteins such as histone deacetylase and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein increased by ABA supplementation under flooding; however, 35 nuclear proteins such as importin alpha, chromatin remodeling factor, zinc finger protein, transducin, and cell division 5 protein decreased. Of them, the mRNA expression levels of cell division cycle 5 protein, C2H2 zinc finger protein SERRATE, CCCH type zinc finger family protein, and transducin were significantly down-regulated under the ABA treatment. These results suggest that ABA might be involved in the enhancement of flooding tolerance of soybean through the control of energy conservation via glycolytic system and the regulation on zinc finger proteins, cell division cycle 5 protein and transducin.

### Keywords
Aba nuclear, Soybean root tip, Flooding

### Affiliations
Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Yohei Nanjo

### Lab Head


