### Accession
PXD044120

### Title
Assesment of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells Responce Exposed to Staphylococcus aureus Biofilms and Planktonic Bacteria

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is one of the most successful human pathogens. It is the leading cause of a multitude of healthcare-associated, community-acquired, and acute-to-chronic infectious diseases. Bacteria can benefit from host signals during infection. Immune cells such as monocytes are able to secrete chemokine upon facing planktonic bacteria or their products. Host immune regulatory chemokine is capable to trigger planktonic S. aureus to releases its virulence factor to evade the immune response. Chemokine binding may facilitate immune evasion by S. aureus, however, the biofilm ability to induce chemokine secretion remains unknown. Also, Understanding the immune response to biofilms is critical for developing effective diagnostics and treatments for biofilm associated infections, as bacteria in biofilms differ in their resistance to antibiotics and host immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)were isolated using a gradient procedure as described previously. Supernatants of the PBMCs and PBMCs challenged with planktonic bacteria and biofilm were supplemented with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and dithiothreitol (DTT) (end concentrations 1 % and 50 mM, respectively) and heated for 5 min at 95°C, then further diluted in urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris HCL, pH 8.0). Buffer exchange and protein digestion was done as follows: The reduced proteins were transferred to a 10 kDa Microcon YM-10 filter (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) and centrifuged at 14.000 x g for 20 min in all consecutive steps, and the flow-through was discarded. For washing, 200 µL urea buffer was added and the centrifugation was repeated. 100 µL of alkylation solution (0.1 M iodoacetamide in urea buffer) was added and samples were incubated for 20 min in the dark. The alkylation solution was removed by centrifugation followed by two additional centrifugation steps with 200 µL 8 M urea buffer. Afterward, samples were washed and centrifuged twice with 200 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Proteins were digested by the addition of 0.5 µg trypsin in 50 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (all Merck). Proteolytic cleavage was allowed for 16 h at 37°C and peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14000 g for 20 minutes. To collect residual peptides the centrifugation was repeated twice after the addition of 50 µL ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and reconstituted by adding 25 µL of 0.3 % formic acid in water.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed with a Dionex UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion LC-MS/MS system (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full mass spectrometry scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z range 370-1570, quadrupole isolation) at a resolution of 120,000 (full width at half maximum) within 150 min of a non-linear gradient from 2 % to 90 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (Merck, USA). Ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, 30 % collision energy) and maximum 20 fragment ion spectra were acquired per cycle in the ion trap at rapid scan mode. The following conditions were used: spray voltage of 2. kV, heated capillary temperature of 275°C, S-lens RF level of 60 %, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) value of 4x105 counts for MS1 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms and a maximum AGC value of 1x104 for MS2, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 35 ms. A dynamic mass exclusion time window of 60 s was set with a 10 ppm maximum mass window.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched against the human UniProt database (version 05.2016, reviewed sequences), the uniparc proteome UP000244076 (S. aureus strain ATCC 43300), with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany). Parameters were used or set as follows: first search peptide tolerance: 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm (for MaxQuant); enzyme: trypsin, maximum 2 missed cleavages; static modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues; variable modifications: methionine oxidation; minimum peptide length: 6, maximum peptide mass: 7600 Da. Normalization was done in MaxQuant using the label-free quantification (LFQ) setting the minimum ratio count to 2 (unique and razor peptides). Further analysis of LFQ, protein intensities were performed using the Perseus software package version 1.6.2.2 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The LFQ-intensities were log2-transformed (missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of the data set (width: 0.3, downshift 1.8). Known contaminants, reverse identified proteins, and proteins with “identified by site” were discarded. Proteins with less than two identifications in at least one group were removed from the data set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immune response, Interleukins, Proteomics, Secretome, Chemokines, Chronic infections

### Affiliations
Jena University Hospital
Institute of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena University Hospital / Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, 07747, Germany.

### Submitter
Reza Gheitasi

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias M. Pletz
Institute of Infectious Diseases and Infection Control, Jena University Hospital / Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, 07747, Germany.


