### Accession
PXD026897

### Title
Endoplasmic reticulum stress as a key mechanism in stunted growth of seawater rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)

### Description
Background: Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) is a salmonid species with a complex life-history. Wild populations are naturally divided into freshwater residents and sea-run migrants. Migrants undergo an energy-demanding adaptation for life in seawater, known as smoltification, while freshwater residents display these changes in an attenuated magnitude and rate. Despite this, in seawater rainbow trout farming all animals are transferred to seawater. Under these circumstances, weeks after seawater transfer, a significant portion of the fish die (around 10%) or experience growth stunting (GS; around 10%), which represents an important profitability and welfare issue. The underlying causes leading to GS in seawater-transferred rainbow trout remain unknown. In this study, we aimed at characterising the GS phenotype in seawater-transferred rainbow trout using untargeted and targeted approaches. To this end, the liver proteome (LC-MS/MS) and lipidome (LC-MS) of GS and fast-growing phenotypes were profiled to identify molecules and processes that are characteristic of the GS phenotype. Moreover, the transcription, abundance or activity of key proteins and hormones related to osmoregulation (Gill Na+, K+–ATPase activity), growth (plasma IGF-I, and liver igf1, igfbp1b, ghr1 and ctsl) and stress (plasma cortisol) were measured using targeted approaches.  Results: No differences in Gill Na+, K+–ATPase activity and plasma cortisol were detected between the two groups. However, a significant downregulation in plasma IGF-I and liver igf1 transcription pointed at this growth factor as an important pathomechanism for GS. Changes in the liver proteome revealed reactive-oxygen-species-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress as a key mechanism underlying the GS phenotype. From the lipidomic analysis, key observations include a reduction in triacylglycerols and elevated amounts of cardiolipins, a characteristic lipid class associated with oxidative stress, in GS phenotype.  Conclusion: While the triggers to the activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress are still unknown, data from this study point towards either an unresolved infection or a nutritional deficiency as underlying drivers of this phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Liver sample preparation Homogenization of 50 mg of liver was done in 1 ml of 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) using a pestle motor mixer. Sodium dodecyl sulphate and dithiothreitol were added to the homogenates to a final concentration of 4% and 0.1M, respectively. The samples were then incubated at 95 oC for 5 min and cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 xg for 10 min at room temperature. TMT labelling After measuring protein concentration by BCA (Interchim Uptima) equal amounts of protein (100 μg) were reduced, alkylated, precipitated, trypsin digested and TMT labelled following manufacturer instructions (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, ThermoFisher Scientific). Multiplexed peptide samples were cleaned-up using Hypersep SpinTip (ThermoFisher Scientific), according to manufacturer instructions. Finally, samples were dried using a vacuum drier (Savant DNA SpeedVac 110, Thermo Scientific). LC MS/MS analysis of TMT Samples were analysed with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL LC−MSn mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray source and coupled to an Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer system (Waters nanoAcquity). Initially, 5 μL of sample resuspended in ultrapure water was loaded, desalted and concentrated in a BEH C18 trapping columns (Waters) with the instrument operated in positive ion mode. The peptides were then separated on a BEH C18 nanocolumn (1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an ACN/water gradient; 1% ACN for 1 min, followed by 0−62.5% ACN over 21 min, 62.5− 85% ACN for 1.5 min, 85% ACN for 2 min and 1% ACN for 15 min.  MS spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition in the m/z range 400−2,000 using a precursor ion resolution of 30,000, following which individual precursor ions (top 5) were automatically fragmented using collision induced dissociation with a relative collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 180 s.

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS data analysis and sequence annotation for TMT MS data was analysed using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peak integration allowed for a window tolerance of 20 ppm using the ‘most confident centroid’ method. Peptide quantification was based on TMT label abundance. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification (i.e. peptides that could be exclusively matched to a single protein in the database). Data across samples was normalized based on protein median. Only high-confidence peptides were used for quantification. Protein abundance was further normalized by dividing it in each sample by the total abundance for that protein (sum of all 10 samples). A multiple t-test followed by FDR 5% was used to compare the abundance of each detected protein in both conditions.  Peptide sequences were annotated by database search against the rainbow trout SwissProt database, which was downloaded from MASCOT and loaded into Proteome Discoverer. The initial search parameters allowed for a single trypsin missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine residues, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-terminal peptides, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of ±0.5 Da, and an FDR of 0.01. Any proteins named ‘uncharacterised’ in the rainbow trout protein database were further searched by sequence homology against the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), zebrafish (Danio rerio), and human (Homo sapiens) SwissProt databases, in this particular order. Only homologies of E-value higher than 0.01 were accepted as valid. Data was tested for normal distribution and homogeneity of variance assumptions using the Shapiro and Bartlett tests, respectively. Next, multiple t-test analysis and 5% FDR correction were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Insulin-like growth factor-i, Pathology, Smoltification, Oxidative stress, Reactive oxygen species, Steelhead, Salmonid, Runt, Aquaculture

### Affiliations
Institute of Aquaculture, Stirling
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling

### Submitter
Bernat Morro

### Lab Head
Dr Amaya Albalat
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling


