### Accession
PXD021606

### Title
Metabolic versatility of the nitrite-oxidizing bacterium Nitrospira marina and its proteomic response to oxygen-limited conditions

### Description
In this study, we investigated the metabolic potential of N. marina based on its complete genome sequence and performed  physiological experiments to test genome-derived hypotheses. Our data confirm that N. marina benefits from additions of undefined organic carbon substrates, has adaptations to resist oxidative, osmotic and UV light-induced stress and low dissolved pCO2. Additionally, N. marina is able to grow chemoorganotrophically on formate, and is thus not an obligate chemolithoautotroph. We further investigated the metabolic response of N. marina to low (5.6 µM) O2 concentrations. In response to O2-limited conditions, the abundance of a potentially more efficient CO2-fixing pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (POR) complex and a high-affinity cbb3-type terminal oxidase increased, suggesting a role in sustaining nitrite oxidation-driven autotrophy under O2 limitation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed with SDS extraction buffer. Extracted proteins were purified from SDS detergent, reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested while embedded within a polyacrylamide tube gel. Protein extracts were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (Michrom Advance HPLC coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a Michrom Advance CaptiveSpray source). Each sample was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 250 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 160 min gradient from 5% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer was set to perform MS/MS on the top 15 ions using data-dependent settings (dynamic exclusion 15 seconds, excluding unassigned and singly charged ions), and ions were monitored over a range of 380-1580 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Spectra-peptide matches were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). Protein identifications were made using Scaffold 4.0 (Proteome Software Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
The genus Nitrospira is the most widespread group of nitrite-oxidizing bacteria and thrives in diverse natural and engineered ecosystems. Nitrospira marina Nb-295<sup>T</sup> was isolated from the ocean over 30 years ago; however, its genome has not yet been analyzed. Here, we investigated the metabolic potential of N. marina based on its complete genome sequence and performed physiological experiments to test genome-derived hypotheses. Our data confirm that N. marina benefits from additions of undefined organic carbon substrates, has adaptations to resist oxidative, osmotic, and UV light-induced stress and low dissolved pCO<sub>2</sub>, and requires exogenous vitamin B<sub>12</sub>. In addition, N. marina is able to grow chemoorganotrophically on formate, and is thus not an obligate chemolithoautotroph. We further investigated the proteomic response of N. marina to low (&#x223c;5.6&#x2009;&#xb5;M) O<sub>2</sub> concentrations. The abundance of a potentially more efficient CO<sub>2</sub>-fixing pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (POR) complex and a high-affinity cbb<sub>3</sub>-type terminal oxidase increased under O<sub>2</sub> limitation, suggesting a role in sustaining nitrite oxidation-driven autotrophy. This putatively more O<sub>2</sub>-sensitive POR complex might be protected from oxidative damage by Cu/Zn-binding superoxide dismutase, which also increased in abundance under low O<sub>2</sub> conditions. Furthermore, the upregulation of proteins involved in alternative energy metabolisms, including Group 3b [NiFe] hydrogenase and formate dehydrogenase, indicate a high metabolic versatility to survive conditions unfavorable for aerobic nitrite oxidation. In summary, the genome and proteome of the first marine Nitrospira isolate identifies adaptations to life in the oxic ocean and provides insights into the metabolic diversity and niche differentiation of NOB in marine environments.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Nitrospira marina, Thermo orbitrap

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, US
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, US


