### Accession
PXD028435

### Title
Single muscle fiber proteomics reveals remodeling of focal adhesions in response to muscle unloading and microgravity

### Description
Spaceflight causes loss of muscle mass and strength, metabolic remodeling and insulin resistance, contributing to severe challenges for astronaut health. We used highly sensitive proteomics to detail single fiber type-specific molecular remodeling caused by muscle unloading in subjects undergoing prolonged bed rest. We then measured the muscle proteome of astronauts before and after a mission on the ISS. Our combined datasets show downregulation of complexes involved in fiber-matrix interaction, force transmission and insulin receptor stabilization on the sarcolemma. Unloading upregulated anti-oxidant responses in slow but not in fast fibers, markers of neuromuscular damage and the hypusination pathway that uniquely modifies translation initiation factor 5A. These muscle intrinsic changes in adhesion, protein turnover and redox balance may contribute to the whole-body detrimental effects caused by prolonged unloading. We conclude that single muscle fiber analysis by proteomics can support the development of advanced countermeasures targeting the mechano-metabolic molecular axis.

### Sample Protocol
Fibers were microdissected manually under a stereomicroscope from fresh biopsies kept in an ice-cold solution containing K-propionate (150mM), KH2PO4 (5mM), Mg Acetate (5mM), EGTA (5 mM) and DTT (1mM). They were individually frozen in dry ice in standard Eppendorf tubes. The fiber isolation was completed within 20 minutes of the muscle biopsy procedure. Fibers were lysed in 20 ul of LYSE (PreOmics), heated at 95oC for 5 min and sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 min. with a 50% duty cycle. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by adding to the fiber lysate 500 ng of endoproteinase LysC and 500 ng of trypsin in 10 ul of LYSE buffer. After overnight digestion at 37oC under continuous shaking, the lysate was acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto StageTip plugs of SDB-RPS. Purified peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile-1% ammonia and dried.   Muscle lysates of astronauts in RIPA buffer were precipitated in Acetone and resuspended in LYSE buffer (PreOmics), heated at 95oC for 5 min and sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 min. with a 50% duty cycle. Protein concentration in the lysate was adjusted to 2ug/ul. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by adding 1 ug of endoproteinase LysC and and trypsin per 50 ug of lysate. After overnight digestion at 37oC under continuous shaking, the lysate was acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto StageTip plugs of SDB-RPS. Purified peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile-1% ammonia and dried.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.15.0) was used for the analysis of raw files searching against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606, UP000005640_9606_additional) and a common contaminants database (Cox & Mann, 2008). The FDR was set to 1% for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching between the runs with a 0.7-min retention-time match window between single fibers, the two libraries and 5 technical replicates of total lysate before fractionation. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving c-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Astronauts experience dramatic loss of muscle mass, decreased strength, and insulin resistance, despite performing daily intense physical exercise that would lead to muscle growth on Earth. Partially mimicking spaceflight, prolonged bed rest causes muscle atrophy, loss of force, and glucose intolerance. To unravel the underlying mechanisms, we employed highly sensitive single fiber proteomics to detail the molecular remodeling caused by unloading and inactivity during bed rest and changes of the muscle proteome of astronauts before and after a mission on the International Space Station. Muscle focal adhesions, involved in fiber-matrix interaction and insulin receptor stabilization, are prominently downregulated in both bed rest and spaceflight and restored upon reloading. Pathways of antioxidant response increased strongly in slow but not in fast muscle fibers. Unloading alone upregulated markers of neuromuscular damage and the pathway controlling EIF5A hypusination. These proteomic signatures of mechanical unloading in muscle fiber subtypes contribute to disentangle the effect of microgravity from the pleiotropic challenges of spaceflight.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Muscle, Microgravity

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Murgia
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Munich, Germany


