### Accession
PXD019545

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of early leaf development in Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Description
The growth of plant organs is driven by cell division and subsequent cell expansion. The transition from proliferation into expansion is critical for the final organ size and, consequently plant yield. Exit from proliferation and onset of expansion is accompanied by major metabolic reprogramming, and in leaves with the establishment of photosynthesis. To learn more about the molecular mechanisms underlying the developmental and metabolic transitions important for plant growth, we used untargeted proteomics and metabolomics analyses to profile young leaves of a model plant Arabidopsis thaliana representing proliferation, transition, and expansion stages. The third true leaves of the in vitro grown Arabidopsis seedlings were harvested daily from day 8 to day 13 after stratification (8 to 13 DAS). Days 8 and 9 correspond to proliferation, days 12 and 13 to expansion and days 10 and 11 to the transition. The dataset presented represents a unique resource comprising approximately 4000 proteins and 300 annotated small-molecular compounds measured across six consecutive days of leaf growth. These can now be mined for novel developmental and metabolic regulators of plant growth and can act as a blueprint for future studies aimed at better defining the interface of development and metabolism in any other species.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets obtained after MTBE extraction were resuspended in 50 µL denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Reduction of cysteines, alkylation and enzymatic digestion using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega Corp., Fitchburg, WI) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested proteins were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 96-well Plate, 40 mg Sorbent per Well, (Waters). Dried peptides were suspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1 % FA) to a concentration of 0.5µg/µl and an equivalent of 1 µg was injected per run. Samples were measured by The Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) high-resolution mass spectrometer coupled to ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters). Samples were separated by reverse-phase nano liquid chromatography in 120 min gradient ramped from 3.2% to 76% CAN. Gradient started from 3.2% ACN and increased to 7.2% ACN in next 20 min, than to 24.8% ACN over 70 min and to 35.2% ACN over next 30 min, followed by a 5 min washout with 76% ACN. The MS was run using a data dependent top-N method that fragmented the top 12 most intense ions per full scan. Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 50 ms, scan range 300 to 1600 m/z. Each dd-MS2 scan was recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomics files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.0.16) with Andromeda- an integrated peptide search engine. Peptides were identified using A. thaliana Uniprot protein sequences(UP000006548) using default orbitrap settings. Moreover, maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and threshold for peptide validation was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. In addition, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. In the analysis, following options were selected: “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” and the minimum length of peptide was set to at least seven amino acids. In the further analysis, only proteins with equal or more than two unique peptides were considered. Moreover, contaminants, i.e. keratins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The growth of plant organs is driven by cell division and subsequent cell expansion. The transition from proliferation to expansion is critical for the final organ size and plant yield. Exit from proliferation and onset of expansion is accompanied by major metabolic reprogramming, and in leaves with the establishment of photosynthesis. To learn more about the molecular mechanisms underlying the developmental and metabolic transitions important for plant growth, we used untargeted proteomics and metabolomics analyses to profile young leaves of a model plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> representing proliferation, transition, and expansion stages. The dataset presented represents a unique resource comprising approximately 4,000 proteins and 300 annotated small-molecular compounds measured across 6 consecutive days of leaf growth. These can now be mined for novel developmental and metabolic regulators of plant growth and can act as a blueprint for studies aimed at better defining the interface of development and metabolism in other species.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Leaf development, Proteomics, 12-opda, Mitotic arrest

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology  Wissenschaftspark  Am Mühlenberg 1  14476 Potsdam-Golm
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology 
Wissenschaftspark 
Am Mühlenberg 1
14476 Potsdam-Golm 


### Submitter
Ewelina Sokolowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology  Wissenschaftspark  Am Mühlenberg 1  14476 Potsdam-Golm


