### Accession
PXD006569

### Title
Comparison of targeted mass spectrometry techniques with an immunoassay: a case study for HSP90 alpha

### Description
We developed 2D-LC-MS/MS-based SRM and PRM assays to measure HSP90 alpha in serum and compared the results to a commercially available immunoassay (ELISA). Serum samples were trypsin-digested and fractionated by SCX chromatography prior to SRM and PRM measurements. PRM data obtained by high-resolution mass spectrometry correlated better with ELISA measurements than SRM data measured on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. While all three methods (SRM, PRM, ELISA) were able to quantify HSP90 alpha in serum at the ng/mL level, the use of PRM on a high-resolution mass spectrometer reduced variation. To rule out that the observed differences in SRM and PRM are due to different mass spectrometry systems, the SCX fractions were measured on the same high-resolution instrument (Orbitrap) in the ion trap mode (IT-PRM); such measurements showed that intense co-eluting signals were present in the SRM method, but these interfering peaks were eliminated in the high-resolution PRM mode. Thus, this report shows that it is possible to measure ng/mL levels of HSP90 alpha in a reproducible, selective and sensitive way using PRM. This opens up the possibility to quantify low levels of multiple proteins in complex samples based on a fractionation strategy on tryptic peptides followed by PRM.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the comparability of the SRM, PRM based on the SIL peptides and the immunoassay recombinant HSP90 alpha standard (1 µg/mL; calibration standard provided with the ELISA kit), an amount of four ng of the HSP90 SIL peptides was mixed with two ng of the immunoassay standard and reduced (5.1 mM DTT), alkylated (15.1 mM IA) and trypsin (50 ng) digested at 37ºC overnight. The sample which corresponded to 56.7 pg on column was measured in triplicate by SRM and PRM. Subsequently the ratios between the endogenous peptides of the HSP90 alpha standard and SIL peptides were used to determine the HSP90 alpha concentration. Three µL of the digested HSP90 alpha standard was analyzed by SRM and PRM as described before. Additionally, to assess the purity of the protein standard a data dependent acquisition was used. For nano-LC separation, a linear gradient from 4% to 38% solvent B in 90 minutes was used and followed by a shotgun method with Orbitrap MS1 acquisition from m/z 400 – 1600 at 120,000 resolution (AGC = 40,000 ions) followed by ion-trap CID MS/MS spectra (30% normalized collision energy, AGC = 10,000 ions, and maximum injection time of 40 ms) for at most 3 seconds (‘top-speed’ type DDA method).

### Data Protocol
A search was applied to the human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, version 151112, 20194 entries) using the following parameters: fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da, parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, maximum number of missed cleavages of two. In the Mascot search engine oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Scx, Serum, Prm, Srm, Elisa

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology;  Clinical & Cancer Proteomics

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology;  Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


