### Accession
PXD023050

### Title
High levels of TFAM repress in vivo transcription of mitochondrial DNA

### Description
Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is coated with mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and compacted into nucleoids. TFAM is not only the main component of mitochondrial nucleoids but its levels can also control mtDNA copy number. Here we show that the TFAM-to-mtDNA ratio is critical for maintaining normal mtDNA expression in different tissues of the mouse. BAC transgenic mice with a 1.5-fold increase in TFAM protein levels maintain a normal TFAM-to-mtDNA ratio in different tissues and as a consequence mitochondrial gene expression, nucleoid distribution and whole animal metabolism are all unaltered. In contrast, mice expressing TFAM from the CAG promoter in the ROSA26 locus have 4.5-fold increase of TFAM protein levels in heart and skeletal muscle and develop pathology leading to early postnatal lethality. The TFAM-to-mtDNA ratio varies widely between tissues in these mice and is very high in skeletal muscle where it causes strong repression of mtDNA expression and deficient oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) despite normal mtDNA levels. In heart, mtDNA copy number is increased leading to a near normal TFAM-to-mtDNA ratio and maintained OXPHOS capacity. In the liver, mtDNA expression is maintained despite increased TFAM levels and normal mtDNA levels. Here, tissue-specific induction of the LONP1 protease and mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT) expression counteracts the silencing effect of high TFAM levels. We conclude that the TFAM-to-mtDNA ratio has an important role in maintaining mtDNA expression in vivo. TFAM acts as a general repressor of mtDNA expression and this effect can be counterbalance by tissue-specific expression of regulatory factors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation from 10 mg of grinded tissue powder was performed as described (Busch et al. 2019) with slight modifications: tryptic peptides were eluted from STAGE tips with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). Four micrograms of desalted peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex, cat. No 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent. All ten samples per timepoint were labelled in one TMT batch. TMT labelling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.8 mg of TMT reagent was re-suspended with 70 µL of anhydrous ACN, dried peptides were reconstituted in 9 µL 0.1M TEAB to which 7 µL TMT reagent in ACN was added to a final ACN concentration of 43.75%, after 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, resuspended in 200 µL 0.1% FA, split into two samples, and desalted using home-made C18 STAGE tips(Rappsilber et al. 2003). One of the two halves was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters cat. no SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 96 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3 min, followed by 8 min of 95% buffer B; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10 mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passed (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). Dried fractions were resuspended in 0.1% FA separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. No 164942) and and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V. Alternatively, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 µm PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur media (Dr.Maisch) and analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements. Peptide separations were performed on an EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Raw files were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (v. 1.6, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analysed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008) (version 1.6.10.43). Raw proteomics data was searched against the mouse proteome database from Uniprot, downloaded in September 2018. The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma (Ritchie et al. 2015) in R (Team 2010).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Transcription, Dna, Tfam, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, D-50931 Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing–Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, D-50931 Cologne, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing–Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


