### Accession
PXD022693

### Title
Salinity effects on guard cell proteome in Chenopodium quinoa

### Description
Quinoa plants were treated with 300 mM NaCl or under control conditions (n=4) for three weeks

### Sample Protocol
Guard cell preparations were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. Then, 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in pre-chilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol was used to precipitate total proteins. The homogenate was kept at -20 °C overnight. Then the samples were centrifuged at 20,000× g at 4 °C for 20 min and the pellets were washed in 100% pre-chilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol. After a final wash (80% prechilled acetone containing 0.07% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol) pellets were centrifuged then air-dried at room temperature. Proteins were then solubilized in    1 mL buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 40 mM Tris (pH=7.5) at 20 °C for 1 h then clarified by centrifugation. Protein extracts were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone and resuspended in 50 μL of solubilization buffer

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 (http://maxquant.org/) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the protein database downloaded from NCBI for Chenopodium quinoa (Wild) (63,475 entries on 20/10/2017).  Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal fragments enriched in guard cells (GCs) were isolated from the halophyte quinoa (<i>Chenopodium quinoa</i> Wild.) species, and the response at the proteome level was studied after salinity treatment of 300 mM NaCl for 3 weeks. In total, 2147 proteins were identified, of which 36% were differentially expressed in response to salinity stress in GCs. Up and downregulated proteins included signaling molecules, enzyme modulators, transcription factors and oxidoreductases. The most abundant proteins induced by salt treatment were desiccation-responsive protein 29B (50-fold), osmotin-like protein OSML13 (13-fold), polycystin-1, lipoxygenase, alpha-toxin, and triacylglycerol lipase (PLAT) domain-containing protein 3-like (eight-fold), and dehydrin early responsive to dehydration (ERD14) (eight-fold). Ten proteins related to the gene ontology term "response to ABA" were upregulated in quinoa GC; this included aspartic protease, phospholipase D and plastid-lipid-associated protein. Additionally, seven proteins in the sucrose-starch pathway were upregulated in the GC in response to salinity stress, and accumulation of tryptophan synthase and L-methionine synthase (enzymes involved in the amino acid biosynthesis) was observed. Exogenous application of sucrose and tryptophan, L-methionine resulted in reduction in stomatal aperture and conductance, which could be advantageous for plants under salt stress. Eight aspartic proteinase proteins were highly upregulated in GCs of quinoa, and exogenous application of pepstatin A (an inhibitor of aspartic proteinase) was accompanied by higher oxidative stress and extremely low stomatal aperture and conductance, suggesting a possible role of aspartic proteinase in mitigating oxidative stress induced by saline conditions.

### Keywords
Quinoa, Salt stress, Stomata, Proteomics analysis, Guard cell

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


