### Accession
PXD017531

### Title
Interaction mapping of human condensin I and condensin II complexes using DSBU-cross-linking and mass spectrometry

### Description
Human condensin I and condensin II complexes play essential roles in chromatin condensation during the cell division process. Both complexes use ATP as the energy source to pack extended chromatin into the short form of chromosome. In order to understand the mechanism of their function, we performed cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) analyses of both complexes and mapped the inter-molecular and intra-molecular interactions of the subunits.

### Sample Protocol
Human condensin I and condensin II complexes were expressed and purified from insect cells. Purified complexes were cross-linked with DSBU (disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea), precipitated, and digested with Lys-C and trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted and fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography prior to the analysis with a Q-Exactive Plus. All fractions were analysed with a standard MS-MS/MS top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive Plus were converted to MGF (Mascot generic files) format with program msConvert GUI from ProteoWizard Toolkit version 3. Program MeroX version 1.6.6.6  was used for cross-link identification.

### Publication Abstract
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) complexes are essential for genome organization from bacteria to humans, but their mechanisms of action remain poorly understood. Here, we characterize human SMC complexes condensin I and II and unveil the architecture of the human condensin II complex, revealing two putative DNA-entrapment sites. Using single-molecule imaging, we demonstrate that both condensin I and II exhibit ATP-dependent motor activity and promote extensive and reversible compaction of double-stranded DNA. Nucleosomes are incorporated into DNA loops during compaction without being displaced from the DNA, indicating that condensin complexes can readily act upon nucleosome-bound DNA molecules. These observations shed light on critical processes involved in genome organization in human cells.

### Keywords
Human, Protein complex, Dsbu, Chromatin, Q-exactive, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Chromosome, Condensin

### Affiliations
Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, 9 Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology,
9 Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund

### Submitter
Dongqing  Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Musacchio
Department of Mechanistic Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, 9 Otto-Hahn-Str. 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany


