### Accession
PXD000275

### Title
Phosphoproteome of MCF7 breast cancer cells treated with estradiol and BI2536

### Description
Triple SILAC phosphoproteome experiment of hormone deprived MCF7 cells treated with estradiol (E2) in presence or absence of the PLK1 inhibitor BI2536.  Conditions were as follows: light (L) population: 1h DMSO, 30min EtOH; medium (M) population: 1h DMSO, 30min E2; heavy (H) population: 1h BI2536, 30min E2. Biological replicates: A and B.  Phosphopeptides were enriched from soluble and insoluble fraction using a two step enrichment protocol consiting of strong cation exchange and TiO2 affinity chromatography.  The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer linked to an online nanoflow HPLC system via a nanoelectrospray ion source and fragmented via higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).  Analysis was carried out using MaxQuant (v. 1.2.2.5) with standard settings including STY phosphporylation as variable modification.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled MCF7 cells were cultured for three days in media without phenol red supplemented with 5% charcoal-treated dialyzed FBS. Cells were treated with BI2536 (100 nM) or vehicle (DMSO) for 1 hr followed by induction with E2 (10 nM) or vehicle (ethanol) for 30 min. Cells were harvested on ice in PBS and lysed in modified RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Extracts were separated by centrifugation. Proteins in the supernatant were acetone precipitated overnight and redissolved in urea buffer. The pellet was extracted in in urea buffer with benzonase and combined with the supernatant fraction. Samples from individual biological conditions were mixed in a 1:1:1 (w:w:w) ratio, reduced, alkylated, and subsequently digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin. Desalted peptides were separated by strong cation exchange chromatography and further enriched for phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 beads. Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips and reconstituted in 4% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5) as per the standard workflow for SILAC data with peptide FDR and site FDR set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is a key regulator of cell division and is overexpressed in many types of human cancers. Compared to its well-characterized role in mitosis, little is known about PLK1 functions in interphase. Here, we report that PLK1 mediates estrogen receptor (ER)-regulated gene transcription in human breast cancer cells. PLK1 interacts with ER and is recruited to ER cis-elements on chromatin. PLK1-coactivated genes included classical ER target genes such as Ps2, Wisp2, and Serpina3 and were enriched in developmental and tumor-suppressive functions. Performing large-scale phosphoproteomics of estradiol-treated MCF7 cells in the presence or absence of the specific PLK1 inhibitor BI2536, we identified several PLK1 end targets involved in transcription, including the histone H3K4 trimethylase MLL2, the function of which on ER target genes was impaired by PLK1 inhibition. Our results propose a mechanism for the tumor-suppressive role of PLK1 in mammals as an interphase transcriptional regulator.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Bi2536, Mcf7, Plk1, Phosphoproteomics, Gene regulation, Silac, Estradiol

### Affiliations
Gene Regulation Program
Gene Regulation Stem Cells and Cancer Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Beato
Gene Regulation Stem Cells and Cancer Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain


