### Accession
PXD000770

### Title
Cellular and proteomics analysis of the endomembrane system from the unicellular Entamoeba histolytica

### Description
This work represents the in-depth proteomics analysis of subcellular compartments in E.histolytica and allows a detailed map of vesicle traffic components in an ancient single-cell ogranism that lacks a stereotypical ER and Golgi apparatus

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the internal membrane fraction (50 µg) were precipitated with methanol-chloroform method and the resulting dried pellet was dissolved in freshly prepared digestion buffer (8 M urea in 25 mM NH4HCO3). Sample were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (45 minutes, 37°C) and alkylated with 50 mm iodoacetamide (60 minutes, 37°C) in the dark. Sample were diluted with 25 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin gold (1 µg, Promega USA). After digestion, peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 2.8 with Formic acid and desalted with minispin C18 columns (Nestgrp, USA). Samples were dried under vacuum and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile before mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 1.4). For the search engine SEQUEST, the peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine along with N-terminal acetylation was used as variable modifications. Spectra were queried against the E. histolytica uniProt database. In order to improve the rate of peptide identifications percolator node in proteome discoverer was utilized with the false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endomembrance vesicles proteomics

### Affiliations
VProteomics
Cell Biology of Parasitism Unit Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris, Cedex 15, FRANCE

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Guillen
Cell Biology of Parasitism Unit Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris, Cedex 15, FRANCE


