### Accession
PXD035438

### Title
Cell-type specific tagging of glycoproteins in murine-human co-culture samples

### Description
We report a strategy termed Bio-Orthogonal Cell line-specific Tagging of Glycoproteins (BOCTAG). Cells are equipped by transfection with an artificial biosynthetic pathway (mut-AGX1/NahK/Nh-GalNAc-T2) that transforms an alkyne tagged sugar into the corresponding nucleotide-sugar. Only transfected cells incorporate the bioorthogonal sugar into glycoproteins in the presence of non-transfected cells. The incorporation of alkyne-sugar in glycoproteins allows the installation, by copper(I)-catalyzed reaction, of a biotinylated tag. Glycoproteins are enriched using Streptavidin, and on-bead digestion yielded a peptide fraction that is analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Murine 4T1(GFP-expressing) and human MCF7 cells stably transfected with plasmids either encodeing AGX1 F383A and B. longum NahK or empty plasmid were individually plated or co-cultured (1:1 ratio). Cells were fed either DMSO or 10 μM Ac4GalN6yne. The secretome was collected, spun, concentrated  and media replaced with PBS by udialysis. 300 µg of each sample was used for the next step.  Samples were clicked with an acid-cleavable biotin-picolyl azide, precipitated and subjected to Neutravidin enrichment. On-bead reduction/alkylation was performed, and samples were on-bead digested with LysC. Peptide samples were then treated with trypsin.   Peptides were desalted by UltraMicroSpinTM (The Nest group Inc., Ipswich, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and vacuum-dried by SpeedVac to remove any traces of organic solvents. Desalted peptides were resuspended in 15 μL of 0.1% formic acid and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Eclipse with ETD (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher). The sample (15 μL for glycopeptide fractions and 5μL out of 16 μL for peptide fractions) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a 50 cm, 75 µm PepMap RSLC C18 column (ES903) after pre-concentation onto a 2 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap100 m nanoViper. The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.275 μL/min using a 120 and 140 minutes gradient for peptides and glycopeptides, respectively. Solvents were: A = 5% (v/v) DMSO, 95% (v/v)0.1% formic acid in water; B = 5% (v/v) DMSO, 20% (v/v)0.1% formic acid in water, 75% (v/v) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient profile was as follows: 0 min 98% A, 2% B; 5 min 98% A, 2% B; 5.5 min 92% A, 8% B; 93 min 60% A, 40% B; 94 min 5% A, 95% B; 104 min 5% A, 95% B; 105 min 98% A, 2% B; 120 min 98% A, 2% B. MS1 scans were collected with a mass range from 350-1500 m/z, 120K resolution, 4x 105 ion inject target, and 50 ms maximum inject time. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude for 20 seconds with a repeat count of 1. Charge states 2-6 with an intensity greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation at top speed for 3s. Selected precursors were fragmented using HCD at 30% nCE 1.2 Da isolation window, 1x104 inject target, and 100 ms maximum inject time. MS2 scans were taken in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. For each sample, three technical replicates and two biological replicates were eluted.

### Data Protocol
raw mass spectrometry files were loaded into MaxQuant software for quantification and identification by using Homo sapiens and Mus musculus FASTA protein sequences database from UniProt as a reference database. For peptides, search parameters included specific cleavage specificity of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 5. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. The protein groups table were uploaded into Perseus to allow for data transformation, visualization and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
4t1, Mcf7, Proteomics, Human-murine, Secretome, Co-culture; lfq

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Imperial College London


