### Accession
PXD027173

### Title
Proteomic changes linked to the limbic stage of AD

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder and the most common cause of dementia worldwide. In AD, neurodegeneration spreads throughout the brain cortex in a gradual and predictable pattern, causing progressive memory decline and cognitive impairment. Here, we conducted proteomic, acetylomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of human postmortem tissue samples from AD (Braak stage III-IV) and control brains, covering all anatomical areas affected during the limbic stage of the disease (total hippocampus, CA1, entorhinal and perirhinal cortices). A total of 58 tissues were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen brain tissue was sectioned using a cryostat to obtain 10 µm slices (10-20 per sample). 200 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM DTT, 2 w/v % SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6) was added to the sample. The lysate was incubated at 95˚C for 5 min and then sonicated in the Bioruptor Plus UCD-300 (Diagnode) followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 18˚C. The supernatant was collected and transferred to a new tube. The proteins were alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at RT, and then were precipitated using 9 volumes of cold ethanol overnight at -20 ºC. The pellet was dried at room temperature and preserved at -20 ºC until further use. The protein pellet was dissolved in a solution of 1% SDS, 0.5% SDC, 100mM TEAB, pH 8.0. For acetylation stoichiometry analysis the unmodified lysine residues were chemically acetylated by incubation with N-acetoxy-succinimide-d3 (NAS-d3) in dimethyl sulfoxide at room temperature for 1 h. This labeling step was repeated once more. The samples were finally incubated with 5% hydroxylamine for 20 min to revert unspecific reactions such as the O-acetylation of hydroxylated amino acids. The samples were precipitated using cold ethanol to remove the excess of reagents and then resuspended in 0.5% SDC, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Protein amounts were quantified using the BCA™ Protein Assay Kit. The proteins were digested using trypsin (enzyme: protein, 1:50) at 37 ºC overnight. After trypsinization the peptides were cleaned up using an ethyl-acetate extraction. The organic phase was discarded and peptides were dried in a speed-vac for 5 min to evaporate the remaining solvent. The peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA and peptide determination was performed using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. The samples were used for global proteome and acetylome analyses. For phosphoproteome analysis, the phosphopeptides produced by classical tryptic digestion (without chemical acetylation) were enriched in the samples. For phosphopeptide enrichment, 55 µg of peptides were submitted to an automatic workflow on the AssayMAP Bravo system (Agilent Technologies) using the Fe(III)-IMAC assay as previously described (Murillo et al, 2018). The phosphopeptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis.  One microgram of the peptides was injected for each global proteome analysis and the total amount of enriched peptides was used for phosphoproteome analysis. The measurements were run on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were concentrated on an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper) trap-column and separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 25 cm) analytical column. The nanoLC system was operated at a flowrate of 300 nL/min and the column temperature was set to 45 °C. The solvents used for the nonlinear gradient were A (0.1% formic  acid) and B (0.08% formic acid in 80% ACN).  For total proteome analysis the gradient started with 2% solvent B and increased to 27% during 112 min, in the next 10 min solvent B increased to 35%, then to 50% in 7 min and finally, it augmented to 90% in 8 min and it was kept at 90% for 5 min. Samples were analyzed using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method,  the spray voltage was set to 1.85 kV. MS1 full scans were acquired with 120,000 resolution, target AGC value of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS2 analysis the 20 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an NCE of 28. MS2 spectra were acquired with 15,000 resolution, target AGC value of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 1.6e5 and the dynamic exclusion to 40 s. The phosphoproteome analysis was performed using a gradient starting with 4% solvent B and increased to 27% during 120 min, in the next 15 min solvent B increased to 45%  and finally, it augmented to 98% in 1 min and it was kept at 98% for 5 min. Samples were analyzed using a top 15 DDA method, the spray voltage was set to 1.85 kV. MS1 full scans were acquired with 120,000 resolution, target AGC value of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For MS2 analysis the 15 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation with an NCE of 25. MS2 spectra were acquired with 60,000 resolution, target AGC value of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The ion selection threshold was set to 7.2e3 and the dynamic exclusion to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2. Peptide identification was done with the SEQUEST HT search engine against UniProtKB human database (version from 01/15/2019, canonical and isoforms, 42,356 sequences). The following search parameters were employed: Arg-C as the cleavage enzyme, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as a static modification, methionine oxidation, acetylation (normal (d0) and heavy (d3)) at lysine residues and at protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed and peptide length was set between 6-144 amino acids. The following filters were applied: high confidence (FDR 0.01) at peptide and protein levels. Protein quantification was done by using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node. The Top 3 method (average of the 3 most intense peptides) was used for protein quantification, being considered only unique peptides.  The same software, protein database and search engine were used for the phosphopeptide search using the following search parameters: Trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as a static modification, methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications, 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed and peptide length was set between 6-144 amino acids. The following filters were applied: high confidence (FDR 0.01) at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder and the most common cause of dementia worldwide. In AD, neurodegeneration spreads throughout different areas of the central nervous system (CNS) in a gradual and predictable pattern, causing progressive memory decline and cognitive impairment. Deposition of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in specific CNS regions correlates with the severity of AD and constitutes the basis for disease classification into different Braak stages (I-VI). Early clinical symptoms are typically associated with stages III-IV (i.e., limbic stages) when the involvement of the hippocampus begins. Histopathological changes in AD have been linked to brain proteome alterations, including aberrant posttranslational modifications (PTMs) such as the hyperphosphorylation of Tau. Most proteomic studies to date have focused on AD progression across different stages of the disease, by targeting one specific brain area at a time. However, in AD vulnerable regions, stage-specific proteomic alterations, including changes in PTM status occur in parallel and remain poorly characterized. Here, we conducted proteomic, phosphoproteomic, and acetylomic analyses of human postmortem tissue samples from AD (Braak stage III-IV, n=11) and control brains (n=12), covering all anatomical areas affected during the limbic stage of the disease (total hippocampus, CA1, entorhinal and perirhinal cortices). Overall, ~6000 proteins, ~9000 unique phosphopeptides and 221 acetylated peptides were accurately quantified across all tissues. Our results reveal significant proteome changes in AD brains compared to controls. Among others, we have observed the dysregulation of pathways related to the adaptive and innate immune responses, including several altered antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Notably, some of these changes were restricted to specific anatomical areas, while others altered according to disease progression across the regions studied. Our data highlights the molecular heterogeneity of AD and the relevance of neuroinflammation as a major player in AD pathology. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027173.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Limbic stage, Proteomics, Neuroinflammation, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Melinda Rezeli

### Lab Head
Dr Gyorgy Marko-Varga
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


