### Accession
PXD036507

### Title
Glycosylation Patterns on Collagen α1(I) and Collagen α2(I) resemble a lock and key arrangement

### Description
Col1 from the skins of 4 animals (cow, deer, goat and sheep) were purified, then used mass spectrometry and proteomic techniques to identify lysines that were oxidised, galactosylated, glucosylgalactosylated, or glycated in its ma-ture sequence. We found 18 out of the 38 lysines in collagen type 1α1, (Col1A1) and 7 of the 30 lysines in collagen type 1α2 (Col1A2) were glycosylated. Six of these modifications had not been reported before, and included a lysine involved in cross linking collagen molecules. Mapping the positions of these modifications on the ColA1 and Col1A2 sequences showed they were complimentary and resembled a lock and key arrangement.

### Sample Protocol
Acid-soluble collagen were extracted from 4 types of animal skins with 0.5 M acetic acid and centrifuged to remove insoluble materials. Sodium chloride (1.5 M final) was added to the hydrolysate and incubated at 4C with constant stirring. Soluble proteins were removed by centrifugation and the pellet formed was washed with MilliQ water before being redissolved in 0.5 M acetic acid and dialysed against MilliQ water with several changes. The dialysate was freeze dried and recostituted in MilliQ water, ran on SDS-PAGE. Whole gel lanes were divided into equal sized portions and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and analysis by LC-MS/MS using data-dependent tandem MS top 10 acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15 was used for data visualisation and quantitation. The following search parameters were used for protein identification: peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance 0.02 Da, up to two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length, six amino acids, oxidation of methionine (Met), Lys and Pro, acetylation of the N-terminal residue, and Gal, Glu-gal modifications of Hyl were set as variable modifica-tions. For each protein, the minimal number of unique peptides identified was set to two and the false discovery rate was set at 1%. Data were searched against the NCBI database (taxonomy: Pecora). All peptides used for PTM analysis were assigned a high confidence level and the modifications were determined by MS/MS. Fragmentation spectra for all pep-tides containing glycosylated hydroxylysines were manually inspected to verify the as-signment and the results used to produce a glycosylation map of Col1A1 and Col1A2.

### Publication Abstract
O-Glycosylation of hydroxylysine (Hyl) in collagen occurs at an early stage of biosynthesis before the triple-helix has formed. This simple post-translational modification (PTM) of lysine by either a galactosyl or glucosylgalactosyl moiety is highly conserved in collagens and depends on the species, type of tissue and the collagen amino acid sequence. The structural/functional reason why only specific lysines are modified is poorly understood, and has led to increased efforts to map the sites of PTMs on collagen sequences from different species and to ascertain their potential role in vivo. To investigate this, we purified collagen type I (Col1) from the skins of four animals, then used mass spectrometry and proteomic techniques to identify lysines that were oxidised, galactosylated, glucosylgalactosylated, or glycated in its mature sequence. We found 18 out of the 38 lysines in collagen type I&#x3b1;1, (Col1A1) and 7 of the 30 lysines in collagen type I&#x3b1;2 (Col1A2) were glycosylated. Six of these modifications had not been reported before, and included a lysine involved in crosslinking collagen molecules. A Fourier transform analysis of the positions of the glycosylated hydroxylysines showed they display a regular axial distribution with the same d-period observed in collagen fibrils. The significance of this finding in terms of the assembly of collagen molecules into fibrils and of potential restrictions on the growth of the collagen fibrils is discussed.

### Keywords
Hydroxylation, Lysine, Collagen, In-gel digestion, Glycosylation, Type 1

### Affiliations
Massey University

### Submitter
Trevor Loo

### Lab Head
Dr Gill Norris
Massey University


