### Accession
PXD044470

### Title
The selfish yeast plasmid exploits a SWI/SNF-type chromatin remodeling complex for hitchhiking on chromosomes and ensuring high-fidelity propagation

### Description
Extra-chromosomal selfish DNA elements can evade the risk of being lost at every generation by behaving as chromosome appendages, thereby ensuring high fidelity segregation and stable persistence in host cell populations. The yeast 2-micron plasmid and episomes of the mammalian gammaherpes and papilloma viruses that tether to chromosomes and segregate by hitchhiking on them exemplify this strategy. We document for the first time the utilization of a SWI/SNF-type chromatin remodeling complex as a conduit for chromosome association by a selfish element. One principal mechanism for chromosome tethering by the 2-micron plasmid is the bridging interaction of the plasmid partitioning proteins (Rep1 and Rep2) with the yeast RSC2 complex and the plasmid partitioning locus STB. We substantiate this model by multiple lines of evidence derived from genomics, cell biology and interaction analyses. We describe a Rep-STB bypass system in which a plasmid engineered to non-covalently associate with the RSC complex mimics segregation by chromosome hitchhiking. Given the ubiquitous prevalence of SWI/SNF family chromatin remodeling complexes among eukaryotes, it is likely that the 2-micron plasmid paradigm or analogous ones will be encountered among other eukaryotic selfish elements.

### Sample Protocol
RSC was purified from Saccharomyces cerivisiae using a TAP-tag method as described (Puig et al., 2001; Dutta et al., 2017). A strain modified with a TAP tag at the C terminus of STH1 was obtained from GE Dharmacon and grown at 30°C in YPD. 10 L of cells were harvested at OD seven and lysed using a cryo-mill. The ground cells were resuspended in a lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 250 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 μM ZnSO4, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, 10 μM leupeptin, protease inhibitor, 0.05% NP-40) and dounced to ensure homogenization, followed by an addition of 18 μL of benzonase (Sigma) while spinning on ice. After 10 min, another 18 μL of benzonase were added. Heparin (Sigma) was then added slowly to a final concentration of 0.5 mg/mL and incubated for 10 min. The lysate was then spun for 90 min at 17,000 g. Supernatant was collected and clarified through a column frit, then bound to 2.5 mL packed IgG resin and incubated for 4 hr at 4°C. After incubation, the supernatant was removed. TCEP was added to the lysis buffer for a final concentration of 0.5 mM and washed 5x over the resin. The sample was released via overnight incubation with 25 μg TEV protease in one volume buffer. Following cleavage, samples were spun to collect supernatant. The CaCl2 concentration of the supernatant was brought up to 2 mM and loaded onto 100 μL CBP resin equilibrated five times with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 150 mM KCl, 50 μM ZnCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 10 μM leupeptin, 1 mM TCEP, 0.01% NP-40). After 4 hr of incubation, the supernatant was removed and the resin was washed 2x with wash buffer with 750 mM KCl, then 3x with wash buffer with 250 mM KCl buffer, then 1x with wash buffer without CaCl2. The sample was eluted with one volume (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 150 mM KCl, 50 μM ZnCl, 2 mM EGTA, 10 μM leupeptin, 1 mM TCEP, 0.01% NP-40) for 30 min, then 15 min for each subsequent elution. Samples were aliquoted, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using FragPipe v17.1 against the S. cerevisiae reference proteome, and the results were imported into Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rsc2; 2-micron plasmid; chromatin remodeling; selfish dna; chromosome-hitchhiking

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA  Livestrong Cancer Institutes and Department of Oncology, Dell Medical School, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Iyerlab Member

### Lab Head
Dr Vishwanath Iyer
Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA  Livestrong Cancer Institutes and Department of Oncology, Dell Medical School, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


