### Accession
PXD027783

### Title
IDA (Iminodiacetic Acid) Generated Mesoporous Nanopolymer - A Template to Relate Surface Area, Hydrophilicity and Glycopeptides Enrichment

### Description
Co-polymer 1,2-epoxy-5-hexene and divinyl benzene with terminal oxirane group is synthesized for the first time. High density of hydrophilic groups (-COOH, -OH) enhances hydrophilicity through facile functionalization with Diethylene Triamine (DETA) and chloroacetic acid. COOH-functionalized mesoporous polymeric beads provide high surface area and porosity, superior hydrophilicity, solvent resistance and good bio-capability for enriching N-Linked glycopeptides. Sensitivity, selectivity, reusability and batch to batch reproducibility are tested using model glycoproteins (HRP, IgG and avidin) and analyzed by MALDI-TOF-MS. Furthermore, N-glycosylation sites in N-glycopeptides of characteristic glycoproteins are identified from digested human serum.

### Sample Protocol
Orbitrap instrument was operated in positive ion mode with normalized collision energy set to 35%. All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the data-dependent mode in full mass range of m/z 300 to 2000 at resolution of 60000 in FT mode. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a dynamic exclusion of 5 seconds, minimum relative signal intensity of 1000, and ≥2 positive charge state. Mgf files were created using Proteome Discover (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed using Mascot server against the most recent version of Uniprot human database. Variable modifications for methionine oxidation and HexNAc of asparagine, and fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl cysteines were specified, with the maximum missed cleavages of 2 and the digestion enzyme was specified as trypsin. MS mass tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da was specified for the searches.

### Publication Abstract
A three-step strategy is introduced to develop inherent iminodiacetic (IDA)-functionalized nanopolymer. SEM micrographs show homogenous spherical beads with a particle size of 500&#xa0;nm. Further modification to COOH-functionalized 1,2-epoxy-5-hexene/DVB mesoporous nanopolymer enriches glycopeptides via hydrophilic interactions followed by their MS determination. Significantly high BET surface area 433.4336 m<sup>2</sup>&#xa0;g<sup>-1</sup> contributes to the improved surface hydrophilicity which is also shown by high concentration of ionizable carboxylic acids, 14.59&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.25&#xa0;mmol&#xa0;g<sup>-1</sup>. Measured surface area is the highest among DVB-based polymers and in general much higher in comparison to the previously reported BET surface areas of co-polymers, terpolymers, MOFs, and graphene-based composites. Thirty-one, 19, and 16&#xa0;N-glycopeptides are enriched/identified by nanopolymer beads from tryptic digests of immunoglobulin G, horseradish peroxidase, and chicken avidin, respectively, without additional desalting steps. Material exhibits high selectivity (1:400 IgG:BSA), sensitivity (down to 0.1 fmol), regeneration ability up to three cycles, and batch-to-batch reproducibility (RSD&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1%). Furthermore, from 1 &#x3bc;L of digested human serum, 343&#xa0;N-glycopeptide characteristics of 134 glycoproteins including 30 FDA-approved serum biomarkers are identified via nano-LC-MS/MS. The developed strategy to self-generate IDA on polymeric surface with improved surface area, porosity, and ordered morphology is insignia of its potential as chromatographic tool contributing to future developments in large-scale biomedical glycoproteomics studies.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Lc-ms/ms, Spe, Polymer, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Georgetown University 
Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.

### Submitter
Muhammad  Sajid 

### Lab Head
Dr Habtom W. Ressom
Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.


