### Accession
PXD003900

### Title
The exposed proteomes of Brachyspira hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli

### Description
Applying a shotgun proteomics approach, we built a unique database of Brachyspira hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli peptides and proteins. A total of 148 LC-MS/MS runs were conducted on an Orbitrap instrument, and more than 29000 different peptides in cell supernatants and partially digested cell suspensions of 3 strains of B. hyodysenteriae and 2 strains of B. pilosicoli were identified. Overall, 16970 and 15493 peptide sequences, which pointed to 1625 and 1338 different protein accessions, were identified in B. hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli, respectively. The large-scale characterization of peptides and proteins in the extracellular medium as well as of the exposed proteins on the bacterial surface in these species provides a unique collection of interrelated data on the molecules involved in the interaction of these bacteria with their environment.

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of each extract corresponding to 2 mg of the original bacterial pellet were concentrated to approximately 5 µL and brought to 20 µL volume with 1 % formic acid, 5 % methanol. Depending on sample availability, each extract was injected at least in duplicate; in most cases, triplicate or quadruplicate samples were injected.  LC-MS/MS peptide analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, DK). The HPLC system consisted of an Agilent 1200 capillary pump, a binary pump, a thermostatted microinjector and a microswitch valve. A 12-cm long, 100-µm-I.D., 5 µm, C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co.) preceded by a C18 preconcentration cartridge (Agilent) was used.  Chromatography was performed at 0.4 µL/min (Solvent A, 0.1 % formic acid in water; Solvent B, 0.1% formic acid in ACN) using a multisegment linear gradient of buffer B as follows: 3 % -10 % in 9.5 min; to 40 % in 170.5 min, to 90 % in 1 min and to 100 % B in 5 min. Mass spectra (400-1800 m/z) were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode at a resolution of 60000. The 10 most abundant ions in the linear ion trap were sequentially selected for sequencing by collision-induced dissociation, using collision energy of 35 %. Ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 45 s. The spray voltage was 1.8 kV, and the heated capillary temperature was 200 ºC.

### Data Protocol
PeptideShaker (vs 1.6.0)  was used for peptide and protein identification from the full MS data collection. Searches were carried out against concatenated target/decoy versions of the Uniprot Databases for Brachyspiraceae and for B. hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli (all from November 2015). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences with SearchGUI. Search parameters included acetyl N-terminus, methionine oxidation and pyrrolidone from glutamic, glutamine and carbamidomethylated cysteine as dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Surfaceome and exoproteome samples were searched setting trypsin as the enzyme and allowing 2 missed cleavages. Peptide analyses were carried out with no enzyme set.  After database search, PeptideShaker uses protein inference algorithms for protein characterization. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM), peptides and proteins were validated at 1 % False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score 35 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package.

### Publication Abstract
Brachyspira hyodysenteriae and Brachyspira pilosicoli are well-known intestinal pathogens in pigs. B. hyodysenteriae is the causative agent of swine dysentery, a disease with an important impact on pig production while B. pilosicoli is responsible of a milder diarrheal disease in these animals, porcine intestinal spirochetosis. Recent sequencing projects have provided information for the genome of these species facilitating the search of vaccine candidates using reverse vaccinology approaches. However, practically no experimental evidence exists of the actual gene products being expressed and of those proteins exposed on the cell surface or released to the cell media. Using a cell-shaving strategy and a shotgun proteomic approach we carried out a large-scale characterization of the exposed proteins on the bacterial surface in these species as well as of peptides and proteins in the extracellular medium. The study included three strains of B. hyodysenteriae and two strains of B. pilosicoli and involved 148 LC-MS/MS runs on a high resolution Orbitrap instrument. Overall, we provided evidence for more than 29,000 different peptides pointing to 1625 and 1338 different proteins in B. hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli, respectively. Many of the most abundant proteins detected corresponded to described virulence factors and vaccine candidates. The level of expression of these proteins, however, was different among species and strains, stressing the value of determining actual gene product levels as a complement of genomic-based approaches for vaccine design.

### Keywords
Brachyspira, Exoproteome, Surfaceome, Shotgun proteomics, Immunogenic proteins

### Affiliations
IIBB-CSIC
CSIC-UAB Proteomics Laboratory IIBB-CSIC  Rosello 161, 6 planta 08036 Barcelona Spain

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Montserrat Carrascal
CSIC-UAB Proteomics Laboratory IIBB-CSIC  Rosello 161, 6 planta 08036 Barcelona Spain


