### Accession
PXD002456

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of endothelial cells treated with VEGF and Ang-1

### Description
The phosphoproteomes of bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAECs) treated with VEGF or Angiopoietin-1 for 10min were analyzed using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine aortic endothelial cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and scraped into lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM Na4P2O7 and 50 mM NaCl. The lysates were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 10 minutes. Protein concentration was carried out using BCA protein asssays. For in-solution digestion, a total 2 mg of protein was reduced at 37°C using dithiothreitol (DTT) for one hour and alkylated by iodoacetaminde for 60 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Then, the mixture was digested using trypsin (ratio enzyme/total protein of 1:50 ) followed by incubation at 37°C overnight. The tryptic digestion was quenched by adding 1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). The resultant peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB extraction plate 30 μm (Waters UK). Briefly, the wells were equilibrated with 500 L of 100% methanol and washed with 500 L of H2O. Afterward, wells were loaded with the peptide mixture, washed with 500 L of 5% methanol and eluted with 400 L of 100% methanol. The recovered peptides were lyophilized and subjected to phosphopeptides enrichment as follow (45-47). Peptides were resuspended in 200 L of 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) / 3% TFA / 300 mg DHB (dihydroxybenzoic acid). TiO2 beads (GL sciences) were resuspended in the same buffer and 20 L of this slurry was added to each (1:2 peptide to beads ratio). Samples were incubated for 30 minutes on a rotator at room temperature and centrifuged at 5000 g for 1 minute. Phosphopeptides-bound TiO2 beads was washed 3 times with 30% ACN, 3% TFA on a StageTip C8 material (ThermoFisher Scientific) and then 3 times with 80% ACN, 0.3% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice using a C8 StageTip with 75 L 40% ACN, 15% NH4OH. Eluted phosphopeptides samples were vacuum-dried prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Phosphopeptides enriched samples were re-solubilized under agitation for 15 minutes in 21 µL of 1% ACN / 1% formic acid. The LC column was a PicoFrit fused silica capillary column, self-packed with C-18 reverse-phase material using a high-pressure packing cell. This column was installed on the Easy-nLC II system and coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray Flex ion source. The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid and 100% ACN / 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were loaded on-column at a flow rate of 600 nL/minute and eluted with a 2 slopes gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5), and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the bovine and human proteome database (NCBI downloaded on June 2012 and UniProt downloaded on May 2012) using the Andromeda search engine (version 1.3.0.5)(25, 48). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages was allowed. Cystein carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modification. The minimum required peptide length was 6 amino acids. Mass tolerances for precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The posterior error probability for peptide identification was set to 1%. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by searching against the databases with the reversed sequences. For protein and peptide identification, the maximum FDR was set to 1%. An analysis of variance test was used for statistical comparisons. A cut-off of > 1.4 fold increase (log2 fold change > 0.5) and < 0.7 fold decrease (log2 fold change < 0.5) was applied to define the regulated phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
VEGF and angiopoietin-1 (Ang-1) are essential factors to promote angiogenesis through regulation of a plethora of signaling events in endothelial cells (ECs). Although pathways activated by VEGF and Ang-1 are being established, the unique signaling nodes conferring specific responses to each factor remain poorly defined. Thus, we conducted a large-scale comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of signaling pathways activated by VEGF and Ang-1 in ECs using mass spectrometry. Analysis of VEGF and Ang-1 networks of regulated phosphoproteins revealed that the junctional proteins ZO-1, ZO-2, JUP and p120-catenin are part of a cluster of proteins phosphorylated following VEGF stimulation that are linked to MAPK1 activation. Down-regulation of these junctional proteins led to MAPK1 activation and accordingly, increased proliferation of ECs stimulated specifically by VEGF, but not by Ang-1. We identified ZO-1 as the central regulator of this effect and showed that modulation of cellular ZO-1 levels is necessary for EC proliferation during vascular development of the mouse postnatal retina. In conclusion, we uncovered ZO-1 as part of a signaling node activated by VEGF, but not Ang-1, that specifically modulates EC proliferation during angiogenesis.

### Keywords
Vegf, Angiopoietin-1, Phosphoproteomic, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
University of Montreal
Department of Pharmacology  Faculty of Medecine  Université de Montréal  Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Rony Chidiac

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Philippe Gratton
Department of Pharmacology  Faculty of Medecine  Université de Montréal  Montreal, Quebec, Canada


