### Accession
PXD003720

### Title
Analysis of LDL-associated proteins using the method of digitized native protein mapping

### Description
The method of digitized native protein mapping, combining nondenaturing micro 2DE, grid gel-cutting and quantitative LC-MS/MS (in data-independent acquisition mode, or MSE), was improved by using a new MS/MS mode, ion mobility separation enhanced-MSE (HDMSE) and applied to analyze the area of human plasma low-density lipoproteins (LDL).  An 18 mm * 4.8 mm rectangular area which included LDL on a nondenaturing micro 2D gel of human plasma was grid-cut into 72 square gel pieces and subjected to quantitative LC-MS/MS.  Compared with MSE, HDMSE showed significantly higher performance, by assigning 50% more proteins and detecting each protein in more squares.  Totally 253 proteins were assigned with LC-HDMSE and the quantity distribution of each was reconstructed as a native protein map.  The maps showed Apo B-100 was the most abundant protein in the grid-cut area, concentrated at pI 5.4-6.1 and apparent mass ca. 1000 kDa, which corresponded to four gel pieces, squares 39-42.  An Excel macro was prepared to search protein maps which show protein quantity peaks localized within the concentrated region of Apo B-100 (squares 39-42).  Twenty-two proteins out of the 252 matched this criteria, in which nineteen proteins have been reported to be associated with LDL.  This method require only several microliters of a plasma sample and the principle of the protein separation is totally different from ultracentrifugation.  The results obtained by this method would provide new insights on the structure and function of LDL.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma was collected from an apparently healthy individual (37 y, female), as described previously [Jin, et al., Electrophoresis 2014, 35, 2055-2064].  Nondenaturing micro 2DE was performed as follows.  A 4-uL aliquot of the plasma sample was subjected to IEF in the absence of denaturants employing agarose column gels (1.4 mm id * 36 mm) which contained 5% v/v Pharmalyte pH 3-10 and 1% w/v agarose.  IEF was run at 0.12 mA/gel constant current until a voltage of 300 V was reached (17 m) and continued at 300 V constant voltage for 20 m.  The IEF apparatus was chilled in an ice-water bath throughout the focusing process.  The focused gel was transferred onto the top of a polyacrylamide micro slab gel (4.2-17.85% T linear gradient, 5% C, 38 mm wide * 42 mm high * 1 mm thick), on which 100-uL 0.01 M Tris-0.076 M glycine buffer (pH 8.3) were added beforehand.  The 2nd-D electrophoresis was run in a buffer of 0.05 M Tris-0.38 M glycine (pH 8.3) at 10 mA/gel constant current, and continued until the spot of albumin, visualized by the binding of bromophenol blue added in the electrophoresis buffer, moved to ~15 mm from the bottom of the gel (~60 m).  The slab gel was stained with CBB R-250 as previously reported [Manabe, et al., Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 843-863].  For the comparison between the two MS/MS modes (MSE and HDMSE), two gels were used for the grid-cutting and the following analysis.  Subsequently, a gel area that has been assigned to include LDL by both immunochemical staining [Manabe, et al., Electrophoresis 1985, 6, 462-467] and MALDI-TOF MS PMF [Jin, et al., Electrophoresis 2009, 30, 939-948] was subjected for grid gel-cutting.  As shown in the gel pattern file (“Nondenaturing 2D gel pattern of plasma -by Ya Jin.pdf”), the 18 mm * 4.8 mm grid area, with pI range 5.0-7.8 and apparent mass above ca. 650 kDa, was cut into eighteen 1-mm wide columns and four rows, the first row being 1.8 mm high to contain the soft gel top and lower three rows being 1 mm high, providing totally 72 gel pieces.  Each gel piece was subjected to the procedures of destaining, reduction, alkylation and in-gel trypsin digestion [Manabe, et al., Electrophoresis 2007, 28, 843-863].  The solution of the extracted peptides from each gel square was dried by vacuum centrifuge and then reconstituted with a 12-uL aliquot of 1% v/v formic acid-2% acetonitrile v/v containing 40 fmol/uL Enolase Digest Standard as an internal standard for quantitation.  Nano-UPLC separation of the peptides was performed with a nanoACQUITY system (Waters) equipped with a Symmetry 5 um C18, 180 um * 20 mm trap column and a UPLC 1.7 um BEH130 C18 100 um * 100 mm analytical reverse phase column (both from Waters).  Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile.  Each sample, injected in 5-uL full-loop mode, was initially transferred with 0.5% mobile phase B to the trap column at a flow rate of 5 uL/min for 3 m.  The peptides were then eluted from the trap column to the analytical column and separated at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a gradient as follows: 2% B for 2 m, ramp to 50% B over 18 m, ramp to 85% B over 1 m, hold at 85% B for 5 m, then ramp to 2% B over 1 m.  The column temperature was maintained at 35 degree Celsius.  The lock mass compound, 100 fmol/uL [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8426), was delivered at 0.05 uL/min to the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source of the mass spectrometer via the sample pump of the MS apparatus and was sampled by MS via the lock mass channel each 60 sec for m/z calibration. On-line MS measurement of the nano-UPLC-separated tryptic peptides was all performed using a hybrid mass spectrometer that couples ion mobility separation (IMS) with a Q-TOF analyzer (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters).  The mass spectrometer was equipped with a nano-ESI source and operated in positive ion and resolution mode.  Instrument settings for MSE and HDMSE measurement were identical for ion source, quadruple profile and data-independent acquisition, i.e. capillary voltage 3.5 kV, sampling cone 50 V, source temperature 100 degree Celsius, quadrupole profile set as mass 1 as 400 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%), mass 2 as 500 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%) and mass 3 as 600, collision gas flow (Ar) 2 mL/min, and data over a m/z 50-2000 range being recorded alternating 0.8 s scans at low (6 V) and elevated energy (linearly ramped from 20 to 45 V) for fragmentation, and lock mass channel being sampled every 60 sec.  Fragmentation was realized in the trap cell for MSE, and in the transfer cell for HDMSE after ion mobility separation, respectively.  For HDMSE, the flow rate of the N2 gas into the IMS cell (IMS gas) was 90 mL/min and the flow rate of the helium gas into the helium cell at the entry to the IMS cell180 mL/min, and trap wave velocity was set at 311 m/s and height at 4 V, 1000 us delay after trap release, and IMS wave velocity at 652 m/s and height at 40 V.

### Data Protocol
The nano-LC-MSE and -HDMSE data (provided in the 72 “MSE-#.raw.zip” files and the 72 “HDMSE-#.raw.zip” files, respectively) were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 2.5.2 (Waters), using the following parameters: database, UniProtKB homo sapiens complete proteome dataset (canonical sequences only, 20251 entries, 2013-05-29); peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic (typically <10 ppm and <20 ppm, respectively); maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications, oxidation at Met; false positive rate, 4%.  The criteria of protein identification were set as; at least 1 peptide matches per protein, at least 3 fragment ion matches per peptide, and at least 7 fragment ion matches per protein.  Protein quantities were calculated by PLGS referring to the quantity of the internal standard (tryptic peptides of ENO1_YEAST, 200 fmol for each LC injection) employing the Top-3 algorithm.  The PLGS analysis results were provided in the 72 “MSE-# search result.zip” files and the 72 “HDMSE-# search result.zip” files.  Keratins and hits with only one peptide matched were removed and not subjected for further analysis.  The quantity distribution of each assigned proteins was reconstructed as previously described [Jin, et al., Electrophoresis 2014, 35, 2055-2064]. Briefly, the comma-separated values (.CSV) files of the protein level identification/quantitation results obtained from the LC-MS/MS analysis on the 72 gel squares (keratins and hits with only one peptide matched removed) were reorganized using self-made Visual Basic (VB) Excel macros as follows, (i) put a tag of the square number to all the data lines for each file, (ii) collected all data of the 72 files in one worksheet and sorted them by “protein entry name” as the first priority and “quantity in ng” as the second to align each assigned protein in the order of quantity, (iii) copied the data of each assigned protein to a new worksheet, (iv) converted the values in the column of “quantity in ng” in each worksheet to percent values, setting the highest quantity detected in the 72 squares to be 100%, making a new column of “percent quantity”, (v) drew a grid comprising 18 columns and 4 rows and filled each square with a color, the transparency of the color set as (100% -“percent quantity” of the square).  Using the above procedure, the quantity distribution of a protein in the grid-cut area was reconstructed as a color density pattern (a native protein map).

### Publication Abstract
The method of digitized native protein mapping, combining nondenaturing micro 2DE, grid gel-cutting, and quantitative LC-MS/MS (in data-independent acquisition mode, or MS(E) ), was improved by using a new MS/MS mode, ion mobility separation enhanced-MS(E) (HDMS(E) ), and applied to analyze the area of human plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL). An 18 mm &#xd7; 4.8 mm rectangular area which included LDL on a nondenaturing micro 2D gel of human plasma was grid-cut into 72 square gel pieces and subjected to quantitative LC-MS/MS. Compared with MS(E) , HDMS(E) showed significantly higher performance, by assigning 50% more proteins and detecting each protein in more squares. A total of 253 proteins were assigned with LC-HDMS(E) and the quantity distribution of each was reconstructed as a native protein map. The maps showed that Apo B-100 was the most abundant protein in the grid-cut area, concentrated at pI ca. 5.4-6.1 and apparent mass ca. 1000 kDa, which corresponded to four gel pieces, squares 39-42. An Excel macro was prepared to search protein maps which showed protein quantity peaks localized within this concentrated region of Apo B-100. Twenty-two proteins out of the 252 matched this criterion, in which 19 proteins have been reported to be associated with LDL. This method only requires several microliters of a plasma sample and the principle of the protein separation is totally different from the commonly used ultracentrifugation. The results obtained by this method would provide new insights on the structure and function of LDL.

### Keywords
Quantitative lc-hdmse, Human plasma low-density lipoprotein, Grid gel-cutting, Nondenaturing micro 2de, Protein-protein interactions, Digitized native protein mapping

### Affiliations
School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, P. R. China
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, P. R. China


