### Accession
PXD039587

### Title
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes LC-MS/MS

### Description
NRCMs were treated with ISO (10 μM) in the presence or absence of FGF18 (50 ng/ml) for 48 h. Protein bands at ~60 kDa were excised from the SDS-PAGE gels for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands at ~60 kDa were excised from the SDS-PAGE gels, reduced with 10 mM of DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and then digested with Sequence Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37℃ overnight. The digestion products were extracted twice with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 50% acetonitrile and 1.0% trifluoroacetic acid, respectively. The extracted mixture was dried by SpeedVac and dissolved in 10 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The gradient consisted of 5~35% (v/v) acrtonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min for 10 min, 35~100% (v/v) acrtonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min for 2 min and 100% acrtonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min for 8 min. The eluted peptides were ionized and introduced into a Thermo Fisher LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 200~1800) were acquired. A full mass spectrum (m/z 200~1800) was followed by fragmentation of the ten most abundant peaks, using 35% of the normalized collision energy for obtaining MS/MS spectra. All peptide assignments were verified by manual inspection. Data analyzed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 software.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factor-18 (FGF18) has diverse organ development and damage repair roles. However, its role in cardiac homeostasis following hypertrophic stimulation remains unknown. Here we investigate the regulation and function of the FGF18 in pressure overload (PO)-induced pathological cardiac hypertrophy. FGF18 heterozygous (Fgf18<sup>+/-</sup>) and inducible cardiomyocyte-specific FGF18 knockout (Fgf18-CKO) male mice exposed to transverse aortic constriction (TAC) demonstrate exacerbated pathological cardiac hypertrophy with increased oxidative stress, cardiomyocyte death, fibrosis, and dysfunction. In contrast, cardiac-specific overexpression of FGF18 alleviates hypertrophy, decreased oxidative stress, attenuates cardiomyocyte apoptosis, and ameliorates fibrosis and cardiac function. Tyrosine-protein kinase FYN (FYN), the downstream factor of FGF18, was identified by bioinformatics analysis, LC-MS/MS and experiment validation. Mechanistic studies indicate that FGF18/FGFR3 promote FYN activity and expression and negatively regulate NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4), thereby inhibiting reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and alleviating pathological cardiac hypertrophy. This study uncovered the previously unknown cardioprotective effect of FGF18 mediated by the maintenance of redox homeostasis through the FYN/NOX4 signaling axis in male mice, suggesting a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of cardiac hypertrophy.

### Keywords
Nrcms iso

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Pharmaceutical Engineering, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P. R. China
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Pharmaceutical Engineering, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang

### Submitter
xu wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Wang
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology Pharmaceutical Engineering, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, P. R. China


