### Accession
PXD030385

### Title
Interactome analysis by shotgun proteomics identifies a novel substrate for  Mycolicibacterium smegmatis unfoldase ClpC1

### Description
Tuberculosis remains a leading cause of worldwide infectious mortality and one of the top ten leading causes of death overall. While advances in public health have contributed to a reduction in tuberculosis cases, the prevalence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) (MDR-TB) infections has created an urgent need to exploit novel drug targets. One such target is the ClpC1P1P2 protease, which degrades folded cytosolic proteins through the cooperation of the ATP-dependent unfoldase ClpC1 and the ClpP1P2 peptidase. Both protease components are strictly essential for Mtb viability and are validated therapeutic targets. However, efforts to develop anti-Mtb compounds are constrained by a limited understanding of Clp protease function and essentiality. Thus, it is crucial to identify physiological substrates and pathways regulated by this protease. In this study, we identify cellular proteins that interact with the ClpC1 unfoldase in Mycolicibacterium smegmatis (Msm), a nonpathogenic surrogate for Mtb. Using a FLAG-tagged ClpC1 variant with mutations within the Walker B motifs, candidate ClpC1 interaction partners were captured by co-immunoprecipitation and identified by mass spectrometry-based proteomics (LC-MS/MS). Notably, our work reveals a novel proteolytic substrate, 5-oxoprolinase, which is recognized by ClpC1P1P2 via an N-terminal degradation sequence.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the co-IP eluate were analyzed on a 6-15% SDS-PAGE gradient gel. Each lane was diced and placed in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. The samples were prepared by adapting standard protocols for in-gel mass spectrometry sample preparation (Gundry et al., 2009). Samples were incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fisher BioReagents) at 55 oC for 45 min to reduce disulfide bonds. Afterwards, carboxymethylation of cysteines was carried out for 30 min at room temperature with 55 µM iodoacetamide (Tokyo Chemical Industry, Japan). Gel pieces are washed sequentially with 50% acetonitrile (Acros Organics) and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Honeywell) and washed with 100% acetonitrile and dried by SpeedVacTM vacuum centrifuge (Thermo). Trypsin digestion was carried out in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 µg ml-1 MS Grade Trypsin Protease (Pierce), and incubated overnight at 37 oC. Peptides were subsequently extracted by a two-step process which was repeated twice: incubation of gel pieces with 5% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) followed by 100% acetonitrile. To remove residual salts, the peptide samples were desalted using a HyperSep™ C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to previously described procedure (Gundry et al, 2009; Wiśniewski et al, 2009). C18 column-eluted samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and frozen prior to mass spectrometry.  Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on a Q Exactive Orbitrap interfaced with Ultimate 3000 Nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Analysis by Q Exactive Orbitrap was as follows: 10 μL of trypsin-digested sample was loaded on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 15 cm nanoViper) via an autosampler. Samples were analyzed using a 150-min gradient running from 2 % to 95 % Buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL min-1. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method that dynamically selected the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan for high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation using a stepped normalized collision energy of 28, 30, and 35 eV. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 on the Q Exactive. LS-MS/MS data was collected in independent biological triplicates.

### Data Protocol
For proteomic analysis, extraction of raw data was performed in the Proteome Discoverer software suite (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw data was searched against the Mycolicibacterium smegmatis (strain ATCC 700084 / MC2 155) UniProt Reference Proteome (Proteome ID UP000000757) using Sequest HT (University of Washington and Thermo Fisher Scientific). Iodoacetamide-mediated cysteine carboxymethylation was set as a static modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, while allowing for fragment ion mass deviation of 0.8 Da for the HCD data, and full trypsinization - with maximum of two missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections has prompted extensive efforts to exploit new drug targets in this globally important pathogen. ClpC1, the unfoldase component of the essential ClpC1P1P2 protease, has emerged as one particularly promising antibacterial target. However, efforts to identify and characterize compounds that impinge on ClpC1 activity are constrained by our limited knowledge of Clp protease function and regulation. To expand our understanding of ClpC1 physiology, we employed a coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry workflow to identify proteins that interact with ClpC1 in Mycolicibacterium smegmatis, a surrogate for M. tuberculosis. We identify a diverse panel of interaction partners, many of which coimmunoprecipitate with both the regulatory N-terminal domain and the ATPase core of ClpC1. Notably, our interactome analysis establishes MSMEI_3879, a truncated gene product unique to M. smegmatis, as a novel proteolytic substrate. Degradation of MSMEI_3879 by ClpC1P1P2 <i>in vitro</i> requires exposure of its N-terminal sequence, reinforcing the idea that ClpC1 selectively recognizes disordered motifs on substrates. Fluorescent substrates incorporating MSMEI_3879 may be useful in screening for novel ClpC1-targeting antibiotics to help address the challenge of M. tuberculosis drug resistance. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Drug-resistant tuberculosis infections are a major challenge to global public health. Much effort has been invested in identifying new drug targets in the causative pathogen, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. One such target is the ClpC1 unfoldase. Compounds have been identified that kill M. tuberculosis by disrupting ClpC1 activity, yet the physiological function of ClpC1 in cells has remained poorly defined. Here, we identify interaction partners of ClpC1 in a model mycobacterium. By building a broader understanding of the role of this prospective drug target, we can more effectively develop compounds that inhibit its essential cellular activities.

### Keywords
Clp protease, Tuberculosis, Mycolicibacterium smegmatis, Unfoldase clpc1, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
Department of Biological Sciences, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry  University of Delaware Newark DE, 19716

### Submitter
Emmanuel Ogbonna

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Robert Schmitz
Department of Biological Sciences, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry  University of Delaware Newark DE, 19716


