### Accession
PXD024244

### Title
Proteomic differences between methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus showing synergistic effects with cannabinoids

### Description
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a major human pathogen in both community and health care settings, which causes a wide range of infections. Its resistance to β-lactam antibiotics and methicillin in particular, greatly complicates treatment options and success rate due to the limited number of antibiotics with activity against MRSA. To further the development of alternative therapeutics, the mechanisms that mediate antibiotic resistance in MRSA need to be fully understood. Cannabinoid compounds including cannabidiol (CBD), tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabinol (CBN) have shown promise as potential antibiotic adjuvants. In the present study, MRSA cells were subjected to antibiotic stress from methicillin in combination with three cannabinoid compounds, and subsequently analysed using metaproteomics to assess the metabolic response. Subjecting MRSA to methicillin made the cells more viable and increased their energy production, as well as upregulation of penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2). The cannabinoids all showed antimicrobial activity against MRSA, and inhibited the energy production of the cells as well as PBP2 when used in combination with methicillin. Furthermore, all three cannabinoid compounds inhibited resistance mechanisms in MRSA, resulting in a decrease in the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of methicillin when used in combination.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell suspensions by applying focused ultrasonication. The proteins were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid, followed by an in solution digestion using trypsin, and a desalting using modified stage TIP protocol was applied to all samples. Tryptic peptides were analysed by an automated LC–ESI–MS/MS. A top 20 method was used to acquire the MS data, an MS1 with an injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 60,000, an MS2 with an injection time of 45 ms and resolution of 15,000, using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and the normalised collision energy was set to 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43), using standard settings and applying the label-free quantification (LFQ) feature. Data were cross-referenced with three databases. Data were cross-referenced with four databases containing all proteins from four different S. aureus strains (USA300 (UP000001939), NCTC 8325 (UP000008816), 107 (UP000236484), and SAZ 10 (UP000298587)) downloaded from UniProt (accessed 7th of January 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methicillin, Cannabinoids, Mrsa, Antibiotic resistance, Proteomics, Hormesis

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg East, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg East, Denmark


