### Accession
PXD015987

### Title
An integrated MS data processing strategy for fast identification, in-depth and reproducible quantification of protein O-glycosylation in large cohorts of human urine samples

### Description
Protein O-glycosylation has long been recognized to be closely associated with many diseases, particularly with tumor proliferation, invasion and metastasis. The ability to efﬁciently proﬁle the variation of O-glycosylation in large-scale clinical samples provides an important approach for the development of biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and for therapeutic response evaluation. Therefore, mass spectrometry (MS)-based techniques for high throughput, in-depth and reliable elucidation of protein O-glycosylation in large clinical cohorts are in high demand. However, the wide existence of serine and threonine residues in the proteome and the tens of mammalian O-glycan types lead to extremely large searching space composed of millions of theoretical combinations of peptides and O-glycans for intact O-glycopeptide database searching. As a result, exceptionally long time is required for database searching which is a major obstacle in O-glycoproteome studies of large clinical cohorts. More importantly, due to the low abundance and poor ionization of intact O-glycopeptides and the stochastic nature of data-dependent MS2 acquisition, substantially elevated missing data levels are inevitable as the sample number increases, which undermines the quantitative comparison across samples. Therefore, we report a new MS data processing strategy that integrates glycoform-specific database searching, reference library-based MS1 feature matching and MS2 identification propagation for fast identification, in-depth and reproducible label-free quantification of O-glycosylation of human urinary proteins. This strategy increases the database searching speeds by up to 20-fold and leads to a 30-40% enhanced intact O-glycopeptide quantification in individual samples with an obviously improved reproducibility. In total, we obtained quantitative information for 1068 intact O-glycopeptides across 36 healthy human urine samples with a 30-40% reduction in the amount of missing data. This is currently the largest dataset of urinary O-glycoproteome and demonstrates the application potential of this new strategy in large-scale clinical investigations.

### Sample Protocol
First, 10 mL of fresh urine sample was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 30 min to remove cell debris, and the urinary proteins were extracted by acetone precipitation. After that, lysis buffer (8 M urea Tris-HCl 8.5, 0.1 M DTT) was used to redissolve the urinary proteins. Next, the urinary proteins were digested by trypsin using the FASP protocol as described in the Supporting Information.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were first converted to mgf files using Proteowizard 3.0 with the default parameters. Next, the mgf files were processed with two in-house prepared programs written in Perl and R named O-glycoextract_SA and O-glycoextract_Non_SA. The MS2 spectra containing glycan fragments of 126.05, 138.05, 168.06, 186.07, 204.08, 274.09 and 292.10 (intensity of the diagnostic ions ≥ 0.5% of that of the precursor) were extracted by O-glycoextract_SA to form a new mgf file (SA-spectra-file). The MS2 spectra containing glycan fragments 126.05, 138.05, 168.06, 186.07, and 204.08, but without 274.09 or 292.10 were extracted by O-glycoextract_Non_SA to form the non-SA-spectra-file. Byonic was used for database searching for the identification of intact O-glycopeptides. We divided the 70 default glycoforms in the software's O-glycan database into two groups based on whether they contained sialic acid. The 27 kinds of sialic acid-containing glycoforms were grouped into the SA-glycoform list, while the rest were grouped into the non-SA-glycoform list. Next, the SA-spectra-file and non-SA-spectra-file were separately searched against the uniprot database (Release 2015.9 20215 entries) using the SA-glycoform-list and the non-SA-glycoform-list, respectively. The parameters used in database searching by Byonic were set as follows: carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification; N-terminal acylation and methionine oxidation were set as the variable modifications. The tolerance of the parent ions was 10 ppm and that of the fragment ions was 0.02 Da. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. A maximum of two O-glycosylation modifications were allowed in one peptide. The false discovery rate was set to ≤ 1% at the protein level and the Byonic score threshold value was set to 300.

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>O</i>-glycosylation has long been recognized to be closely associated with many diseases, particularly with tumor proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. The ability to efficiently profile the variation of <i>O</i>-glycosylation in large-scale clinical samples provides an important approach for the development of biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and for therapeutic response evaluation. Therefore, mass spectrometry (MS)-based techniques for high throughput, in-depth and reliable elucidation of protein <i>O</i>-glycosylation in large clinical cohorts are in high demand. However, the wide existence of serine and threonine residues in the proteome and the tens of mammalian <i>O</i>-glycan types lead to extremely large searching space composed of millions of theoretical combinations of peptides and <i>O</i>-glycans for intact <i>O</i>-glycopeptide database searching. As a result, an exceptionally long time is required for database searching, which is a major obstacle in <i>O</i>-glycoproteome studies of large clinical cohorts. More importantly, because of the low abundance and poor ionization of intact <i>O</i>-glycopeptides and the stochastic nature of data-dependent MS2 acquisition, substantially elevated missing data levels are inevitable as the sample number increases, which undermines the quantitative comparison across samples. Therefore, we report a new MS data processing strategy that integrates glycoform-specific database searching, reference library-based MS1 feature matching and MS2 identification propagation for fast identification, in-depth, and reproducible label-free quantification of <i>O</i>-glycosylation of human urinary proteins. This strategy increases the database searching speeds by up to 20-fold and leads to a 30%-40% enhanced intact <i>O</i>-glycopeptide quantification in individual samples with an obviously improved reproducibility. In total, we identified 1300 intact <i>O</i>-glycopeptides in 36 healthy human urine samples with a 30%-40% reduction in the amount of missing data. This is currently the largest dataset of urinary <i>O</i>-glycoproteome and demonstrates the application potential of this new strategy in large-scale clinical investigations.

### Keywords
O-glycopeptide; urine; sialic acid

### Affiliations
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, PR China

### Submitter
Xinyuan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Weijie Qin
National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, PR China


