### Accession
PXD003684

### Title
Analysis of isolated Plastoglobules from Arabidopsis thaliana WT and M48 null mutants.

### Description
We studied the function of PG localized protease, PGM48 both in vitro and in vivo during natural senescence in Arabidopsis thaliana.Our results show that PGM48 is a metalloprotease and a senescence inducible protein. In vitro assay by recombinant protein revealed a proteolytic activity. Quantitative proteome analysis of PGs from senescing rosettes of overexpression plants lines showed a significantly reduced level of CAROTENOID CLEAVAGE ENZYME 4 ( CCD4) protein but 2-3 fold higher level of phytyl-esterase (PES1) compared to wild type; the opposite results were found in RNAi lines. Yeast-2-hybrid analysis and in vitro pull-down experiments showed that PGM48 interacts with the kinase ABC1K3, PES1 and CCD4, but not with chlorophyll catabolic enzymes. We propose that PGM48 acts as a positive regulator of leaf senescence.

### Sample Protocol
For Plastoglobules (PG) preparation from senescence leaf, plants were grown on soil under 120 µmol photons m-2 s-1 with 18 hour photoperiod for 35 day. PG proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lanes from the 1D SDS-PAGE were cut into bands followed by reduction, alkylation, and in-gel digestion with trypsin. The resuspended peptide extracts were analyzed by data-dependent MS/MS using an on-line LC-LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Electron Corp.). Mass spectrometry data processing, data searching against TAIR10 using Mascot and subsequent filtering and quantification based on normalized and adjusted spectral counts was carried out. Mass spectrometry-derived information, as well as annotation of protein name, location and function for the identified proteins can be found in the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/).  .

### Data Protocol
Peptide extracts for each gel band were analyzed by on-line nanoLC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo). Resulting spectral data were searched with Mascot v.2.4 against the predicted Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10), including a small set of typical contaminants and the decoy. Only proteins with 2 or more matched spectra were considered. Protein abundances were quantified according to the number of matched adjusted MS/MS spectra (AdjSPC). MS-derived information, as well as annotation of protein name, location and function for the identified proteins, can be found in the Plant Proteome Database (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu).

### Publication Abstract
Plastoglobuli (PG) are thylakoid-associated monolayer lipid particles with a specific proteome of &#x223c;30 PG core proteins and isoprenoid and neutral lipids. During senescence, PGs increase in size, reflecting their role in dismantling thylakoid membranes. Here, we show that the only PG-localized peptidase PGM48 positively regulates leaf senescence. We discovered that PGM48 is a member of the M48 peptidase family with PGM48 homologs, forming a clade (M48D) only found in photosynthetic organisms. Unlike the M48A, B, and C clades, members of M48D have no transmembrane domains, consistent with their unique subcellular location in the PG. In vitro assays showed Zn-dependent proteolytic activity and substrate cleavage upstream of hydrophobic residues. Overexpression of PGM48 accelerated natural leaf senescence, whereas suppression delayed senescence. Quantitative proteomics of PG from senescing rosettes of PGM48 overexpression lines showed a dramatically reduced level of CAROTENOID CLEAVAGE ENZYME4 (CCD4) and significantly increased levels of the senescence-induced ABC1 KINASE7 (ABC1K7) and PHYTYL ESTER SYNTHASE1 (PES1). Yeast two-hybrid experiments identified PG core proteins ABC1K3, PES1, and CCD4 as PGM48 interactors, whereas several other PG-localized proteins and chlorophyll degradation enzymes did not interact. We discuss mechanisms through which PGM48 could possibly accelerate the senescence process.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Plastoglobules, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-msms, Protease, Ltq-orbitrap, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Plant Biology
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY (USA)

### Submitter
Giulia Friso

### Lab Head
Dr Giulia Friso c/o Klaas van Wijk's Lab
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY (USA)


