### Accession
PXD024253

### Title
Retention time as an extra dimension for proteome-wide cross-link identification

### Description
Chemical crosslinking methods have not been successfully applied to protein-protein interaction discovery mainly due to the computation complexity (O (n2)) issue. In a previous report, we proposed a decision tree searching strategy which can reduce complexity by orders of magnitude. In this study, we found that the mono-linked peptides carry out the information of the retention time of the cross-linked pairs, therefore the retention time of cross-linked peptide pairs can be predicted accurately. By utilizing the obtained retention time information, the false positive rate can be reduced by around 86% with a sensitivity loss of 12%. The method was successfully applied to the identification of inter cross-links obtained from E. coli cell lysate crosslinked by a newly synthesized enrichable crosslinker.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinked samples were prepared as reported previously with slight modification.12 Briefly, crosslinked BSA or E. coli sample were first reduced using 20 mM DTT at 37 oC for 2 hours. Then crosslinked BSA were alkylated using 50 mM IAA in dark at room temperature for 30 min. The crosslinked E. coli cell lysate were not alkylated. The both BSA and E. coli samples were FASP digested for 6 hours at 37 oC. The tryptic digested sample were then enriched by using TiO2 beads as reported previously. The enriched peptides were desalted using homemade C18 ziptip and then vacuum dried. The dried peptides were then re-dissolved in 0.1 mM TECP and 2% CH3CN and then incubated at 37 oC for half an hour prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The crosslinked peptides were analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) equipped with Easy LC 1200 and nanoflex spray source. The samples were first loaded to C18 column (Ion opticks, 25 cm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) and subsequently eluted from the column to MS using a gradient of 5% Buffer B (80% CH3CN 0.1% formic acid) to 45% Buffer B over 2 hours. The buffer A is 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate and column temperature were to set to 300 nL/min and 50 oC respectively. A profile scan (m/z 335~1800 at a resolving power of 120K) were first conducted followed by the MS/MS of ten most intense precursor ions. Only those ions with a charge state from 3 to 7 were selected for MS/MS scan. High collision activation (HCD) were employed to generate fragment ions. The resolution of MS/MS scan was set to 60K. The AGC and the maximum injection time of MS2 were set to 4e5 and 150 ms respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xl-ms, Chemical crosslinking, Retention time, Proteome-wide cross-link identification

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, ShanghaiTech University, 393 Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai, 201210, China
ShanghaiTech University

### Submitter
Hongli Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hongli Chen
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, ShanghaiTech University, 393 Middle Huaxia Road, Pudong, Shanghai, 201210, China


