### Accession
PXD028693

### Title
Huh7 cells proteoic analysis withtomatidine treatment at 6 and 16 hours post-treatment

### Description
Tomatidine, a natural steroidal alkaloid from unripe green tomatoes has been shown to exhibit many health benefits. We recently provided in vitro evidence that tomatidine reduces the infectivity of Dengue virus (DENV) and Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), two medically important arthropod-borne human infections for which no treatment options are available. The objective of this mass spectrometry analysis was to determine possible proteomic changes in the human cell line Huh7 induced by tomatidine which may be indicative of the underlying antiviral activity of tomatidine.

### Sample Protocol
Huh7 cells were lysed using the RIPA lysis buffer system (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA) and proteins were extracted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were loaded on a 4–12% pre-cast NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA), and briefly ran into the gel, without separation. The gel was stained with Coomassie dye R-250 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) followed by destaining with ultrapure water. The protein blob was excised as a single band and destained with 70% 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 30% acetonitrile. Reduction was performed using 10 mM DTT dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 55 °C. Samples were alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were washed for 10 min with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and for 30 min with 100% acetonitrile. The gel pieces were dried for 15 min at 55°C. Tryptic digestion was performed with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA, 10 ng/ml in 50 mM NH4HCO3) with overnight incubation at 37°C. Peptides were extracted using 5% formic acid followed by a second elution with 5% formic acid in 75% acetonitrile. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge and dissolved in 5% formic acid for injection on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA) interfaced online with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 5 mm × 300 μm i.d. C18 PepMAP100 trapping column (Dionex) in 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid at 20 μL/min. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. C18 PepMAP100 nanocolumn (Dionex). The following mobile phase gradient was delivered at the flow rate of 300 nL/min: 2%-50% of solvent B in 90 min; 50%–90% B in 1 min; 90% B during 13 min, and back to 2% B in 1 min (held for 15 min). Solvent A was 100 water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer using a stainless-steel emitter at a spray voltage was 1.8 kV with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; the ion transfer tube temperature was 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) with MS/MS fragmentation of the top 12 precursor ions in each cycle. A cycle consisted of a survey scan of m/z 400–1800 at 70000 resolution and MS/MS scans at 17500 resolution. Singly charged ions were excluded from MS/MS experiments and precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Proteins with no intensity in at least one sample were filtered. EdgeR R-package (v3.24.3) was used for normalization (trimmed mean of M values; TMM) and differential protein expression analysis (glmQLFTest) [30]. Proteins were regarded differentially expressed with a false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 0.1.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using PEAKS Studio 10.6. The parameter mass error tolerance was 10.0 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance was 0.02 Da. The enzyme uysed was trypsin (semispecific digestion mode) and the max missed cleavages were 3. The max variable PTM per peptide was 6. The fixed modification was carbamidomethylation 57.02 and the variable modification was oxidation (M) 15.99.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huh7 cells, Tomatidine

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Groningen
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University of Groningen; University Medical Center Groningen; Groningen, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Berit Troost-Kind

### Lab Head
Dr Jolanda M. Smit
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, University of Groningen; University Medical Center Groningen; Groningen, the Netherlands


