### Accession
PXD018090

### Title
SRSF7 and SRSF3 affectSRSF7 and SRSF3 affect 3’UTR length in opposite directions by controlling proximal poly(A)-site usage and CFIm levels  3’UTR length in opposite directions by controlling proximal poly(A)-site usage and CFIm levels

### Description
Alternative polyadenylation (APA) refers to the regulated selection of polyadenylation sites (PASs) in transcripts, which affects the length of their 3’ untranslated regions (3’UTRs). APA regulates stage- and tissue-specific gene expression by affecting the stability, subcellular localization or translation rate of transcripts. We have recently shown that SRSF3 and SRSF7, two closely related SR proteins, link APA to mRNA export. However, the underlying mechanism for APA regulation by SRSF3 and SRSF7 remained unknown.  Here, we combined iCLIP and 3’-end sequencing to find that both proteins bind upstream of proximal PAS (pPAS), but exert opposing effects on 3’UTR length. We show that SRSF7 enhances pPAS usage in a splicing-independent and concentration-dependent manner by recruiting the cleavage factor FIP1, thereby generating short 3’UTRs. SRSF7-specific domains that are absent in SRSF3 are necessary and sufficient for FIP1 recruitment. SRSF3 promotes long 3’UTRs by maintaining high levels of the cleavage factor Im (CFIm) via alternative splicing. Using iCLIP, we show that CFIm binds before and after the pPASs of SRSF3 targets, which masks them and inhibits polyadenylation. In the absence of SRSF3, CFIm levels are strongly reduced, which exposes the pPASs and leads to shorter 3’UTRs. Conversely, during cellular differentiation, 3’UTRs are massively extended, while the levels of SRSF7 and FIP1 strongly decline. Altogether, our data suggest that SRSF7 acts as a sequence-specific enhancer of pPASs, while SRSF3 inhibits pPAS usage by controlling CFIm levels. Our data shed light on a long-standing puzzle of how one factor (CFIm) can inhibit and enhance PAS usage.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted IP-Samples were alkylated by incubation with DTT (final concentration 5 mM) for 30 min at 55°C and reduced with chloroacetamide (final concentration of 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were precipitated by ice-cold methanol-chloroform and pellets were resuspended in 0.2 M EPPS pH 8.2 and 10 % acetonitrile (ACN). Proteins were digested with 0.4 µg Trypsin (Promega, V5113) over night at 37°C. The amount of ACN was adjusted to 20% and peptides were incubated with 20 µg of Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT™) 10 plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90111) for 1h at room temperature. TMT-labelling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were pooled, acidified, and dried for further processing. Peptide samples were purified using Empore C18 (Octadecyl) resin material (3M Empore) and resuspended in 0.1% FA for LC-MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Mus musculus SwissProt database (TaxID = 10090, v. 2017-07-05) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl (Cys,+57.021464), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Mus musculus SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at lysine residues, TMT6 (N-terminal) and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications acetylation (N-terminal) and methionine oxidation were set. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. The Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings. Results were then exported to Excel and protein levels were normalised to GFP (UniProtKB - P42212).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cpsf5, Alternative polyadenylation, Mace, Srsf7, Cpsf6, Fip1, Srsf3, Cfim, Iclip, Dapars, Poly(a) site

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

### Submitter
Melinda  Brunstein 

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.


