### Accession
PXD033889

### Title
Proteomic profiling of KIT-containing EVs secreted by neoplastic human mast cells (SUB1)

### Description
Activating mutations in the receptor KIT promote the dysregulated proliferation of human mast cells (huMCs). The resulting neoplastic huMCs secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can transfer oncogenic KIT among other cargo into recipient cells. Despite potential contributions to diseases, KIT-containing EVs have not been thoroughly investigated. Here, we isolated KIT-EV subpopulations released by neoplastic huMCs using an immunocapture approach that selectively isolates EVs containing KIT in its proper topology. Proteomic profiling was performed on KIT-containing EVs compared to KIT-depleted EV populations, and on KIT-EVs that are microvesicle- and exosome-like.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, IMDM deficient in both L-lysine and L-arginine was supplemented with dialyzed FBS, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Both 0.798 mM L-lysine HCl and 0.398 mM L-arginine HCl were added to prepare “light” SILAC media. “Heavy” SILAC media was supplemented with 0.798 mM 13C6 L-lysine 2xHCl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and 0.398 mM 13C6 L-arginine HCl (Silantes). To counteract the conversion of arginine to proline, the media was additionally supplemented with 200 mg/l L-proline. Media was filtered through a 0.22 µm PES filter after preparation. HMC-1.1 cells were passaged every three days in fresh ‘heavy’ or ‘light’ media to allow the metabolic incorporation of heavy isotope amino acids, which was confirmed by a cell check at passage 5.  For the isolation of EVs, cells were cultured for 72 h in “heavy” or “light” SILAC media supplemented with dialyzed EV-depleted FBS (obtained by ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g, 24 h, 4°C; SW40-Ti rotor). EVs were isolated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and immunocapturing of KIT-EVs was performed. The flow-through, containing KIT-depleted EVs, was subjected to CD9 immunocapturing (sub 1). Alternatively, EVs were first pelleted at 15,000 x g and 120,000 x g to obtain P15 and P120 EVs, followed by SEC as a “cleaning” step and KIT-EV immunocapture (sub 2). All washing steps were performed with filtered PBS. Captured EV populations were eluted with 10 µl of 1% sodium dodecanoate under heating at 60°C for 20 min, after which “heavy” and “light” EV populations were combined prior to further processing for the mass spectrometry analysis. Both reciprocal pairs (H/L and L/H) were prepared and analyzed. The KIT/CD9 samples were not further fractionated while the P15/P120 samples were processed with the Kulak's SCX fractionation. Fairly standard conditions were used for data collection. An Easy-Spray source with 50cm column flow rates of 0.1uL/minute and a LUMOS mass spectrometer were used for data collection.

### Data Protocol
DATA PROCESSING PROTOCOL  Raw data were searched using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 (Cox & Mann, 2008) using default settings against common contaminants and the human reference proteome (downloaded 11/07/2020). Label inversion was accommodated by switching the specification in the type panel (heavy forms of amino acid for light labels etc.). Enriched proteins were analyzed using Perseus software to determine significantly changed proteins (H/L fold change >2; P < 0.05). Significantly changed proteins were submitted in ShinyGO v0.741 for gene ontology and KEGG pathway analysis (http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/).

### Publication Abstract
Activating mutations in the receptor KIT promote the dysregulated proliferation of human mast cells (huMCs). The resulting neoplastic huMCs secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can transfer oncogenic KIT among other cargo into recipient cells. Despite potential contributions to diseases, KIT-containing EVs have not been thoroughly investigated. Here, we isolated and characterized KIT-EV subpopulations released by neoplastic huMCs using an immunocapture approach that selectively isolates EVs containing KIT in its proper topology. Immunocapture of EVs on KIT antibody-coated electron microscopy (EM) affinity grids allowed to assess the morphology and size of KIT-EVs. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated KIT-EVs have a distinct protein profile from KIT-depleted EVs, contain exosome and microvesicle markers, and are separated into these subtypes by ultracentrifugation. Cell treatment with sphingomyelinase inhibitors shifted the protein content among KIT-EV subtypes, suggesting different biogenesis routes. Proteomic analysis revealed huMC KIT-EVs are enriched in proteins involved in signalling, immune responses, and cell migration, suggesting diverse biological functions, and indicated neoplastic huMCs disseminate KIT via shuttling in heterogeneous microvesicle- and exosome-like EVs. Further, selective KIT-immunocapture will enable the enrichment of specific huMC-derived EVs from complex human biosamples and facilitate an understanding of their in vivo functions and potential to serve as biomarkers of specific biological pathologies.

### Keywords
Immunocapture, Kit, Extracellular vesicles, Mast cell, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Mast Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectios Diseases, National Istitutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, United States Government.
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Dean Darrel Metcalfe
Mast Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectios Diseases, National Istitutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, United States Government.


