### Accession
PXD013051

### Title
Eukaryotic Ribosome GCN2 interaction Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry

### Description
General control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2) phosphorylates eIF2α, regulating translation in response to nutritional stress. Here, we show that mammalian ribosomes are potent GCN2 activators. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange–mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) showed GCN2 interacting with domain II of the uL10 P-stalk protein. The P-stalk is a uL10/P12/P22 pentameric complex that is part of the ribosomal GTPase-associated center. Recombinant human P-stalk greatly stimulates GCN2. Both domain II of uL10 and the C-terminal tails of P1 and P2 are necessary for maximal GCN2 activation. On actively translating ribosomes, the C-terminal tails of P1 and P2 are sequestered by elongation factors, suggesting P-stalk availability could link translational stress to GCN2 activation.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Ribosome-GCN2 samples: Hydrogen-Deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) samples were prepared from two reactions: one consisting of ribosomes alone at 0.5 µM, and a second consisting of ribosomes at 0.5 µM and GCN2 at 2.5 µM. All reactions were assembled in RNC buffer. Both reactions were incubated on ice for 15 minutes and then aliquoted into 10 µL aliquots. To each reaction, 40 µL of deuterated RNC buffer [50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KOAc, 5 mM MgAc2, 94.8 % D2O (Acros Organics 7789-20)] was added and the reactions mixed rapidly, producing a final D2O concentration of 75.84%. Three incubation times were tested in triplicate: 5 minutes, 50 minutes and 500 minutes, all at 32 ˚C. To ensure the prolonged 500 minute time point was not having a detrimental effect on the structure of the ribosome, a pulse experiment was also performed in which a 10 µL protein aliquot was incubated at 32 ˚C for 495 minutes before 40 µL deuterated RNC buffer was added for 5 minutes. All reactions were quenched via the addition of 20 µL ice-cold Quench buffer [5 M GdCl, 8.4 % formic acid], followed by freezing in liquid nitrogen. HDX LC MS/MS Sample Analysis Each sample was thawed and injected onto the M-Class Acquity UPLC with HDX technology (Waters) kept at 0.1 ˚C. The proteins were digested on an Enzymate Pepsin Column (Waters, 186007233) at 15 ˚C for two minutes. The peptides were then eluted from the column onto an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column (Waters,186003975), equilibrated in Pepsin-A buffer [0.1 % formic acid]. The pre-column was eluted into an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (Waters, 186002346), using a 3 - 43% gradient of Pepsin-B buffer [0.1 % formic acid, 99.9 % acetonitrile] over 22 minutes. Data were collected on a Waters Synapt G2-Si in HD-MSe (with ion mobility separation) mode with an electrospray ionisation source, and scanned with a 50 to 2000 m/z range. The spray voltage was 3.0 kV

### Data Protocol
Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange-Mass Spectrometry Peptides were identified using ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters, 720001408EN). Three replicates of non-deuterated ribosomes were analysed by HD-MSe (5). To qualify for further analysis, peptides had to fulfil the following criteria:   1. Minimum intensity of 5,000 counts 2. Maximum length of 25 amino acids 3. Minimum number of products of three 4. Minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.05 5. Maximum mass error of 10 ppm For the P-stalk/GCN2 dataset, the peptide length criterion was relaxed to allow for the detection of the C-terminal termini of the P-stalk that typically presented as longer petides (35 amino-acids or greater). Peptides that fulfilled the stated criteria were imported into DynamX (Waters, 720005145en) for data analysis. All data was subjected to automated data processing by DynamX, followed by manual inspection of the data. Peptides that showed an unacceptably low signal-to-noise ratio precluding robust analysis were eliminated at this stage. Following this analysis, changes in the deuteration profile for each peptide upon the addition of excess binding partners were statistically analysed to determine the level of significance for the dataset. Peptides that showed changes greater than this threshold were therefore considered to be significantly affected by the presence of the binding partner

### Publication Abstract
Cells dynamically adjust their protein translation profile to maintain homeostasis in changing environments. During nutrient stress, the kinase general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2) phosphorylates translation initiation factor eIF2&#x3b1;, initiating the integrated stress response (ISR). To examine the mechanism of GCN2 activation, we have reconstituted this process in vitro, using purified components. We find that recombinant human GCN2 is potently stimulated by ribosomes and, to a lesser extent, by tRNA. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) mapped GCN2-ribosome interactions to domain II of the uL10 subunit of the ribosomal P-stalk. Using recombinant, purified P-stalk, we showed that this domain of uL10 is the principal component of binding to GCN2; however, the conserved 14-residue C-terminal tails (CTTs) in the P1 and P2 P-stalk proteins are also essential for GCN2 activation. The HisRS-like and kinase domains of GCN2 show conformational changes upon binding recombinant P-stalk complex. Given that the ribosomal P-stalk stimulates the GTPase activity of elongation factors during translation, we propose that the P-stalk could link GCN2 activation to translational stress, leading to initiation of ISR.

### Keywords
Gcn2, Hdx-ms, Ribosome

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Glenn Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Roger L. Williams
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology


