### Accession
PXD018523

### Title
extracellular electron transfer channels in Carboxydothermus ferrireducens

### Description
Proteomic profiling of Carboxydothermus ferrireducens cells grown with different electron acceptors

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis biomass was harvested from 100 mL cultures by centrifugation at 16000 g, 15 min. Cell lysis, reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins were performed as follows. Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer (pH 8.5) containing 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TRIS(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide was added to a biomass sample. The sample was sonicated and boiled for 10 min, protein concentration in the sample was routinely determined by Bradford assay and equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS, pH 8.5, was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS)-binding, and 20 µg was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips with a 100 µl of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 100 µl of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 60 µl acetonitrile/ammonia (80/5 %, v/v) mixture. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analysis, peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA buffer and sonicated for 2 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was commercially performed in the core facility center "Bioorganic" (IBCh RAS, Moscow, Russia) using the Q Exactive HF benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to the Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System via a nanoelectrospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dissolved peptides were analyzed using the HPLC system configured in a trap-elute mode. Approximately 1 µg of tryptic peptide digests were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 µm x 2 cm) trap column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 µm x 50 cm) column (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.2% FA) and eluted at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1 with a multistep linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile): 4 - 6% B for 5 min; 6 – 28% B for 91 min; 28 – 45% B for 20 min; 45 – 99% B for 4 min; 99% B for 7 min; 99 – 4% B for 1 min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 96% buffer B for 9 min. Column was kept at 40°C. Peptides were analyzed on a mass spectrometer with one full scan (375–1,400 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and max ion fill time 30 ms, followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (target 1e5 ions, max ion fill time 50 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 28%, underfill ratio 2%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 15,000 at fixed first mass 100 m/z). Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match – preferred; exclude isotopes – on; dynamic exclusion – 30 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was made by MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.5 using Carboxydothermus ferrireducens amino acid FASTA dataset (see above) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 20 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Downstream bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus.1.5.5.1. For Student’s t-test, missing values were imputed with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 over the total matrix. Two sample tests were performed in Perseus with s0 set to 0. Quantification was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. To quantify proteins in each sample, the iBAQ algorithm, implemented into MaxQuant software, was used. Normalization of each protein's iBAQ value to the sum of all iBAQ values generated a relative iBAQ (riBAQ) values corresponding to the mole percentage of each protein in the sample, taking the whole set of proteins in it as 100%.

### Publication Abstract
Biogenic transformation of Fe minerals, associated with extracellular electron transfer (EET), allows microorganisms to exploit high-potential refractory electron acceptors for energy generation. EET-capable thermophiles are dominated by hyperthermophilic archaea and Gram-positive bacteria. Information on their EET pathways is sparse. Here, we describe EET channels in the thermophilic Gram-positive bacterium <i>Carboxydothermus ferrireducens</i> that drive exoelectrogenesis and rapid conversion of amorphous mineral ferrihydrite to large magnetite crystals. Microscopic studies indicated biocontrolled formation of unusual formicary-like ultrastructure of the magnetite crystals and revealed active colonization of anodes in bioelectrochemical systems (BESs) by <i>C. ferrireducens</i>. The internal structure of micron-scale biogenic magnetite crystals is reported for the first time. Genome analysis and expression profiling revealed three constitutive <i>c</i>-type multiheme cytochromes involved in electron exchange with ferrihydrite or an anode, sharing insignificant homology with previously described EET-related cytochromes thus representing novel determinants of EET. Our studies identify these cytochromes as extracellular and reveal potentially novel mechanisms of cell-to-mineral interactions in thermal environments.

### Keywords
Multiheme cytochromes, Novel oxidoreductases, Gram-positive bacteria, Extracellular electron transfer, Thermophiles

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Life Sciences
Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center of Biotechnology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Maksim Zakhartsev

### Lab Head
Dr Elizaveta A. Bonch-Osmolovskaya
Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center of Biotechnology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia


