### Accession
PXD015185

### Title
Rapid acetylation of yeast Hsp70 mediates the cellular response to heat stress

### Description
Hsp70 is a highly conserved molecular chaperone critical for the folding of new and denatured proteins. While traditional models state that cells respond to stress by upregulating inducible HSPs, this response is relatively slow and is limited by transcriptional and translational machinery. Recent studies have identified a number of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on Hsp70 that act to fine-tune its function. We utilized mass spectrometry to determine whether yeast Hsp70 (Ssa1) is differentially modified upon heat shock. We uncovered four lysine residues on Ssa1, K86, K185, K354 and K562 that are deacetylated in response to heat shock. Mutation of these sites cause a substantial remodeling of the Hsp70 interaction network of co-chaperone partners and client proteins while preserving essential chaperone function. Acetylation/deacetylation at these residues alter expression of other heat-shock induced chaperones as well as directly influencing Hsf1 activity. Taken together our data suggest that cells may have the ability to respond to heat stress quickly though Hsp70 deacetylation, followed by a slower, more traditional transcriptional response.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from yeast Yeast strains were cultured overnight in 5 ml YPD or selective media at 30˚C. The following morning, cells were diluted in 25 ml of fresh media to an OD600 of 0.2 and incubated until an OD600 of 0.6-0.8 was reached. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4˚C (5 min, 2500 rpm) and pellets were washed with distilled water. Pellets were resuspended in yeast cell lysis reagent (Sigma) with 10 mM DTT and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Glass beads of 0.5 mm diameter were added to aid cell lysis using a mini-beater (Biospec products). Supernatants were transferred to pre-chilled 1.5 ml microfuge tubes and centrifuged (10 min, 13000 rpm) to remove any cell fragments.  Trypsin digestion of samples from SDS-PAGE gel plugs IP eluates were loaded onto a 12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and run for 15 min at 200 V resulting in a ~3 cm “gel plug”.  The gel was stained with 25 mL Imperial Stain (Pierce) at room temperature, and destained overnight in dH2O at 4 °C. The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, one ~3 cm section per sample, and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μlof 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37˚C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer and allowed to react in the dark at 20˚C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37˚C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried. HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded onto a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a two-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 μl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC–MS/MS and statistical analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lock masses, followed by 10 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the SPROT Saccharomycescerevisiae database downloaded 1/9/2018 and searched using the following criteria:  LFQ quantification with a min of 1 high confidence peptide.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Deamidation (NQ), Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), and Phosphorylation (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using a MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da.  A 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications.LFQ Intensities were reported based on the MS level peak areas determined by MaxQuant. Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Three complete biological replicates were performed.  The abundance data from each biological replicate were normalized to the ratio of Ssa1.  LFQ Peak intensities were analyzed in each run to determine protein hits that fell into the category of either Unstressed only hits or Stressed only hits and retained if they confirmed to this state across all 3 runs.  LFQ Significance cutoffs are Significantly Up > 1.2 ratio (Log2 0.26) and Significantly Down < 0.8 ratio (Log2 -0.32). Any hits that were not observed in at least 2 replicates each were labeled 'no quant' (a normalized ratio was still calculated but not included in final data set analysis).

### Publication Abstract
Hsp70 is a highly conserved molecular chaperone critical for the folding of new and denatured proteins. While traditional models state that cells respond to stress by upregulating inducible HSPs, this response is relatively slow and is limited by transcriptional and translational machinery. Recent studies have identified a number of post-translational modifications (PTMs) on Hsp70 that act to fine-tune its function. We utilized mass spectrometry to determine whether yeast Hsp70 (Ssa1) is differentially modified upon heat shock. We uncovered four lysine residues on Ssa1, K86, K185, K354 and K562 that are deacetylated in response to heat shock. Mutation of these sites cause a substantial remodeling of the Hsp70 interaction network of co-chaperone partners and client proteins while preserving essential chaperone function. Acetylation/deacetylation at these residues alter expression of other heat-shock induced chaperones as well as directly influencing Hsf1 activity. Taken together our data suggest that cells may have the ability to respond to heat stress quickly though Hsp70 deacetylation, followed by a slower, more traditional transcriptional response.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Yeast, Ssa1, Heat stress, Acetylation, Ptms, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andrew W. Truman
Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA.


