### Accession
PXD009711

### Title
Mode of action studies for a novel anti-leishmania compound

### Description
We describe the development of a novel anti-leishmanial drug-like chemical series based on a pyrazolopyrimidine scaffold. The leading compound  is efficacious in a mouse model of visceral leishmaniasis, and has suitable physicochemical, pharmacokinetic and toxicological properties for further development and has been declared a preclinical candidate. Detailed mode of action studies indicate that compounds from this series act principally by inhibiting the parasite protein kinases.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, Leishmania donovani cell line LdBOB (derived from MHOM/SD/62/1S-CL2D) promastigotes were grown at 26 °C in SILAC SDM-79 media supplemented with either normal isotopic abundance L-Arginine and L-Lysine (SDM-79 + R0K0, light) or with L-Arginine.HCl U-13C6 and L-Lysine.2HCl U-2H4 (SDM-79 + R6K4, heavy). Cells were harvested at ~5 × 107 cells ml-1 by centrifugation and resuspended at 0.5 × 109 cells ml-1 in ice-cold buffer 1 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (0.1 mM TLCK, 1 µg ml-1 Leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM benzamidine, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II (Calbiochem)). Detergent based lysis was performed by adding an equal volume of ice-cold buffer 2 (100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 300 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 1.6% Igepal-CA-630, 2 mM DTT) and the cell lysate centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h at 4 ºC to remove insoluble material. The Aliquots of the cell lysate were snap frozen and stored at -80 ºC prior to subsequent processing. The total protein concentration of the cell lysate was determined by BCA assay (Pierce) to be ~ 5 mg mL-1.    Beads derivatised with the target compound as follows:  The storage solvent was removed from commercial NHS functionalised magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) and the beads washed and resuspended in anhydrous DMSO (150 µL [mg resin]-1). The compound (7 nmol [mg resin]-1) and DIPEA (14 nmol [mg resin]-1) were then added and the resin gently agitated for 24 h at room temperature. The reaction solvent was subsequently removed, and the beads washed with and resuspended in anhydrous DMSO (150 µL [mg resin]-1).  Ethanolamine (70 nmol [mg resin]-1) and DIPEA (70 nmol [mg resin]-1) were then added and the resin gently agitated for 24 h at room temperature.  The reaction solvent was then removed and the resin washed with DMAc, prior to storage in the same solvent.   Stable isotope labelled L. donovani cell lysates (0.5 mL) were first gently mixed with 2 mg empty (ethanolamine blocked) resin for 30 min at 4°C to reduce non-specific protein binding. This pre-cleared lysate was then incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 10 uM compound 10 in DMSO (light label) or DMSO (heavy label) only control (1% DMSO final). Subsequently, compound 9-resin (2 mg) was added to each sample, and gently mixed for a further 1 h at 4°C. The beads were isolated using a magnet, washed three times with lysis buffer containing 0.2% Igepal-CA630, and twice with Tris-buffered saline before the light and heavy samples were combined, and the bead-bound proteins were eluted with NuPAGE LDS buffer (Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT for 10 min at 100 °C. Eluted sample were subjected to electrophoresis on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 10% acrylamide gel (Invitrogen) under reducing conditions until the dye front had entered ~1.5 cm into the resolving gel. The proteins were stained with Instant Blue Coomassie (Expedeon), and the entire stained area excised and subjected to in-gel reductive alkylation and tryptic digestion for 18 h at 37°C with 12.5 μg/mL trypsin gold (Promega). Tryptic peptides were recovered in 45% MeCN, 1% formic acid and lyophilized prior to analysis.  Liquid chromatography was performed on a fully automated Ultimate U3000 Nano LC System (Dionex) fitted with a 1 × 5 mm PepMap C18 trap column and a 75 um × 15 cm reverse phase PepMap C18 nanocolumn (LC Packings, Dionex). Samples were loaded in 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A and buffer B (90% MeCN, 0.08% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5 to 40% buffer B over 65 min. The HPLC system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon nanospray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode to perform a survey scan over a range 335 – 1800 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000), with each MS scan triggering ten MS2 acquisitions of the ten most intense ions. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was internally calibrated on the fly using the lock mass of polydimethylcyclosiloxane at m/z 445.120025

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 15 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine 16. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containing L. infantum JCPM5 annotated proteins (Version 24, downloaded from TriTrypDB 17, http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and mammalian keratins) that contains a total of 8,482 protein sequences. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. SILAC ratios were calculated using unique and razor peptides, and required a minimum of two SILAC pairs, and two unique peptides per protein group. To account for any errors in the counting of the number of cell numbers mixed, the distribution of SILAC ratios was normalised within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of Log2 ratios is zero, as described by Cox et al 16. Data was visualized using Perseus 1.3.0.4 (www.perseus-framework.org) and further information on the identified proteins was obtained from TriTrypDB (http://www.tritrypdb.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Lancaster University
Drug Discovery Unit, Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head
Dr Ian H Gilbert
Drug Discovery Unit, Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research, Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom


