### Accession
PXD001096

### Title
Bovine sperm plasma membrane proteomics through biotinylation and subcellular enrichment

### Description
Mammalian fertilization requires a complex interplay between a sperm cell and an oocyte. A significant proportion of these functions are mediated through the proteomic composition of the sperm surface. These proteomic constituents can present as biomarkers to control and regulate breeding of agricultural animals. Previous studies have addressed the composition of bovine sperm cell apical plasma membrane proteome with nitrogen cavitation enrichment. Alternative workflows would enable to expand the compositional data more globally around the entire sperm’s surface. We used a cell-surface biotin-labelling in combination with differential centrifugation to enrich bovine sperm surface proteins. Using nano-LC MS/MS, 338 proteins were confidently identified in the plasma membrane enriched proteome. These results were bioinformatically analysed to assess the purification and to highlight the potential protein-protein interaction networks on the sperm cell surface. A highly significant degree of enrichment was found for transmembrane and plasma membrane proteins, among them proteins previously not described on bovine sperm (CPQ, CD58, CKLF, CPLV, GLB1L3 and LPCAT2B). Functional categories of sperm-egg interaction, protein turnover, metabolism as well as molecular transport, spermatogenesis and signal transduction were represented by proteins with high quantitative signal in our study. A descriptive overview of the bovine sperm plasma membrane integral and peripheral proteins is provided to complement future studies on animal reproduction and its relation to sperm cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
Sperm sample prepurification for viable cells using colloid centrifugation, cell surface biotinylation, subcellular enrichment with differential centrifugation, affinity capture of biotinylated proteins, protein digestion, shotgun proteomis LCMSMS

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometric raw data were analysed with MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 using the UniProt bovine complete proteome database (http://www.uniprot.org/, 2012 December version). Three missed cleavages were allowed to account for larger peptides resulting from lysine modification. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, asparagine deamidation and S-carbamidomethylated lysines as variable modifications. Criteria for identification were specified as following: 1 peptide, minimum length of 7 residues and false discovery rate (FDR) <1% using a target-decoy approach. Match between runs was enabled, and all other parameters were default. Only proteins that were found in all three biological replicates were considered for further analysis. Additionally, all bovine protein hits with currently unassigned gene names were supplemented with a closest ortholog gene name using NCBI Protein BLAST (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Contributions of protein categories with different functions (e.g molecular transport) or properties (e.g transmembrane) were calculated based on summed peptide peak areas (giving a protein total ion current fraction or TIC%). For increased abundance accuracy on the protein level, contributions of individual category members were estimated by the exponentially modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) using an optimized exponent base of 6.5.

### Publication Abstract
A significant proportion of mammalian fertilization is mediated through the proteomic composition of the sperm surface. These protein constituents can present as biomarkers to control and regulate breeding of agricultural animals. Previous studies have addressed the bovine sperm cell apical plasma membrane (PM) proteome with nitrogen cavitation enrichment. Alternative workflows would enable to expand the compositional data more globally around the entire sperm's surface. We used a cell surface biotin-labeling in combination with differential centrifugation to enrich sperm surface proteins. Using nano-LC MS/MS, 338 proteins were confidently identified in the PM-enriched proteome. Functional categories of sperm-egg interaction, protein turnover, metabolism as well as molecular transport, spermatogenesis, and signal transduction were represented by proteins with high quantitative signal in our study. A highly significant degree of enrichment was found for transmembrane and PM-targeted proteins. Among them, we also report proteins previously not described on bovine sperm (CPQ, CD58, CKLF, CPVL, GLB1L3, and LPCAT2B) of which CPQ and CPVL cell surface localization was further validated. A descriptive overview of the bovine sperm PM integral and peripheral proteins is provided to complement future studies on animal reproduction and its relation to sperm cell surface. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001096 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001096).

### Keywords
Sperm cell, Biotinylation, Plasma membrane proteome, Reproductive biology, Bos taurus

### Affiliations
Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tiigi 61b, Tartu, Estonia Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Puusepa 8, Tartu, Estonia Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, Tartu, Estonia
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility

### Submitter
Sergo Kasvandik

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Salumets
Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tiigi 61b, Tartu, Estonia Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Puusepa 8, Tartu, Estonia Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, Tartu, Estonia


