### Accession
PXD027789

### Title
pChem_benchmarking_dataset_lysinome_profiling

### Description
Data sets are used for benchmarking, pChem, a modification-centric, blind-search tool to provide a streamlined pipeline for unbiased assessing of the performance of chemoproteomic probes. Data were produced from the IPM-based QTRP (quantitative thiol reactivity profiling) applications in various species, incData sets are used for benchmarking, pChem, a modification-centric, blind-search tool to provide a streamlined pipeline for unbiased assessing of the performance of chemoproteomic probes. Data were produced from the lysinome profiling experiments using amine-reactive probes as indicated, including STP and NHS, both with a clickable alkyne handle.

### Sample Protocol
The intact cells or cell lysates were incubated with each indicated probe. The resulting protein samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM, 1 h, RT), and subsequently alkylated with IAA (40 mM, 1 h, RT, with light protection). Proteins were then precipitated with a methanol-chloroform system (aqueous phase/methanol/chloroform, 4:4:1 (v/v/v)). With sonication, the precipitated proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested with trypsin at a 1:50 (enzyme/substrate) ratio overnight at 37°C. The tryptic digests were desalted, dried under vacuum, and resuspended in a water solution containing 30% acetonitrile. CuAAC reaction was performed at RT for 2 h with rotation and light protection by subsequently adding 1 mM either light or heavy Azido-UV-biotin, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM TBTA, and 10 mM CuSO4. The light and heavy isotopic tagged samples were then mixed immediately following CuAAC, cleaned with strong cation exchange spin columns, and then enriched with streptavidin for 2 h at RT. Streptavidin beads were then washed with 50 mM NaAc (pH=4.5), 50 mM NaAc containing 2 M NaCl (pH=4.5), and deionized water twice each with end-to-end rotations, then resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, transferred to glass tubes (VWR), and irradiated with UV lamp at 365 nm (2 h, RT, with magnetic stirring). The supernatant was collected, concentrated under vacuum, and desalted with HLB cartridges. The resulting peptides were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For pChem analysis, raw data files were blind-searched against homo sapiens Uniprot canonical database. All mass shifts within the given range (1,000 Da by default) are retained.  Then, several semi-empirical criteria are applied to automatically recognize the genuine probe-derived modifications (PDMs). First, the isotope coding information is utilized to eliminate non-PDMs or other unrealistic modifications. For the six-heavy carbon coding strategy, in this case, the theoretical mass difference between a pair of light and heavy PDMs is 6.020132 Da. If such a measured mass difference is out of the range of [6.020132 - 0.001, 6.020132 + 0.001] Da, corresponding to 166 ppm tolerance for 6.020132Da, then the modification will be neglected. Second, less abundant modification candidates with the PSM counting number lower than a predefined threshold (i.e., 5% of total, by default) are also filtered out. Third, only the modifications with masses larger than the pre-defined threshold, e.g., 200 Da by default, are retained.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics has emerged as a key technology to expand the functional space in complex proteomes for probing fundamental biology and for discovering new small-molecule-based therapies. Here we report a modification-centric computational tool termed pChem to provide a streamlined pipeline for unbiased performance assessment of chemoproteomic probes. The pipeline starts with an experimental setting for isotopically coding probe-derived modifications that can be automatically recognized by pChem, with masses accurately calculated and sites precisely localized. pChem exports on-demand reports by scoring the profiling efficiency, modification homogeneity and proteome-wide residue selectivity of a tested probe. The performance and robustness of pChem were benchmarked by applying it to eighteen bioorthogonal probes. These analyses reveal that the formation of unexpected probe-derived modifications can be driven by endogenous reactive metabolites (for example, bioactive aldehydes and glutathione). pChem is a powerful and user-friendly tool that aims to facilitate the development of probes for the ever-growing field of chemoproteomics.

### Keywords
Stp nhs lysinome pchem

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China

### Submitter
jixiang he

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences • Beijing, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing, China


