### Accession
PXD017454

### Title
Quantitative label-based canine faecal proteomics

### Description
In small animals, diarrhoea is a regular presentation, the aetiology of which can be varied, from an isolated self-limiting event to more serious episodes requiring symptomatic and supportive treatment. Chronic diarrhoea, defined as diarrhoea lasting longer than 3 weeks, is a relatively common problem often prompting referral for more detailed investigation. Although the potential cause of chronic diarrhoea includes chronic intestinal parasitism and alimentary neoplasia (specifically lymphoma), the majority of these dogs will be diagnosed with idiopathic canine chronic enteropathy (CCE), previously referred to as idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).  Of those cases diagnosed with CCE, further subdivision based on response to treatment trials leads to a final diagnosis of antibiotic responsive diarrhoea (ARD), food responsive diarrhoea (FRD) or idiopathic inflammatory bowl disease (IBD).  The aim of this study was to compare the proteomes of faeces of dogs with chronic enteropathies and a population of healthy dogs, and furthermore to identifying proteins that might be useful in distinguishing FRD from ARD from IBD.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly voided faeces, collected from 15 dogs referred to the Glasgow University Small Animal Hospital for investigation of chronic diarrhoea and 14 healthy staff-owned dogs between November 2016 October 2017, was stored at -80˚C until use. On thawing at room temperature 0.5g of faeces were mixed with 9ml of buffer (50mM Tris-HCl . 10mM CaCL2 pH 7.8), as detailed in (Debyser et al., 2015). To 400 ml of buffer, 16 protease inhibitor tablets were added (Protease cocktail inhibition 11873580001 Roche Diagnostics, In. USA.). The manufacturer’s recommendation is to use 1 tablet per 50ml of buffer unless high proteolytic activity is suspected in which case use 1 tablet per 25ml, owing to the nature of the faecal material and high content of proteolytic activity of bacteria that latter recommendation was followed. Following a manual disruption and mixing of the faecal material with the buffer the solution was centrifuged at 400g/30 minutes/ 4˚C and the supernatant, removed and sonicated on ice using Sonicator 3000 (Misonix), at full speed at 10 second intervals 7 times. Samples were then centrifuged again at 4000g for an hour at 4˚C. Samples were filtered (Minisart Filter 16537-K) and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter unit with Ultracel-10 (UFC8010EMD Millipore) ultracentrifugation membrane filter tubes. Samples werestored at -20°C for further TMT-based relative quantification.  After total protein concentration determination, 35 μg of total plasma protein from samples and internal standard (a pool of equal protein amounts from all samples used as a reference for normalization) were diluted to a volume of 50 μL using 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific). Samples were reduced (20 mM DTT, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h at 55 °C and alkylated (30 mM IAA, Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, 300 µL of pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone were added, and samples were allowed to precipitate overnight at -20 °C. Protein pellets were collected subsequently by centrifugation (9000 × g, 4 °C), dissolved in 50 μL of 0.1 M TEAB and digested on the filters at 37 °C overnight by using 1 μL of trypsin [1 mg/mL, (Promega, Madison WI); trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35]. Peptides were labelled using the TMT sixplex Label Reagent Set prepared according to the manufacturer's procedure and 19 μL of the appropriate TMT label were added to each sample used for the labeling reaction (60 min, room temperature) which was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich). Five TMT-modified peptide samples were combined with the internal standard (labeled with TMT m/z 126) into the new tube, aliquoted, dried and stored at −20 °C for further analysis.  High-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100 A, 300 μm × 5 mm), desalted for 12 min at a flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 45% to 90% for 2 min, held at 80% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionization was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using the DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1 × 10E6, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2 × 10E5. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database on 14/10/2016, 41787 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow. At least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required for reporting confidently identified proteins.  Protein relative quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to combine the results for each protein within the TMT experiments (sixplexes).

### Publication Abstract
Canine chronic enteropathy (CCE) is a collective term used to describe a group of idiopathic enteropathies of dogs that result in a variety of clinical manifestations of intestinal dysfunction. Clinical stratification into food-responsive enteropathy (FRE) or non-food responsive chronic inflammatory enteropathy (CIE), is made retrospectively based on response to treatments. Faecal extracts from those with a FRE (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;5) and those with non-food responsive chronic inflammatory enteropathies (CIE) (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6) were compared to a healthy control group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;14) by applying TMT-based quantitative proteomic approach. Many of the proteins with significant differential abundance between groups were pancreatic or intestinal enzymes with pancreatitis-associated protein (identified as REG3&#x3b1;) and pancreatic M14 metallocarboxypeptidase proteins carboxypeptidase A1 and B identified as being of significantly increased abundance in the CCE group. The reactome analysis revealed the recycling of bile acids and salts and their metabolism to be present in the FRE group, suggesting a possible dysbiotic aetiology. Several acute phase proteins were significantly more abundant in the CCE group with the significant increase in haptoglobin in the CIE group especially notable. Further research of these proteins is needed to fully assess their clinical utility as faecal biomarkers for differentiating CCE cases. SIGNIFICANCE: The identification and characterisation of biomarkers that differentiate FRE from other forms of CIE would prove invaluable in streamlining clinical decision-making and would avoid costly and invasive investigations and delays in implementing effective treatment. Many of the proteins described here, as canine faecal proteins for the first time, have been highlighted in previous human and murine inflammatory bowl disease (IBD) studies initiating a new chapter in canine faecal biomarker research, where early and non-invasive biomarkers for early clinical stratification of CCE cases are needed. Pancreatitis-associated protein, pancreatic M14 metallocarboxypeptidase along with carboxypeptidase A1 and B are identified as being of significantly increased abundance in the CCE groups. Several acute phase proteins, were significantly more abundant in the CCE group notably haptoglobin in dogs with inflammatory enteropathy. The recognition of altered bile acid metabolism in the reactome analysis in the FRE group is significant in CCE which is a complex condition incorporating of immunological, dysbiotic and faecal bile acid dysmetabolism. Both proteomics and immunoassays will enable the characterisation of faecal APPs as well as other inflammatory and immune mediators, and the utilisation of assays, validated for use in analysis of faeces of veterinary species will enable clinical utilisation of faecal matrix to be fully realised.

### Keywords
Chronic diarrhoea, Tandem mass tags, Faecal proteomics, Dog

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


