### Accession
PXD043583

### Title
Cell Lineage-Guided Microanalytical Mass Spectrometry Reveals Increased Energy Metabolism and Reactive Oxygen Species in the Vertebrate Organizer

### Description
The vertebrate body plan is established through inductive signaling during gastrulation via a signaling center, which is called the Spemann-Mangold organizer (SMO) in the developmental model Xenopus laevis, the South African Clawed Frog. Here, we performed a multiplexed quantitative proteomic screen of the SMO in contrast with the rest of the embryo (RE). Wild-type embryos were cultured to the 32-cell stage, where precursor cells of the SMO were injected with a fluorescent lineage tracing dye. These experimental embryos were cultured to stage 10 (beginning of gastrulation), whence the fluorescently labelled cells were dissected. The proteome of the SMO and the RE were quantified using multiplexing quantification. The tissue samples were processed using a bottom-up proteomic workflow and analyzed using LC-MS3. The resulting data revealed an upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in the SMO tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type X. laevis embryos were cultured to stage 6 (32-cell stage). Precursor cells of the SMO (D112 and D212) were labeled with inert, fluorescent Alexa Fluor 488 dye via microinjection. The labeled embryos were raised in 50% SS to early gastrula (NF stage 10). The lineage-traced tissues, primarily consisting of the SMO, were dissected. The SMO tissues and the RE were separately collected and pooled to a total of 5 dissections for each biological replicate sample, then flash-frozen on dry ice. As biological replicates, N = 3 independent samples were collected for this study. The proteome of the collected tissues was extracted and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were labeled with isobaric mass tags encoding the SMO and RE for each biological replicate and combined to enable multiplexed analysis. The barcoded peptides were fractionated into 8 fractions using high-pH reversed-phase fractionation. Each fraction was separated using reversed-phase nano-flow liquid chromatography. The peptides were ionized using nano-flow electrospray ionization. The peptide ions were detected on an orbitrap-quadrupole-ion trap tribrid high-resolution tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo) executing data-dependent acquisition. Precursor ions were surveyed at 120,000 FWMH resolution in the orbitrap mass analyzer (MS1) with the following settings: maximum IT, 50 ms; AGC, 4 × 105 counts; microscans, 1. Tandem MS was activated with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in helium at 35% NCE. The generated fragment ions were detected in the ion trap analyzer with rapid scan rate with the following settings: maximum IT, 50 ms; AGC, 1 × 104 counts; microscans, 1. After fragmentation, these ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s before being reconsidered for analysis. Multinotch (Simultaneous Precursor Selection, SPS) MS3 fragmentation was conducted on the top 10 MS2 fragments with HCD in nitrogen at 65% NCE. The 3rd-stage mass spectra were measured at 50,000 FWMH in the orbitrap analyzer (maximum IT, 105 ms; AGC, 1×105 counts; microscans, 1).

### Data Protocol
The high-resolution mass spectrometry data were processed in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 executing the SEQUEST-HT search engine. The MS−MS/MS data were searched against the Xenopus laevis genome assembly (Version 9.2, downloaded from Xenbase on 12/06/2019) supplemented with the mRNA-derived PHROG version 1.0 database. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) against a reversed-sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular understanding of the vertebrate Organizer, a tissue center critical for inductive signaling during gastrulation, has so far been mostly limited to transcripts and a few proteins, the latter due to limitations in detection and sensitivity. The Spemann-Mangold Organizer (SMO) in the South African Clawed Frog (<i>X. laevis</i>), a popular model of development, has long been known to be the origin of signals that pattern the mesoderm and central nervous system. Molecular screens of the SMO have identified several genes responsible for the ability of the SMO to establish the body axis. Nonetheless, a comprehensive study of proteins and metabolites produced specifically in the SMO and their functional roles has been lacking. Here, we pioneer a deep discovery proteomic and targeted metabolomic screen of the SMO in comparison to the remainder of the embryo using high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). Quantification of ~4,600 proteins and a panel of targeted metabolites documented differential expression for 460 proteins and multiple intermediates of energy metabolism in the SMO. Upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation and redox regulatory proteins gave rise to elevated oxidative stress and an accumulation of reactive oxygen species in the SMO. Imaging experiments corroborated these findings, discovering enrichment of hydrogen peroxide in the SMO. Chemical perturbation of the redox gradient perturbed mesoderm involution during early gastrulation. HRMS expands the bioanalytical toolbox of cell and developmental biology, providing previously unavailable information on molecular classes to challenge and refine our classical understanding of the Organizer and its function during early patterning of the embryo.

### Keywords
Organizer, Spemann-mangold organizer, Xenopus laevis, Proteomics, Development, Metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
University of Maryland, College Park


