### Accession
PXD030307

### Title
Temporal resolution of gene derepression and proteome changes upon PROTAC-mediated degradation of BCL11A protein in erythroid cells

### Description
Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin expression by down-regulation of BCL11A is a promising treatment of -hemoglobinopathies. A detailed understanding of BCL11A-mediated repression of -globin gene (HBG1/2) transcription is lacking, as studies to date used perturbations by shRNA or CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. We leveraged the dTAG PROTAC platform to acutely deplete BCL11A protein in erythroid cells and examined consequences by PRO-seq, proteomics, chromatin accessibility, and histone profiling. Among ≤ 31 genes repressed by BCL11A, HBG1/2 and HBZ show the most abundant and progressive changes in transcription and chromatin accessibility upon BCL11A loss. Transcriptional changes at HBG1/2 were detected in < 2h.  Robust HBG1/2 reactivation upon acute BCL11A-depletion occurred without loss of promoter 5methylcytosine (5mC). Using targeted protein degradation, we establish a hierarchy of gene reactivation at BCL11A targets, in which nascent transcription is followed by increased chromatin accessibility, and both are uncoupled from promoter DNA methylation at the HBG1/2 loci.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in SDC buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate in100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and immediately boiled for 5 min at 95°C. After cooling the lysates on ice for 5 min, we sonicated them for 15 min at 4° using Bioruptor® Plus sonication device. Protein concentration was determined by Tryptophan assay as described in (Kulak, Pichler et al., 2014) to equalize protein amounts before reduction and alkylation by 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, respectively, for 5 min at 45°C. Proteins were subsequently digested by the addition of 1:100 LysC and Trypsin overnight at 37°C with agitation (1,500 rpm). Next day, around 20 µg of peptide was desalted using an in-StageTip (iST) protocol (Kulak et al., 2014). Briefly, samples were at least 4-fold diluted with 1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) in isopropanol and loaded onto StageTips prepared in-house using SDB-RPS material (Empore). StageTips were then washed with 200μL of 1% TFA in isopropanol twice and 200μL 0.2% TFA/2% ACN (acetonitrile) once. Peptide elution is performed with 80 μl of 1.25% Ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH)/80% ACN and eluates were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Concentrator Plus; Eppendorf). MS loading buffer (0.2% TFA/2%ACN (v/v)) was added to the dried samples to resuspend prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentrations were measured optically at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; Thermo Scientific) and subsequently equalized using the same MS loading buffer. Approximately, 200 ng of peptides from each sample was analyzed using a 100 min DIA method.  Nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) measurements were carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 ultrahigh-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap instrument, namely Orbitrap Exploris 480 and a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In-house packed columns (50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) were used and column temperature was kept at 60°C with an in-house developed oven. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid (FA) (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 80 min gradient of 5–30 % of buffer B (80 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA (v/v)), followed by a 4 min increase to 60 % of buffer B and a 4 min increase to 95 % of buffer B, and a 4 min wash of 95% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. At the end, buffer B concentration was decreased to 4% in 4 min and stayed at 4% for another 4 min.   MS data for each sample/biological replicate were recorded in singlicates in DIA mode.  Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. Full MS events were followed by 33 MS/MS windows per cycle at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 1e5 or an Xcalibur-automated maximum injection time. The spectra were recorded in profile mode. The HCD collision energies (%) was stepped (25.5, 27, and 30).

### Data Protocol
Subsequently, data were processed in Spectronaut version 15.2.210819.50606 (Biognosys AG) using the human SwissProt reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 42,431 entries downloaded in July 2019 for final protein identification and quantification. We set carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted and a peptide length of 7–52 amino acids. A protein and precursor FDR of 1% were used for filtering and subsequent reporting in samples (q-value mode with no imputation).  In preparation for the analysis, protein intensities were log2-transformed and data were filtered to ensure that identified proteins showed expression in all biological triplicates of at least one experimental group. Subsequently, missing values were replaced by random numbers that were drawn from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8). Principle component analysis (PCA) of samples/ biological replicates was performed using Perseus (1.6.1.3) (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016). For the pairwise comparisons between groups, a statistical t-test was performed and permutation-based FDR which was set to 0.01 or 0.05 in conjunction with an S0-parameter of 0.1 was applied. For hierarchical clustering of proteins, protein abundances were z-scored and clustered using Euclidean as a distance measure for row and/or column clustering. Mean log2 ratios of biological triplicates and the corresponding P-values were visualized with volcano plots and significance was based on a FDR < 0.05 or 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin expression by the downregulation of BCL11A is a promising treatment for &#x3b2;-hemoglobinopathies. A detailed understanding of BCL11A-mediated repression of &#x3b3;-globin gene (HBG1/2) transcription is lacking, as studies to date used perturbations by shRNA or CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. We leveraged the dTAG PROTAC degradation platform to acutely deplete BCL11A protein in erythroid cells and examined consequences by nascent transcriptomics, proteomics, chromatin accessibility, and histone profiling. Among 31 genes repressed by BCL11A, HBG1/2 and HBZ show the most abundant and progressive changes in transcription and chromatin accessibility upon BCL11A loss. Transcriptional changes at HBG1/2 were detected in &lt;2 h. Robust HBG1/2 reactivation upon acute BCL11A depletion occurred without the loss of promoter 5-methylcytosine (5mC). Using targeted protein degradation, we establish a hierarchy of gene reactivation at BCL11A targets, in which nascent transcription is followed by increased chromatin accessibility, and both are uncoupled from promoter DNA methylation at the HBG1/2 loci.

### Keywords
Bcl11a, Hemoglobinopathies, Proteomics, Protac, Mass spectrometry, Data-independent acqusition

### Affiliations
Head of the department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction at the MPI of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Head of the department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction at the MPI of Biochemistry


