### Accession
PXD022039

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Histoplasma capsulatum under zinc deprivation

### Description
The project aimmed to characterize the proteomic response of the human pathogenic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum to zinc poor environment. For that yeast cells were incubated in two conditions: zinc replete (with 20uM fo zinc sulfate) and zinc depleted (suppplemented with  diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid. Finaly teh proteins regulaed by zinc availability were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts of H. capsulatum were obtained from yeast cells lysed using a BeadBeater with 0.5 um diameter glass beads and ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). The cells were disrupted 6 times for 30 s at maximum speed with 1 min intervals on ice. Then, the lysate was centrifuged 5 times at 10000 x g for 10 min at 4 Celsius degrees to remove cell debris. The protein extracts were quantified using the Bradford method  with bovine serum albumin solution as standard. The enzymatic digestion was performed based using 150 μg of total protein extract in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM) and RapiGESTTM SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) for 15 min at 80 ºC. Then, dithiothreitol (100 mM) was added and samples incubated for 30 min at 60ºC followed by iodoacetamine (300 mM) and incubation at room temperature in a dark room. The digestion was done through the addition of 30 μL of a 0.05 μg/μL trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubation at 37 ºC for 16 h. Subsequently, 10 μL of 5% (v/v) triofluoracetic acid (TFA) was added, followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 90 min. The samples were centrifuged and supernatant was lyophilized in the speed vacuum (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  After digestion, an internal standard (rabbit glycogen phosphorilase B, spiked to 150 fmol) was added to the pools to allow quantitative analysis. The buffer solution of 20 mM ammonium formate was used to increase the pH. Qualitative and quantitative nUPLC tandem nano–elestrospray ionization (nESI) MSE experiments were conducted with the use of a 1.5-hour reversed phase gradient from 5% to 40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) at 400 nL/min on a Acquity UPLC M Class. A Nanoacquity UPLC C18 BEH 1.7 mm, 100 mm × 10 cm column was used in conjunction with an SCX 5 mm, 180 mm × 23 mm column. Typical on-column sample loads were 900 ng of total protein digests. For all measurements, the time of flight (TOF) analyzer of the mass spectrometer was operated in the “V” mode. All analyses were performed with the use of ESI in the positive ion mode (+) and a Nanolock spray source. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30 seconds, calibrated with a human (Glu1)-fibrinopeptide B (GFP) solution (100 fmol/mL) delivered through the reference sprayer of the Nanolock spray source. Data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed with a Waters Synapt G1 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters), which was automatically planned to switch between standard MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies MSE (12–40 eV) applied to the trap “T-wave” collision-induced dissociation (CID) cell with argon gas; the transfer collision cell was adjusted for 1 eV, using a scan time of 1.0 s, both in low-energy and in high-energy CID orthogonal acceleration (oa) TOF MSE from m/z 50 to 3,000.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications and quantitative data packaging were generated by the use of ProteinLynxGlobalServer v.2.4 (PLGS) and searching against a Histoplasma capsulatum‐specific database. The utilized databases were randomized “on‐the fly” during the database queries and appended to the original database to access the false‐positive rate of identification. For proper spectral processing and database searching conditions, a ProteinLynxGlobalServer v.2.4 (PLGS) with ExpressionE informatics v.2.4 was used. Search conditions were: maximum missed cleavages by trypsin allowed up to 1, variable modifications by carbamidomethyl (C), acetyl N‐terminal, and oxidation (M). The proteins obtained were organized by the PLGS ExpressionE tool algorithm into a statistically significant list corresponding to increased and decreased regulation ratios between the different groups. Normalization was performed with a protein that showed no significant difference in abundance in all injections.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fungal pathogenesis, Zinc uptake

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade Federal de Goias
Universidade Federal de Goiás

### Submitter
Alexandre Bailao

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Melo Bailao
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade Federal de Goias


