### Accession
PXD042233

### Title
Large collection of HeLa LFQ quality control and maintenance runs

### Description
Collection of HeLa maintenance and quality control runs for several years. The dataset was acquired to be used for exploration of deep learning models, initially in the scope of imputation. 

The repository for this archiv contains hints on how to use the three curated datasets and the single runs as filtered data. It provides links to the files on PRIDE.
https://github.com/RasmussenLab/hela_qc_mnt_data 

The current pre-print of the data descriptor can be found here:
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-3083547/v2


### Sample Protocol
The default protocol used is published a as Protocol: protocolexchange.researchsquare.com/article/pex-2155 


### Data Protocol
The data was processed using MaxQuant 1.6.12 using the UNIPROT human reference proteome containing 20,950 canonical and 75,468 additional sequences. The standard contaminants provided by MaxQuant were used. All three fasta files were uploaded. Each raw file was processed by MaxQuant separately. For each raw file an identically named zip folder is provided.  Aggregated and partly filtered data is provided for all 7,444 files on the precursor (evidence.txt), peptides (peptides.txt) and protein groups (proteinGroups.txt) level. Metadata acquired using the ThermoRawFileParser is provided in the `pride_metadata.csv`. All MaxQuant summaries are aggregated in `mq_summaries.csv`. The experimental design is stored in the SDRF file `Experimental-Design.sdrf.tsv`. Please see the project repository for futher instructions: https://github.com/RasmussenLab/hela_qc_mnt_data

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Bigdata

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Novo Nordisk Foundation Institut for Protein Research

### Submitter
Henry Webel

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Rasmussen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: cervex
- cell type: epithelial
- disease: adenocarcinoma
- label: NT=label free sample;AC=MS:1002038
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive;AC=MS:1001911, NT=Exactive Plus;AC=MS:1002526, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002523, NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos;AC=MS:1002732, NT=Q Exactive HF-X;AC=MS:1002877:, NT=Orbitrap Exploris 480;AC=MS:1003028

