### Accession
PXD005497

### Title
METTL21B is a novel human lysine methyltransferase of translation elongation factor 1A: discovery by CRISPR/Cas9 knock out

### Description
Lysine methylation is widespread on human proteins, however the enzymes that catalyse its addition remain largely unknown. This limits our capacity to study the function and regulation of this modification. Here we report that human METTL21B is a protein methyltransferase, which methylates lysine 165 of eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1A (eEF1A). The CRISPR/Cas9 system was used to knock out putative protein methyltransferases METTL21B and METTL23 in K562 cells. The known eEF1A methyltransferase EEF1AKMT1 was also knocked out as a control. Targeted mass spectrometry revealed the loss of lysine 165 methylation upon knock out of METTL21B, and the expected loss of lysine 79 methylation on knock out of EEF1AKMT1. No loss of eEF1A methylation was seen in the METTL23 knock out. Recombinant METTL21B was then shown to catalyse methylation on lysine 165 in eEF1A1 and eEF1A2 in vitro, confirming it as the methyltransferase responsible for this methylation site. Stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) proteomic analysis revealed dysregulation of processes related to eEF1A function in knock outs of METTL21B and EEF1AKMT1, but specific dysregulation of ribosomal proteins in the knock out of METTL21B. This indicates a specific function for lysine 165 methylation of eEF1A in human. METTL21B is specific to vertebrates, with its target lysine showing similar evolutionary conservation. We suggest METTL21B be renamed eEF1A-KMT3. This is the first study to specifically generate CRISPR/Cas9 knock outs of the genes encoding putative protein methyltransferases, for the purpose of substrate discovery and site mapping. Our approach should prove useful for the discovery of further novel methyltransferases, and more generally for the discovery of sites for other protein-modifying enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
K562 cells (wild-type and knock outs) were pelleted, washed once with phosphate-buffered saline, before being resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 % v/v Triton X-100, 2 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (40 min at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C) and separated by SDS-PAGE, after which gel bands were excised, digested and prepared for mass spectrometry, as described previously. Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), as described previously. Purified eEF1A proteins (10 μM) were incubated with or without purified METTL21B (10 μM) in the presence of AdoMet (500 μM) in in vitro methylation buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) at 37 °C overnight. Reactions were then resolved by SDS-PAGE and eEF1A proteins prepared for mass spectrometry as above. For stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), K562 wild-type and knock outs of METTL21B and EEF1AKMT1 were grown in RPMI1640 medium without arginine, leucine, lysine and phenol red (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), supplemented with 50 mg/L L-leucine (Sigma-Aldrich), 300 mg/L L-proline (Sigma-Aldrich), 220 μM L-lysine HCl (Sigma-Aldrich) and 240 μM L-arginine (Sigma-Aldrich), for light labelling. For heavy labelling, cells were instead grown with 220 μM 13C6, 15N2-L-Lysine HCl (Silantes, Munich, Germany) and 240 μM 13C6, 15N4-L-Arginine HCl (Silantes). Cells were grown for five doublings in order to ensure >95% labelling, which was confirmed before mixing. Cells were then lysed as above, and lysates from heavy and light conditions were mixed 1:1 before separation by SDS-PAGE as above. Each gel lane was cut into 25 bands, which were prepared for mass spectrometry as above, with the exception that reduction (10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hr) and alkylation (55 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 1 hr) were included before digestion by trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using RawConverter (v. 1.0.0.0), with “Experiment Type” set to “Data Dependent” and “Select monoisotopic m/z in DDA” selected. Converted data were then searched against the SwissProt database (2016_03, 550,740 sequences through to 2016_09, 552,259 sequences) using Mascot (v. 2.4, Matrix Sciences) hosted by the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Research (Melbourne, Australia) with the following settings: Enzyme: Trypsin (trypsin-digested samples), Asp-N (AspN-digested samples), or LysArginase (LysargiNase-digested samples); Max missed cleavages: 2; Precursor tolerance: 4 ppm; Fragment ion tolerance: 20 mmu; Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+; Instrument: ESI_HCD; Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Trimethyl (K) and Methyl (DE). Methyl (N-term), Dimethyl (N-term) and Propyl (N-term) were additionally selected as variable modifications for samples pertaining to N-terminal methylation. For samples from lysates (K562 wild-type and mutants), Taxonomy was set as Homo sapiens (human) and the contaminants database (139 sequences, 29,727 residues) was additionally selected. For METTL23 knock out samples, the Enzyme was set as Asp-N_ambic, and Max missed cleavages was set as 3. Peptides were identified with expect values <0.05, and spectra were manually annotated to only include fragment ions with 20 ppm error or less. Peptides and their methylation states were analysed by taking extracted ion chromatograms of the monoisotopic peak (±10 ppm) in Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser 2.2 SP1.48, as previously. A tolerance of ±5 ppm was used instead for the eEF1A2 AspN peptide DSTEPAYSEKRY+2 and its methylated states, due to the presence of near-isobaric, co-eluting, non-monoisotopic peaks. SILAC data were analysed with MaxQuant (v.1.5.8.0). Data were searched against human SwissProt proteins (03-2017, 20,170 sequences) and contaminants (245 sequences) with the following settings: Multiplicity: 2 (heavy labels designated as Lys8 and Arg10): Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Max missed cleavages: 2; Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); Precursor ion tolerance: 4.5 ppm; Fragment ion tolerance: 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a modification used in protein quantification and “Match between runs” was selected. Peptide-spectrum matches were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, estimated using the target-decoy approach. Proteins for which SILAC ratios were obtained across all eight comparisons (3307 in total) were then further analysed using Perseus. Each methyltransferase knock out was analysed for significantly changing proteins using a one-sample t-test and applying a 10% Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate. Significantly up- and down-regulated proteins for METTL21B and EEF1AKMT1 knock out were analysed for gene ontology (GO) term enrichment (biological process and cellular compartment) using the PANTHER (v. 11.1, released 2016-10-24) overrepresentation test, with all 3307 proteins quantified set as background. All quantified proteins from enriched GO terms were compared for differences in average SILAC ratios between METTL21B and EEF1AKMT1 knock outs using a Mann-Whitney test. P-values were then adjusted for multiple testing by multiplying by the number of GO terms tested (n = 37).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine methylation is widespread on human proteins, however the enzymes that catalyze its addition remain largely unknown. This limits our capacity to study the function and regulation of this modification. Here we used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to knockout putative protein methyltransferases <i>METTL21B</i> and <i>METTL23</i> in K562 cells, to determine if they methylate elongation factor eEF1A. The known eEF1A methyltransferase <i>EEF1AKMT1</i> was also knocked out as a control. Targeted mass spectrometry revealed the loss of lysine 165 methylation upon knockout of <i>METTL21B</i>, and the expected loss of lysine 79 methylation on knockout of <i>EEF1AKMT1</i> No loss of eEF1A methylation was seen in the <i>METTL23</i> knockout. Recombinant METTL21B was shown <i>in vitro</i> to catalyze methylation on lysine 165 in eEF1A1 and eEF1A2, confirming it as the methyltransferase responsible for this methylation site. Proteomic analysis by SILAC revealed specific upregulation of large ribosomal subunit proteins in the <i>METTL21B</i> knockout, and changes to further processes related to eEF1A function in knockouts of both <i>METTL21B</i> and <i>EEF1AKMT1</i> This indicates that the methylation of lysine 165 in human eEF1A has a very specific role. METTL21B exists only in vertebrates, with its target lysine showing similar evolutionary conservation. We suggest METTL21B be renamed eEF1A-KMT3. This is the first study to specifically generate CRISPR/Cas9 knockouts of putative protein methyltransferase genes, for substrate discovery and site mapping. Our approach should prove useful for the discovery of further novel methyltransferases, and more generally for the discovery of sites for other protein-modifying enzymes.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase, Crispr, Cas9, Methylation, Knockout

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Joshua Hamey

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia


