### Accession
PXD026819

### Title
lgG4 lesion of EoE patient biopsy by AutoSTOMP

### Description
To test the ability of the Automated Spatially Targeted Optical Micro Proteomics (AutoSTOMP) protocol for clinical research. We collected from a patient diagnosed with active EoE (≥15 eosinophils/hpf), according to consensus guidelines, using standard endoscopy procedures, then we try to selectively obtain the proteome from the discrete lgG4+ lesions of the biopsy sections by AutoSTOMP, and try to link the lesion structure with its specially skewed constituents comparing to the rest of the tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsies were fixed and sectioned as described and stained with an antibody specific to human lgG4 (clone MRQ-44, Cell Marque). The human study was approved by the University of Virginia Institutional Review Board (IRB), which requires written participant consent (IRB-HSR#19562). 7 μm cryosections were acquired and processed by AutoSTOMP protocol. https://github.com/boris2008/AutoSTOMP_2.0.git.EoE biopsy sections were lysed in DTT/SDS buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT, 4% SDS, pH=8.0) at 99 oC for 1 h.  Proteins were precipitated on streptavidin beads. The bound proteins was eluted, processed, and further characterized on Thermo Electron Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra data were parsed by MaxQuant (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The MaxQuant results were then analyzed following the label-free quantification (LFQ) data analysis protocol. Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR < 0.05) and t-SNE clustering were applied in Perseus (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The resulting data were plotted in R (www.r-project.org) with the installed packages “ggplot2”, “ggrepel”, “heatmap.2” or using GraphPad Prism (version 8.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
Tissue microenvironment properties like blood flow, extracellular matrix, or proximity to immune-infiltrate are important regulators of cell biology. However, methods to study regional protein expression in the native tissue environment are limited. To address this need, we developed a novel approach to visualize, purify, and measure proteins <i>in situ</i> using automated spatially targeted optical microproteomics (AutoSTOMP). Here, we report custom codes to specify regions of heterogeneity in a tissue section and UV-biotinylate proteins within those regions. We have developed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)/MS-compatible biochemistry to purify those proteins and label-free quantification methodology to determine protein enrichment in target cell types or structures relative to nontarget regions in the same sample. These tools were applied to (a) identify inflammatory proteins expressed by CD68<sup>+</sup> macrophages in rat cardiac infarcts and (b) characterize inflammatory proteins enriched in IgG4<sup>+</sup> lesions in human esophageal tissues. These data indicate that AutoSTOMP is a flexible approach to determine regional protein expression <i>in situ</i> on a range of primary tissues and clinical biopsies where current tools and sample availability are limited.

### Keywords
Autostomp, Eoe, Lgg4

### Affiliations
University of Virginia

### Submitter
BOCHENG YIN

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah E. Ewald
University of Virginia


