### Accession
PXD016697

### Title
Metabolic changes related to the IDH1 mutation in gliomas preserve TCA-cycle activity: an investigation at the protein level

### Description
The discovery of the IDH1 R132H (IDH1 mut) mutation in low-grade glioma and the associated change in function of the IDH1 enzyme has increased the interest in glioma metabolism. In an earlier study, we found that changes in expression of genes involved in the aerobic glycolysis and the TCA-cycle are associated with IDH1 mut. Here we apply proteomics to FFPE samples of diffuse gliomas with or without IDH1 mutations, in order to map changes in protein levels associated with this mutation. We observed significant changes in the enzyme abundance associated with aerobic glycolysis, glutamate metabolism and the TCA-cycle in IDH1 mut gliomas. Specifically, the enzymes involved in the metabolism of glutamate, lactate and enzymes involved in the conversion of α-ketoglutarate were increased in IDH1 mut gliomas. In addition, the bicarbonate transporter (SLC4A4) was increased in IDH1 mut gliomas, supporting the idea that a mechanism preventing intracellular acidification is active. We also found that enzymes that convert proline, valine, leucine and isoleucine into glutamate were increased in IDH1 mut glioma. We conclude that in IDH1 mut glioma metabolism is rewired (increased input of lactate and glutamate) to preserve TCA cycle activity in IDH1 mut gliomas.

### Sample Protocol
Samples FFPE tissue samples of surgically resected gliomas from 48 patients were used. All these gliomas are classified based on the most recent guidelines provided by WHO (13). The set included 18 astrocytomas (IDH1 R132H and TP53 mutated), 11 oligodendroglioma (IDH1 R132H and 1p/19q loss) and 19 GBM (IDH1 wt). Additional patient characteristics can be found in table 1. The use of patient material was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands (nr MEC 221.520/2002/262; date of approval 22 July 2003, and MEC-2005-057, date of approval 14 February 2005). Patients gave written informed consent to use their tissue for research purposes.   Sample preparation H&E stained sections of 4 µm were microscopically assessed for at least 70% tumor cells. For proteomic analyses adjacent 8 µm sections were collected in LoBind™ Eppendorf tube. The tissue section were de-paraffinized by xylene (98%), hydrated with different concentrations of ethanol, sequentially 100%, 70%, 50% and 0%, all steps were followed by centrifugation with an Eppendorf centrifuge at maximum speed for 5 minutes. After each step the supernatant was discarded before proceeding to the next step. After the final step the samples were stored at -80°C until the time of digestion. To all samples 100 µl lysis buffer was added containing 1% SDC (sodium deoxycholate) in 0.3 M Tris (pH 8). The samples were disrupted by sonification for 2 min at 70% amplitude at a maximum temperature of 25°C (Branson, Ultrasonic, Danbury, CT). Subsequently, the samples were incubated for 90 minutes at 90°C. Five µl of 0.1 M DTT (dithiothreitol) was added to the samples and incubated for 30 minutes at 60°C. Subsequently, 5 µl of 375 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) was added and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in a dark environment. Next, 300 ng of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each sample and after overnight incubation at 37°C, 2.5 µl 25% TFA was added to each sample and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 minutes. Supernatants of all samples were transferred to a 96 well plate and desalted. For the automated sample processing the AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA) was used. C18 cartridges were primed with 100 µl 50% ACN / 0.1% TFA and equilibrated with loading buffer (0.1% TFA / water). Hundred µl of sample was loaded onto the C18 cartridge. After washing the cartridges with 100 µl loading buffer, the desalted peptides were eluted in 25 µl elution buffer: 70% ACN/0.1% TFA. Subsequently, the samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Savant SC210A, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were dissolved in 120 µl aqueous 0.1% TFA and the total volume of each sample was divided over five 96 well plates. Next, plates were sealed and stored at 4°C until the LC-MS measurements were performed.  PRM measurements PRM analyses were performed on the same nano-LC Orbitrap Q Exactive HF system as the DDA measurements. A shorter 30 minutes gradient is used on the nano-LC system under similar LC conditions as for the DDA measurements. A quadrupole isolation window of 0.6 m/z units, an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions, a maximum fill time of 120 ms and an Orbitrap resolving power of 60,000 at 200 m/z were used. A normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27% was used for all peptides together with a retention time window of 4 minutes for each peptide. Eventually, the results for all proteins were evaluated and for each protein the two best performing peptides were selected. Targeted MS/MS methods could be successfully developed for 117 peptides belonging to 64 proteins (see supplementary Table 1). It was not possible to analyze all targets in a single method with the required sensitivity and retention time window. For this reason different methods were created, all containing a subset of the targeted peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and analysis PRM data  The PRM data was analyzed using Skyline version 3.5.0.9320 MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA; (https://skyline.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view), fragment ions for each targeted mass were extracted and peak areas were integrated. Each fragment ion was visually inspected for interference and only fragment ions without interference in the integrated area were used and summed for further analyses. For all peptides the areas were exported to Excel and correlation plots of peptides from the same protein were created. The values for all targeted proteins were imported in Perseus where the same analyses were performed as mentioned above for the DDA data.

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of the IDH1 R132H (IDH1 mut) mutation in low-grade glioma and the associated change in function of the IDH1 enzyme has increased the interest in glioma metabolism. In an earlier study, we found that changes in expression of genes involved in the aerobic glycolysis and the TCA cycle are associated with IDH1 mut. Here, we apply proteomics to FFPE samples of diffuse gliomas with or without IDH1 mutations, to map changes in protein levels associated with this mutation. We observed significant changes in the enzyme abundance associated with aerobic glycolysis, glutamate metabolism, and the TCA cycle in IDH1 mut gliomas. Specifically, the enzymes involved in the metabolism of glutamate, lactate, and enzymes involved in the conversion of &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate were increased in IDH1 mut gliomas. In addition, the bicarbonate transporter (SLC4A4) was increased in IDH1 mut gliomas, supporting the idea that a mechanism preventing intracellular acidification is active. We also found that enzymes that convert proline, valine, leucine, and isoleucine into glutamate were increased in IDH1 mut glioma. We conclude that in IDH1 mut glioma metabolism is rewired (increased input of lactate and glutamate) to preserve TCA-cycle activity in IDH1 mut gliomas.

### Keywords
Glioma, Proteomics, Idh1 mutation

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
ErasmusMC Neurology Laboratory of clinical and cancer proteomics Rotterdam The Netherlands

### Submitter
Lennard Dekker

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
ErasmusMC Neurology Laboratory of clinical and cancer proteomics Rotterdam The Netherlands


