### Accession
PXD005979

### Title
Proteogenome of Frankia coriariae cells

### Description
This project contributes to define the proteome dynamics of Frankia coriariae, a nitrogen-fixing bacterium, in presence of three host plants. Frankia coriariae was treated with root exudates from compatible (Coriaria myrtifolia), incompatible (Alnus glutinosa) and non-actinorhizal (Cucumis melo) host plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples extracted from Frankia coriariae cells were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, subjected to a short migration, extracted as a single polyacrylamide band, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular signaling networks in the actinorhizal rhizosphere select host-compatible <i>Frankia</i> strains, trigger the infection process and eventually the genesis of nitrogen-fixing nodules. The molecular triggers involved remain difficult to ascertain. Root exudates (RE) are highly dynamic substrates that play key roles in establishing the rhizosphere microbiome. RE are known to induce the secretion by rhizobia of Nod factors, polysaccharides, and other proteins in the case of legume symbiosis. Next-generation proteomic approach was here used to decipher the key bacterial signals matching the first-step recognition of host plant stimuli upon treatment of <i>Frankia coriariae</i> strain BMG5.1 with RE derived from compatible (<i>Coriaria myrtifolia</i>), incompatible (<i>Alnus glutinosa</i>), and non-actinorhizal (<i>Cucumis melo</i>) host plants. The <i>Frankia</i> proteome dynamics were mainly driven by host compatibility. Both metabolism and signal transduction were the dominant activities for BMG5.1 under the different RE conditions tested. A second set of proteins that were solely induced by <i>C. myrtifolia</i> RE and were mainly linked to cell wall remodeling, signal transduction and host signal processing activities. These proteins may footprint early steps in receptive recognition of host stimuli before subsequent events of symbiotic recruitment.

### Keywords
Plant interaction, Rhizosphere, Microorganism, Nitrogen-fixation

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA-Marcoule, DRF-SPI-Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Armengaud  
CEA-Marcoule, DRF-SPI-Li2D


