### Accession
PXD003982

### Title
Profiling carbonylated proteins in heart and skeletal muscle mitochondria from trained and untrained mice

### Description
Understanding the relationship between physical exercise, reactive oxygen species and skeletal muscle modification is important in order to better identify the benefits or the damages that appropriate or inappropriate exercise can induce. Heart and skeletal muscles have a high density of mitochondria with robust energetic demands and mitochondria plasticity has an important role in both cardiovascular system and skeletal muscle responses. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of regular physical activity on oxidation profiles of mitochondrial proteins from heart and tibialis anterior muscles. To this end, we used mouse as animal model. Mice were divided in two groups: untrained and regularly trained. The carbonylated protein pattern was studied by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by Western Blot with anti-dinitrophenyl hydrazone antibodies. Mass spectrometry analysis allowed the identifications of several different protein oxidation sites including methionine, cysteine, proline and leucine residues. A large number of oxidized protein were found in both untrained and trained animals. Moreover, mitochondria from skeletal muscles and heart showed almost the same carbonylation pattern. Interestingly, exercise training seems to increase carbonylation level mostly of mitochondrial protein from skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples (100 μg for Oxyblot and 200 μg for preparative gels) were separated on 13-cm immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips (pH 3-8 NL) on PROTEAN® i12™ IEF System (BIO-RAD) according to the manufacturer's protocol. After first dimension protein carbonyls were derivatized to DNP (2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazone) by incubating IPG strips in 10 mM DNPH (2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine, Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in 2 N HCl, for 20 min at room temperature. Following derivatization, the marked IPG strips were washed with 6 M Urea, 20% (v/v) Glycerol, 1% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, then they were reduced, alkylated and run on 4–16% precast polyacrylamide gels (BIO-RAD). After running, gels were blotted on Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) membrane. The PVDF membranes were incubated over-night at 4°C with the primary antibody solution consisting of a 1:10,000 dilution of anti-DNP IgG antibody (Sigma) in Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 2.0% non-fat dry milk. The blots were then washed with PBS, 0.1% (v/v) Tween and incubated with the goat anti-rabbit IgG/HRP conjugate (1: 3,000 dilution in PBS/Milk) for 1 hour at room temperature. Gels used for normalization of Oxyblots were stained with ammoniacal silver nitrate as previously described (28); MS-preparative gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie (29).  Image acquisition and analysis Gel and Oxyblot images were acquired using an Epson expression 1680 PRO scanner and saved as TIFF files. Computer-aided 2D image analysis was carried out using ImageMaster 2D Platinum software version 6.0 (GE Healthcare). Relative spot volume (%V=V single spot/V total spots, where V is the integration of the optical density over the spot area) was used during analysis in order to reduce experimental error. The intensity of carbonylated spots on Oxyblots was normalized vs their respective spots visualized on silver stained gels. The efficiency and the reproducibility of the blotting was always checked by staining PVDF membrane with Coomassie.  Proteins identification by LC-MS/MS analysis Selected spot were in situ hydrolyzed with trypsin and peptide mixtures thus obtained were directly analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap XL™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  C-18 reverse phase capillary column 75 μm*10 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific), was performed using a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with a gradient from eluentA (0.2% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) to eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile). The following gradient conditions were used: t=0 min, 5% solvent B; t=10 min, 5% solvent B; t=90 min, 50% solvent B; t=100 min, 80% solvent B; t=105 min, 100% solvent B; t=115 min, 100% solvent B; t=120 min; 5% solvent B. Peptides analysis was performed using data-dependent acquisition of one MS scan followed by CID and ETD fragmentations of the three most abundant ions. For the MS/MS experiment, we selected the three most abundant precursors and subjected them to sequential CID-MS/MS and ETD-MS/MS acquisitions. For the MS scans, the scan range was set to 400–1800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 × 106. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was set to 15,000, the AGC target was set to 1 × 105, the precursor isolation width was 2 Da, and the maximum injection time was set to 500 ms. The CID normalized collision energy was 35%; the charge-dependent ETD reaction time was enabled, and the ETD AGC target was set to 1 × 105. Data were acquired by Xcalibur™ software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peaklists were generated by Mass Matrix data converter software version 3.9 directly from each raw data.  In house Mascot software (version 2.4.0 ) was used as a search engine to identify proteins and their modification sites. The database used for protein identification was SwissProt 2015_02 (547,599 sequences; 195,014,757 residues), we used as search parameters trypsin as protease to generate peptides, maximum 3 missed cleavages allowed, 10 ppm as Peptide Mass Tolerance, 0.6 Da as Fragment Mass Tolerance, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Arg->GluSA (R),Cysteic Acid (C) (C),Deamidated (NQ),Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q),His-oxo His (H),Hydroxylation (K) (K),Hydroxylation (P) (P),Nitro (Y), Leu-HydroxiLeu (L), Lys->Allysine (K), Oxidation (HW), Oxidation (M), Pro->pyro-Glu (P), Pro-GluSA (P), S-Hydroxycysteine (C), Thr-KetoButyricacid (T) as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired by Xcalibur™ software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peaklists were generated by Mass Matrix data converter software version 3.9 directly from each raw data.  In house Mascot software (version 2.4.0 ) was used as a search engine to identify proteins and their modification sites. The database used for protein identification was SwissProt 2015_02 (547,599 sequences; 195,014,757 residues), we used as search parameters trypsin as protease to generate peptides, maximum 3 missed cleavages allowed, 10 ppm as Peptide Mass Tolerance, 0.6 Da as Fragment Mass Tolerance, Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and Arg->GluSA (R),Cysteic Acid (C) (C),Deamidated (NQ),Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q),His-oxo His (H),Hydroxylation (K) (K),Hydroxylation (P) (P),Nitro (Y), Leu-HydroxiLeu (L), Lys->Allysine (K), Oxidation (HW), Oxidation (M), Pro->pyro-Glu (P), Pro-GluSA (P), S-Hydroxycysteine (C), Thr-KetoButyricacid (T) as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the relationship between physical exercise, reactive oxygen species, and skeletal muscle modification is important in order to better identify the benefits or the damages that appropriate or inappropriate exercise can induce. Heart and skeletal muscles have a high density of mitochondria with robust energetic demands, and mitochondria plasticity has an important role in both the cardiovascular system and skeletal muscle responses. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of regular physical activity on the oxidation profiles of mitochondrial proteins from heart and tibialis anterior muscles. To this end, we used the mouse as animal model. Mice were divided into two groups: untrained and regularly trained. The carbonylated protein pattern was studied by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by Western blot with anti-dinitrophenyl hydrazone antibodies. Mass spectrometry analysis allowed the identification of several different protein oxidation sites, including methionine, cysteine, proline, and leucine residues. A large number of oxidized proteins were found in both untrained and trained animals. Moreover, mitochondria from skeletal muscles and heart showed almost the same carbonylation pattern. Interestingly, exercise training seems to increase the carbonylation level mainly of mitochondrial proteins from skeletal muscle.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Carbonylation, Two dimensional gel electrophoresis, Orbi trap

### Affiliations
Università di Napoli Federico II
Chemical Sciences

### Submitter
Andrea Carpentieri

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Carpentieri
Università di Napoli Federico II


