### Accession
PXD004494

### Title
Monitoring of the spatial and temporal dynamics of BER/SSBR pathway proteins, including MYH, UNG2, MPG, NTH1 and NEIL1-3, during DNA replication, Batch 2

### Description
Base lesions in DNA can stall the replication machinery or induce mutations if bypassed. Consequently, lesions must be repaired before replication or in a post-replicative process to maintain genomic stability. Base excision repair (BER) is the main pathway for repair of base lesions, but how BER is organized during DNA replication is unclear. Here we refined the iPOND (isolation of proteins on nascent DNA) technique with targeted mass-spectrometry analysis, which enabled us to detect all proteins required for BER on nascent DNA and to monitor their spatiotemporal orchestration at replication forks. We demonstrate that XRCC1 and other BER/single-strand break repair (SSBR) proteins are enriched in replisomes in unstressed cells, supporting a cellular capacity of post-replicative BER/SSBR. Importantly, the DNA glycosylases MYH, UNG2, MPG, NTH1, NEIL1 and NEIL3 were also detected on nascent DNA. Thus our findings reveal that a broad spectrum of DNA base lesions are recognized and repaired by BER in a post-replicative process.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND iPOND was done essentially as previously described (20,21). Briefly, HEK293 cells (3-4·108 cells per sample) were pulsed with medium containing 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU) (10 µM, Life Technologies) for 5-15 min (pulse samples). For pulse-chase experiments, EdU was replaced with medium containing excess thymidine for 30 min (10 µM, Sigma-Aldrich). Medium containing DMSO (0.1%) was used as a negative control (15 min incubation). Subsequently, cells were crosslinked for 20 min in PBS containing formaldehyde (0.13, 0.25 and 1%), quenched using glycine (0.125 M) and washed in cold PBS. The following steps were performed as previously described in (21). The eluted proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting or mass spectrometry (MS).  Immunoblotting Proteins were transferred to PVDF-membranes (Immobilon, Millipore) and the membranes were blocked in 5% dry milk in PBS-T before incubation with primary antibodies in 5% dry milk. Antibodies against POLβ (ab3181), POLδ (ab10362, Abcam), POLε (ab57298), XRCC1 (ab1838), LIG1 (ab615), LIG3 (ab587), APE1 (ab194), H3 (ab1791), GFP (ab290), PCNA (SC-56, Santa-Cruz Biotechnology), FEN1 (A300-256, Bethyl Laboratories), FLAG (F3165, Sigma-Aldrich) and α-UNG2 (TA503755, OriGene) were used. Membranes were incubated in swine α-rabbit and rabbit α-mouse secondary antibodies (Dako Cytomation) diluted 1:5000 in 1% dry milk and visualized in KODAK Image Station 4000R.  In-gel tryptic digestion Protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 5 pieces. Gel pieces were washed in pure H2O followed by washes in NH4HCO3 (25 mM) and CH3CN (50%). Further, gel pieces were shrinked in CH3CN (100%) before incubation (56 °C, 45 min) in NH4HCO3 (25 mM) and DTT (10 mM). Subsequently, samples were incubated (RT, 45 min) in NH4HCO3 (25 mM) containing iodoacetamide (55 mM), followed by washing (RT, 5 min) in NH4HCO3 (25 mM) and CH3CN (50%) and dehydration in CH3CN (100%). Then, each piece was incubated (ice, 30 min) in 15 μL of trypsin (12.5 ng/mL, Promega) and NH4HCO3 (50 mM). Gel pieces were covered with NH4HCO3 (50 mM) and incubated over night at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were extracted the following day by incubating twice in HCOOH (5%) and CH3CN (50%) followed by incubation in CH3CN (100%). Finally, the peptides were completely dried in a speed vac.  Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry (Shotgun MS) The dried peptides were dissolved in 40 μL of HCOOH (0.1%) (solvent A). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried by using a nano EasynLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dissolved peptides were analyzed on a 50 cm reversed phase C18 column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted using an 82 min gradient of 0 to 30% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer B: HCOOH (0.1%) in CH3CN). The nanoelectrospray were running at a voltage of 2.0 kV and peptide masses were measured in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 000 (m/z 400-2000). Up to 20 of the most intense peptides were selected from each MS scan and fragmented and detected in the linear ion trap using collision induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from the mass spectrometer were analyzed using Max Quant v 1.5.3.30 [1] which maps the spectra over Human proteome downloaded from Uniprot [2] in March 2016. The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance as 0.5 Da; Cysteine Carbamidomethylation as fixed while Deamidation of Aspargine/Glutamine, Oxidation of Methionine, Protein N-terminal acetylation, and Methylation of Lysine/Arginine as variable modifications. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (high confidence) and minimum of two peptides with high confidence were used for final protein identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm [3] was used to estimate the protein amounts in the sample. These LFQ values were log transformed with base 2 and two-tailed Student's T-test was performed between 90P and 15C. Euclidean distance were calculated between proteins over these values which were further used for hierarchical clustering using average linkage procedure. Perseus plugins [4] were employed to carry out these steps and resulting figure is  presented as Figure *           Reference:       1. Cox, J. and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-72.   2. Boutet E, Lieberherr D, Tognolli M, Schneider M, Bansal P, Bridge AJ, Poux S, Bougueleret L, Xenarios I. UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, the Manually Annotated Section of the UniProt KnowledgeBase: How to Use the Entry View. Methods Mol. Biol. 1374:23-54 (2016)   3. Cox J., Hein M. Y., Luber C. A., Paron I., Nagaraj N., and Mann M.(2014). MaxLFQ allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Jun 17. pii: mcp.M113.031591.  4. https://github.com/JurgenCox/perseus-plugins

### Publication Abstract
Base lesions in DNA can stall the replication machinery or induce mutations if bypassed. Consequently, lesions must be repaired before replication or in a post-replicative process to maintain genomic stability. Base excision repair (BER) is the main pathway for repair of base lesions and is known to be associated with DNA replication, but how BER is organized during replication is unclear. Here we coupled the iPOND (isolation of proteins on nascent DNA) technique with targeted mass-spectrometry analysis, which enabled us to detect all proteins required for BER on nascent DNA and to monitor their spatiotemporal orchestration at replication forks. We demonstrate that XRCC1 and other BER/single-strand break repair (SSBR) proteins are enriched in replisomes in unstressed cells, supporting a cellular capacity of post-replicative BER/SSBR. Importantly, we identify for the first time the DNA glycosylases MYH, UNG2, MPG, NTH1, NEIL1, 2 and 3 on nascent DNA. Our findings suggest that a broad spectrum of DNA base lesions are recognized and repaired by BER in a post-replicative process.

### Keywords
Quantification, Ipond, Ssbr, Replication, Label free, Orbitrap, Replisome, Ber, Batch 2

### Affiliations
Professor Institutt for kreftforskning og molekylær medisin Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030, Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Professor Institutt for kreftforskning og molekylær medisin Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030, Norway


