### Accession
PXD010598

### Title
Regulation of Cl- signaling and ion transport by IRBIT-mediated recruitment of multiple kinases and phosphatases

### Description
IRBIT is a multifunctional protein that controls the activity of IP3 receptors and the transporters NBCe1-B, CFTR and Slc26a6, by an unknown mechanism. IRBIT interacts with the NBCe1-B N terminus autoinhibitory domain (AID), exposing two cryptic Cl- sensing GXXXP sites to confer regulation of NBCe1-B by intracellular Cl- (Cl-in). Here, LC-MS/MS phosphoprotein analysis revealed that IRBIT controls five NBCe1-B phosphorylation sites that determine both NBCe1-B active conformation and regulation by Cl-in. Specifically, IRBIT-dependent combinatorial dephosphorylation of pSer232, pSer233 or pSer235 generated the conformations pSer233/pSer235, pSer232/pSer235 or pSer232/pSer233. The activity of the pSer232/pSer235 form is similar to IRBIT-activated NBCe1-B, but it is insensitive to inhibition by Cl-in. The pSer232/pSer235 form properties were similar to wild-type NBCe1-B, while the pSer232/pSer233 form was partially active, further activated by IRBIT, but retained inhibition by Cl-in. In addition, IRBIT recruited the phosphatase PP1 and the kinase SPAK to control Ser65 phosphorylation, which reciprocally affected Cl-in sensing by the 32GXXXP36 motif. IRBIT also recruited the phosphatase calcineurin and the kinase CaMKII to control phosphorylation of Ser12, which reciprocally affected Cl-in sensing by the 194GXXXP198 motif. Ser232/Ser233/Ser235 are conserved in all NBCe1 variants. Mutating the serines to alanines resulted in fully active NBCe1 transporters, while mutating the serines to the phosphomimetic aspartates resulted in inhibited transporters, suggesting that Ser232/Ser233/Ser235 determine whether NBC transporters are in active or inactive conformations. These findings reveal how multiple kinase/phosphatase pathways use multiple phosphorylation sites to fine tune a transport function, which have important implications for epithelial fluid and HCO3- secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expression NBCe1-B alone (N) or NBCe1-B and IRBIT (NI) were lysed with 8M urea and sonicated. The cell lysates were reduced by addition of 20 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide, and diluted with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8.5) to reduce urea to 1M. The lysates were then digested with trypsin (Promega, enzyme) at a lysate/trypsin ratio of 1:20. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced extraction cartridges (Oasis), and then subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment using either Fe-NTA or TiO2 columns per manufacture’s protocol (ThermoFisher). The enriched peptides were desalted using graphite columns, vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C. Peptides were re-suspended with 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion ETD mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spec spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (ThermoFisher). Peptide-spectra matching (false discovery rate <0.01, peptide rank = 1) was analyzed by both Mascot and SequestHT software, and the human Swiss-prot (Nov. 18, 2016) protein database. The probabilities of the phosphorylation site localizations were calculated using the phosphoRS 3.1 Module within Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
IRBIT is a multifunctional protein that controls the activity of various epithelial ion transporters including NBCe1-B. Interaction with IRBIT increases NBCe1-B activity and exposes two cryptic Cl<sup>-</sup>-sensing GXXXP sites that enable regulation of NBCe1-B by intracellular Cl<sup>-</sup> (Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub>). Here, phosphoproteomic analysis revealed that IRBIT controlled five phosphorylation sites in NBCe1-B that determined both the active conformation of the transporter and its regulation by Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub> Mutational analysis suggested that the phosphorylation status of Ser<sup>232</sup>, Ser<sup>233</sup>, and Ser<sup>235</sup> was regulated by IRBIT and determined whether NBCe1 transporters are in active or inactive conformations. The absence of phosphorylation at Ser<sup>232</sup>, Ser<sup>233</sup>, or Ser<sup>235</sup> produced NBCe1-B in the conformations pSer<sup>233</sup>/pSer<sup>235</sup>, pSer<sup>232</sup>/pSer<sup>235</sup>, or pSer<sup>232</sup>/pSer<sup>233</sup>, respectively. The activity of the pSer<sup>233</sup>/pSer<sup>235</sup> form was similar to that of IRBIT-activated NBCe1-B, but it was insensitive to inhibition by Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub> The properties of the pSer<sup>232</sup>/pSer<sup>235</sup> form were similar to those of wild-type NBCe1-B, whereas the pSer<sup>232</sup>/pSer<sup>233</sup> form was partially active, further activated by IRBIT, but retained inhibition by Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub> Furthermore, IRBIT recruited the phosphatase PP1 and the kinase SPAK to control phosphorylation of Ser<sup>65</sup>, which affected Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub> sensing by the <sup>32</sup>GXXXP<sup>36</sup> motif. IRBIT also recruited the phosphatase calcineurin and the kinase CaMKII to control phosphorylation of Ser<sup>12</sup>, which affected Cl<sup>-</sup> <sub>in</sub> sensing by the <sup>194</sup>GXXXP<sup>198</sup> motif. Ser<sup>232</sup>, Ser<sup>233</sup>, and Ser<sup>235</sup> are conserved in all NBCe1 variants and affect their activity. These findings reveal how multiple kinase and phosphatase pathways use phosphorylation sites to fine-tune a transporter, which have important implications for epithelial fluid and HCO<sub>3</sub> <sup>-</sup> secretion.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Ion channel, Irbit

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Chief, Epithelial Signaling and Transport Section  NIH, NIDCR, Building 10, Room 1N-112,  Bethesda MD 20892. U.S.A.

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Shmuel Muallem
Chief, Epithelial Signaling and Transport Section  NIH, NIDCR, Building 10, Room 1N-112,  Bethesda MD 20892. U.S.A.


