### Accession
PXD032954

### Title
mCherry contains a fluorescent protein isoform that interferes with its reporter function

### Description
Fluorescent proteins are essential reporters in cell biology and molecular biology. Here, we reveal that red-fluorescent proteins possess an alternative translation initiation site that produces a short functional protein isoform. The short isoform creates significant background fluorescence that biases the outcome of expression studies. Our investigation identifies the short protein isoform, traces its origin, and determines the extent of the issue within the family of red fluorescent protein. Our analysis shows that the short isoform defect of the red fluorescent protein family may affect the interpretation of many published studies. Finally, we provide a re-engineered mCherry variant that lacks background expression as an improved tool for imaging and protein expression studies.

### Sample Protocol
The strain carrying the constitutively expressed mCherry V1 was grown overnight in 50 mL of LB media supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin at 37°C-225 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (5000 rpm, 5 min) and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 0.05 % Triton X-100, pH 8.0) supplemented with 1 tablet EDTA-free cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche). Cell debris were eliminated by centrifugation (7500 rpm, 15 min) and the soluble fraction was collected. 2 samples of 200 µl cell lysate each were separated for LC-MS analysis, one to be digested by Trypsin the other by both Trypsin and Lys-C. Soluble proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform/water precipitation. Briefly, 800 µl methanol was added to the sample, followed by the addition of 200µl chloroform and vortexing. After addition of 600 µl ultra pure water (18 MΩ), samples were thoroughly mixed by vortexing and centrifuged at 16000g for 2 minutes. The upper layer was discarded without disturbing the protein layer and further 800 µl methanol was added, followed by vortexing and centrifugation as above. After removing the supernatant, the protein pellet was air dried for 10 minutes, it was then reconstituted in 150 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (BioUltra; Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). Next, proteins were reduced with 1.5 µmol of DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada) for 20 minutes at 70 degrees Celsius, then they were brought back to room temperature and then they were alkylated using 6 µmoles of iodoacetamide (BioUltra; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 3.5 µmoles of DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada) and incubating in the dark for 20 min at room temperature. Finally, proteins were digested by endoproteinase at 37 °C overnight, one sample digested by 1.25 µg trypsin and the other by 1.25 µg trypsin and 1.25 µg of Lys-C. After overnight digestion, 5 µl of formic acid was added to each sample and then the peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator at 60 degrees Celsius. Samples were resuspended in 100 µl 0.1 % formic acid and desalted in C18 stage tip columns, unless otherwise specified chemicals are Optima grade from Fisher Chemicals and centrifugations are at 2000g. Briefly, Stage tip columns consisting of three C18 plugs (Empore C18 47mm SPE Disks, 3M, USA) were made and activated with 50 µL methanol by centrifugation for 2 minutes, the methanol activation was repeated. Then the Stage tip was equilibrated with 60 µL of 0.1% formic acid in water by centrifugation for 2 minutes, the equilibration was repeated. Peptide-samples were centrifuged (16000g for 25 minutes), supernatants were loaded onto stage tip columns and centrifuged for 4 minutes, flow-through solutions were reloaded to stage tip columns. Stage tip columns were washed with 60 µL 0.1% formic acid by centrifugation for 2 minutes, the wash was repeated. Peptides were then eluted from the stage tip column using 40 µL 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, centrifugation for 2 minutes, the elution step was repeated. Finally, desalted peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator at 60 degrees Celsius and stored at -20 degrees Celsius until LC-MS analysis. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 50 µL 0.1% formic acid in water and shaken at 6 degrees Celsius at 900 rpm for 1.5 hour. Samples were centrifuged at 16000g for 10 minutes and 40 µL supernatants were transferred to MS-vials for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d., 2 cm long, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d., 50 cm long, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using a 180-minute multi-step gradient (150 min 2%-40% B, 15 min 40%-100% B, 15 min at 100% B; where B is 0.1 % formic acid and 80% CH3CN and A is 0.1 % formic acid) at 250 nl/min flow. Peptides were analyzed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 28. Each MS scan (200 to 2000 m/z, 2 m/z isolation width, profile) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by MS/MS scans at resolution 17,500 (2 m/z isolation width, profile) triggered for the 12 most intense ions, with a 30 s dynamic exclusion and analyzed in the Orbitrap analyzer. Charge exclusion was set to unassigned, 1, >4.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by processing the LC-MS data using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) version 2.5. The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; acetylation of protein N-terminus with methionine loss, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine were considered as dynamic and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static post-translational modifications; precursor mass tolerance of 10 parts per million with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Sequest HT node queried the raw files against sequences for mCherry (original and short), E. coli (strain K-12) proteins downloaded from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000625) in September 2020 and a common  LC-MS contaminants database. For downstream analysis of these peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), for protein and peptide identifications the PSM FDR was set to 1% and as high and 5% as medium confidence, thus only unique peptides with these confidence thresholds were used for final protein group identification and to label the level of confidence, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mcherry

### Affiliations
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway. United Scientists CORE (Limited), Aotearoa - New Zealand.

### Submitter
Davi Fonseca

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hohmann-Marriott
Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway. United Scientists CORE (Limited), Aotearoa - New Zealand.


