### Accession
PXD027237

### Title
Identification of acetylation-regulated interactors of the human CCR4-NOT complex

### Description
The evolutionarily conserved CCR4-NOT complex acts as a central player in the control of mRNA turnover and mediates accelerated mRNA degradation upon histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition. Here, we explored acetylation-induced changes in the composition of the CCR4-NOT complex by purification of the endogenously tagged scaffold subunit NOT1 and identified ring finger protein 219 (RNF219) as an acetylation-regulated cofactor. We provide evidence that RNF219 is an active RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase which stably associates with the CCR4-NOT complex via the NOT9 module through a short linear motif located in the C-terminal low-complexity region of RNF219. Using a reconstituted six-subunit human CCR4-NOT complex, we demonstrate that RNF219 acts as an inhibitor of deadenylation. Accordingly, our transcriptome-wide mRNA half-life measurements reveal that RNF219 attenuates global mRNA turnover in cells, independently of its E3 ligase activity. Our results establish RNF219 as a negative regulator of CCR4-NOT-mediated mRNA deadenylation, whose loss upon HDAC inhibition contributes to accelerated mRNA turnover.

### Sample Protocol
FST-NOT1 (clone #47) HeLa cells were subjected to SILAC by differential labeling using the SILAC DMEM Lysine(8) Arginine(10) Kit (Silantes). 2.2×106 parental or FST-NOT1 (clone #47) HeLa cells were seeded in 15 cm dishes. The following day, cells were treated with 20 nM Romidepsin (Abcam) or an equal volume of solvent (DMSO) for 16 hours. For each condition, 10×15 cm dishes were used. Cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS, harvested by scraping in ice-cold PBS supplemented with HDAC inhibitors (1 μM trichostatin A [Cell Signaling Technology], 10 mM nicotinamide, 5 mM sodium butyrate [both from Sigma-Aldrich]), and subsequently flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were mechanically disrupted using a Tissuelyzer II (4x 15 sec, 25 Hz) with 5 mm stainless steel beads (both from Qiagen). Cell powder was solubilized in 9 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% NP-40) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Lysates were vortexed briefly and incubated on a rotating shaker for 10 min at 4 °C. Lysates were then homogenized with 5 up and down strokes through a 27-gauge needle and cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. 25-30 mg of total protein from each SILAC label were combined prior to affinity purification of FST-NOT1 using 200 μl equilibrated anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich). Following incubation for 3 hours at 4 °C on a rotating shaker, beads were subsequently washed once with ice-cold lysis buffer and six times with ice-cold wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% NP-40). Bound proteins were eluted in 100 μl lysis buffer supplemented with 250 μg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4 °C with vigorous shaking. Eluted proteins were mixed with 5x SDS sample buffer (250 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 10% SDS, 50% glycerol, 500 mM DTT, bromophenol blue) and incubated for 10 min at 95 °C. Purified CCR4-NOT complexes were shortly run into a 10% NuPAGE polyacrylamide Bis-Tris gel using NuPAGE MOPS SDS Running Buffer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stained with colloidal Coomassie (VWR). The gel was subjected to MS analysis at the ZMBH Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were separated by SDS PAGE. The Coomassie stained bands were cut out and processed as described with minor modifications (Fecher-Trost et al). In brief, trypsin digestion was done over night at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands) and the supernatant was dried in a vacuum concentrator before LC-MS analysis. Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, injected to a self-packed analytical column (75um x 200mm; ReproSil Pur 120 C18-AQ; Dr Maisch GmbH) and eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl / min in an acetonitrile-gradient (3% - 40%). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Collision induced dissociation MS2 spectra were generated for up to 20 precursors with normalized collision energy of 29%. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.12.0 (Cox et al) for peptide identification and quantification.2 MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot human proteome database (UP000005640_9606.fasta downloaded Nov 2019) and the contaminants database provided together with the MaxQuant software using the  Andromeda search engine with the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and deamidation (Q,N) as variable modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. All other parameters were default parameters of MaxQuant. Quantitative normalized ratios were calculated by MaxQuant and used for further data analysis using the Perseus software (Tyanova et al).    Fecher-Trost, Claudia et al. “The in Vivo TRPV6 Protein Starts at a Non-AUG Triplet, Decoded as Methionine, Upstream of Canonical Initiation at AUG.” The Journal of Biological Chemistry 288.23 (2013): 16629–16644. PMC. Web. 19 July 2018.  J. Cox, M. Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367  Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13, 731–740 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901

### Publication Abstract
The CCR4-NOT complex acts as a central player in the control of mRNA turnover and mediates accelerated mRNA degradation upon HDAC inhibition. Here, we explored acetylation-induced changes in the composition of the CCR4-NOT complex by purification of the endogenously tagged scaffold subunit NOT1 and identified RNF219 as an acetylation-regulated cofactor. We demonstrate that RNF219 is an active RING-type E3 ligase which stably associates with CCR4-NOT via NOT9 through a short linear motif (SLiM) embedded within the C-terminal low-complexity region of RNF219. By using a reconstituted six-subunit human CCR4-NOT complex, we demonstrate that RNF219 inhibits deadenylation through the direct interaction of the &#x3b1;-helical SLiM with the NOT9 module. Transcriptome-wide mRNA half-life measurements reveal that RNF219 attenuates global mRNA turnover in cells, with differential requirement of its RING domain. Our results establish RNF219 as an inhibitor of CCR4-NOT-mediated deadenylation, whose loss upon HDAC inhibition contributes to accelerated mRNA turnover.

### Keywords
Deadenylation, Protein acetylation, Ccr4-not complex, Rnf219, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Mrna turnover

### Affiliations
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg
University Heidelberg ZMBHCore Facility for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
University Heidelberg ZMBHCore Facility for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany


