### Accession
PXD003074

### Title
Sulfolobus islandicus top-down LC-MSMS

### Description
Protein posttranslational methylation and acetylations have been reported to occur in archaea, including members of the genus Sulfolobus, but have not been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Sulfolobus chromatin proteins are known to be methylated and acetylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in this respect. We utilized bottom-up and top-down proteomic approaches to perform a global and deep methylation study in the hyperthermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus with particular interest in chromatin proteins. Without specific enrichment, 731 protein were found by bottom-up proteomic analysis. The methylation sites on >400 proteins were monitored throughout 3 cell culture growth stages: early exponential, late exponential and stationary. (The previously described aKMT4 is found to be a plausible methyltransferase responsible for the massive methylation.) The proteome-wide top-down study/approach revealed 3778 proteoforms of 681 proteins, including 292 methylated proteoforms, of which 85 were comprehensively characterized by high-resolution MS/MS. Methylated proteoforms of the five chromatin proteins were characterized in detail by combination of bottom-up and top-down data showing the differences between the closely related Sul7d proteins. The two Alba chromatin proteins are, for the first time, reported to be methylated in this work. Alba1 protein is shown to be mono-, di- and trimethylated at the lysine-16 side chain. Stage-wise top-down analysis shows that the relative abundance of the methylated proteoforms versus non-methylated ones significantly grows/increases for Alba1 and Cren7 chromatin proteins throughout the cell growth. These findings highlight the ubiquitous lysine methylation throughout the S. islandicus proteome and singificantly enrich our knowledge related aboutarchaeal chromatin proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone. Proteins were fractionated into 11 fractions on SAX column at pH 8.0 using NaCl concentration gradient. The resulting fractions were desalted using Amicon membrane filters prior to analysis. Alternatively, proteins were fractionated into 3-5 fractions on GELFREE 8100 system using 12% Tris-Acetate cartridges. The fractionated proteins were precipitated using methanol/water/chloroform protocol and reconstituted for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using ProSight PC 3 (Thermo Scientific), using a fully-annotated Sulfolobus islandicus LAL 14/1 database (Uniprot, July 2015)  Contact

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational methylation has been reported to occur in archaea, including members of the genus Sulfolobus, but has never been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Among important Sulfolobus proteins carrying such modification are the chromatin proteins that have been described to be methylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in that aspect. To get more insight into the extent of this modification and its dynamics during the different growth steps of the thermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus LAL14/1, we performed a global and deep proteomic analysis using a combination of high-throughput bottom-up and top-down approaches on a single high-resolution mass spectrometer. 1,931 methylation sites on 751 proteins were found by the bottom-up analysis, with methylation sites on 526 proteins monitored throughout three cell culture growth stages: early-exponential, mid-exponential, and stationary. The top-down analysis revealed 3,978 proteoforms arising from 681 proteins, including 292 methylated proteoforms, 85 of which were comprehensively characterized. Methylated proteoforms of the five chromatin proteins (Alba1, Alba2, Cren7, Sul7d1, Sul7d2) were fully characterized by a combination of bottom-up and top-down data. The top-down analysis also revealed an increase of methylation during cell growth for two chromatin proteins, which had not been evidenced by bottom-up. These results shed new light on the ubiquitous lysine methylation throughout the S. islandicus proteome. Furthermore, we found that S. islandicus proteins are frequently acetylated at the N terminus, following the removal of the N-terminal methionine. This study highlights the great value of combining bottom-up and top-down proteomics for obtaining an unprecedented level of accuracy in detecting differentially modified intact proteoforms. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD003074 and PXD004179.

### Keywords
Top-down, Lc-msms, Archaea, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
Unité de Spectrométrie de Masse Structurale et Protéomique, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France Tel: + 33 1 40 61 38 59  julia.chamot-rooke@pasteur.fr

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Unité de Spectrométrie de Masse Structurale et Protéomique, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75015 Paris, France Tel: + 33 1 40 61 38 59  julia.chamot-rooke@pasteur.fr


