### Accession
PXD000301

### Title
Calorie restriction-induced changes in the secretome of human adipocytes, comparison with resveratrol-induced secretome effects

### Description
Obesity is characterized by excess energy storage which results in dysfunctional white adipose tissue (WAT) and in turn leads to metabolic diseases. Lifestyle changes especially calorie restriction (CR) reduces the risk for age and obesity-associated complications. The impact of CR on obesity has mainly been examined with human intervention studies, which indicated alterations in circulating adipokines. However, a detailed understanding of CR-induced adipocyte secretome changes remains elusive. Therefore, we investigated the effect of CR on the secretion profile of mature human adipocytes by using proteomics technology with bioinformatic analysis. We demonstrated CR-mediated adipocyte triglyceride reduction, which resulted in a positive effect on adipokine secretion indicating an improved inflammatory phenotype and alleviation of obesity-associated metabolic dysfunction including insulin resistance and glucose intolerance. Furthermore, 6 novel adipocyte-secreted proteins were identified which were regulated by CR. Since resveratrol (RSV) mimics CR we compared results from this study with data from our previous RSV study on the adipocyte secretome. We observed that both treatment strategies lead to a less inflammatory phenotype and an altered adipokine profile indicating improvement of metabolic complications even though the CR and RSV adipocyte secretomes differed from each other.

### Sample Protocol
Culture media were collected, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail, transferred to dialysis tubes (2-kDa molecular-weight cut-off, Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) and dialyzed against 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 4°C for 48h with 10 - 12x buffer changes. The dialyzed medium samples were freeze-dried, dissolved in fresh rehydration buffer (8 M urea, 2% w/v CHAPS and 65 mM DTT) and centrifuged at 20000 x g at 10°C for 30 min. The protein concentrations were determined with a Bradford-based protein assay kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Veenendaal, The Netherlands). All samples were stored at -80°C. Protein samples derived from 2.75x106 adipocytes were used for 2D gel analysis according to Bouwman et al. 14 but with different IPG strips (pH 3-11, nonlinear, 24 cm). 100 mg of total protein in a volume of 450 ml containing 0.5% (v/v) IPG was loaded onto the IPG strips. For protein profiling, 4 independent replicates were made for calorie and non-calorie restricted adipocytes. The gels were stained with Flamingo fluorescent gel stain according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Bio-Rad Laboratories). To visualize the proteins, gels were scanned by the Molecular Imager FX (Bio-Rad Laboratories).  

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS, LCQ Xcalibur v2.0 SR2 raw files and spectra were selected from Proteome Discover1.2 software (Thermo Scientific) with the following settings: minimal peak count 50; total intensity threshold 4000; and S/N ≥6. Peak lists were searched with Sequest v1.2.0.208 and Mascot v2.3.0.1 against EMBL-EBI International Protein Index database for human proteins (version 3.78, 86702 entries) and using following settings: fragment tolerance, 1.00 Da (monoisotopic); parent tolerance, 3.0 Da (monoisotopic); fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cystein; variable modifications, oxidation of methionin; max missed cleavages, 2. Search engine results were combined and validated by Scaffold v3.00.07 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) with minimum peptide and protein probability set to ≥ 80%, followed by visual inspection of spectral (annotation) quality and manual curation, eliminating high-background spectra and single-engine identifications, evaluating one-hit wonders and filtering out keratins. Mascot DAT files were processed by PRIDE Converter software and were submitted together with relevant files (.raw, .mgf, .dat and Scaffold .sf3 files) via ProteomeXchange (http://www.proteomexchange.org) to the PRIDE database 17, project accession number is: 29652-29779. Mass spectrometry data can be visualized using PRIDE Inspector 18 (http://tinyurl.com/csffalc) and Scaffold .sf3 free viewer (https://proteomecommons.org/tool.jsp?i=1009).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is characterized by dysfunctional white adipose tissue (WAT) that ultimately may lead to metabolic diseases. Calorie restriction (CR) reduces the risk for age and obesity-associated complications. The impact of CR on obesity has been examined with human intervention studies, which showed alterations in circulating adipokines. However, a direct effect of CR on the human adipocyte secretome remains elusive. Therefore, the effect of a 96h low glucose CR on the secretion profile of in vitro cultured mature human SGBS adipocytes was investigated by using proteomics technology. Low-glucose CR decreased the adipocyte triglyceride contents and resulted in an altered secretion profile. Changes in the secretome indicated an improved inflammatory phenotype. In addition, several adipocyte-secreted proteins related to insulin resistance showed a reversed expression after low-glucose CR. Furthermore, 6 novel CR-regulated adipocyte-secreted proteins were identified. Since resveratrol (RSV) mimics CR we compared results from this study with data from our previous RSV study on the SGBS adipocyte secretome. The CR and RSV adipocyte secretomes partly differed from each other, although both treatment strategies lead to secretome changes indicating a less inflammatory phenotype. Furthermore, both treatments induced SIRT1 expression and resulted in a reversed expression of detrimental adipokines associated with metabolic complications.

### Keywords
Calorie restriction, 2-de lc-ms/ms, Adipokines, Metabolic syndrome, Human adipocytes

### Affiliations
Dept. of Human Biology, FHML, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, The Netherlands
FBI

### Submitter
Jean-Paul Noben

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. E. Mariman
Dept. of Human Biology, FHML, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, The Netherlands


