### Accession
PXD030070

### Title
LC-MS/MS identification of histone Kbz sites in yeast

### Description
Identification of 29 Kbz sites on yeast H3, H4, H2A, H2A.Z, and H2B by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The histone samples were reductive alkylated, and then digested with trypsin (sample: trysin=1:50) pH 8-9. The peptides were desalinated and enriched by the anti-Kbz antibody conjugated beads, eluted by 0.15% TFA and analyzed by the LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The benzoylation identification search was performed with the PEAKS Studio 8.5 against Uniprot Yeast protein database (6721 entries, http://www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine benzoylation (Kbz) is a recently discovered post-translational modification associated with active transcription. However, the proteins for maintaining and interpreting Kbz and the physiological roles of Kbz remain elusive. Here, we systematically characterize writer, eraser, and reader proteins of histone Kbz in S. cerevisiae using proteomic, biochemical, and structural approaches. Our study identifies 27 Kbz sites on yeast histones that can be regulated by cellular metabolic states. The Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex and NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent histone deacetylase Hst2 could function as the writer and eraser of histone Kbz, respectively. Crystal structures of Hst2 complexes reveal the molecular basis for Kbz recognition and catalysis by Hst2. In addition, we demonstrate that a subset of YEATS domains and bromodomains serve as Kbz readers, and structural analyses reveal how YEATS and bromodomains recognize Kbz marks. Moreover, the proteome-wide screening of Kbz-modified proteins identifies 207 Kbz sites on 149 non-histone proteins enriched in ribosome biogenesis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and rRNA processing pathways. Our studies identify regulatory elements for the Kbz pathway and provide a framework for dissecting the biological functions of lysine benzoylation.

### Keywords
Lysine benzoylation, Lc-ms/ms, Histone, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, CAS
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
 Chinese Academy of Sciences


### Submitter
Duo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Yong
Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, CAS


