### Accession
PXD037792

### Title
Proteomic analysis of vastus lateralis muscle biopsies

### Description
The molecular level the different muscular signature from Veteran soccer Players (VPG) vs age-matched active healthy subjects (control group, CG) was explored by using a proteomic approach. V. lateralis muscle biopsies were investigated in order to highlight the molecular mechanisms that characterize a successful aging through a lifelong football training

### Sample Protocol
Muscle biopsies were obtained from the vastus lateralis under local anaesthesia. Muscle biopsies were homogenized in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton, 5 mM EDTA, 50mM Tris-HCl and Complete Mini protease inhibitory cocktail. After 30 min incubation on ice, samples were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using Bradford’s reagent. For each group (VPG and CG), the six protein samples were pooled, incubated for 5 min at 95°C and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. Gel bands were stained with Colloid Blue Stain Reagent. The whole gel lanes were manually cut into 2 mm gel slices. Each slice was washed with acetonitrile (ACN) and then with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein bands were reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 56°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Enzymatic digestion was carried out with 10 ng/ul modified trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at 4°C. Peptide mixtures were extracted as previously reported and resuspended in 0.2% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometry  analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with nanoEASY II, Nanoseparations chromatographic system. Peptide analysis was performed with a resolution of 30000 and using data-dependent acquisition of MS scan (400-1800 m/z) followed by MS/MS scans of the five most abundant ions. To compare the expression of the same protein between the two different examined conditions, the Rsc parameter was calculated as the log ratio of abundance between VPG and CG samples. Proteins with Rsc ≥ 1.40 or ≤ -1.40 were considered differentially represented in VPG versus CG.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human proteomics, Muscle biopsy

### Affiliations
Department Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples
University of Naples 'Federico II'

### Submitter
Marianna Caterino

### Lab Head
Dr Marianna Caterino
Department Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples


