### Accession
PXD010672

### Title
ZBTB10 binds the telomeric variant repeat TTGGGG and interacts with TRF2

### Description
Telomeres are the ends of linear chromosomes and together with the shelterin complex present an essential feature for genome integrity. Vertebrate telomeres usually consist of hexameric TTAGGG repeats, however, in cells that use the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) mechanism, variant repeat sequences are interspersed throughout telomeres. Previously, it was shown that NR2C/F transcription factors bind to TCAGGG variant repeats and contribute to telomere maintenance in ALT cells. While specific binders to other variant repeat sequences have been lacking to date, we here identify ZBTB10 as the first TTGGGG-binding protein and demonstrate direct binding via the two zinc fingers with affinity in the nanomolar range. Concomitantly, ZBTB10 co-localizes with a subset of telomeres in ALT-positive U2OS cells and interacts with TRF2/RAP1 via the N-terminal region of TRF2. Our data establishes ZBTB10 as a novel variant repeat-specific binding protein at ALT telomeres.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion was performed as previously described (Rappsilber et al., Nat Prot 2006). Tryptic peptides were desalted on StageTips and loaded on an in-house packed C18 column (25 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) for reverse-phase chromatography. The EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) was mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 90 min (pulldown) or 5 h (proteome) gradient from 2 to 40% MS grade acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to ten MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the human Uniprot database (81,194 entries). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met) and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For enzyme specificity trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option were activated.

### Publication Abstract
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear chromosomes and present an essential feature for genome integrity. Vertebrate telomeres usually consist of hexameric TTAGGG repeats, however, in cells that use the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) mechanism, variant repeat sequences are interspersed throughout telomeres. Previously, it was shown that NR2C/F transcription factors bind to TCAGGG variant repeats and contribute to telomere maintenance in ALT cells. While specific binders to other variant repeat sequences have been lacking to date, we here identify ZBTB10 as the first TTGGGG-binding protein and demonstrate direct binding via the two zinc fingers with affinity in the nanomolar range. Concomitantly, ZBTB10 co-localizes with a subset of telomeres in ALT-positive U2OS cells and interacts with TRF2/RAP1 via the N-terminal region of TRF2. Our data establishes ZBTB10 as a novel variant repeat binding protein at ALT telomeres.

### Keywords
Interactome; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


