### Accession
PXD002301

### Title
Root iTRAQ protein profile analysis of two Citrus species differing in aluminum-tolerance in response to long-term aluminum-toxicity

### Description
After long-term aluminum treatment, thereafter, we investigated Citrus root protein profiles using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
Different protein samples were reduced, alkylated and labeled according to iTRAQ 8-plex kits (AB Sciex Inc., MA, USA) manufacturer’s manual. Twenty fractions were garnered after fractionation by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μl  on average. Ten μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shi madzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA)

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), [5600 msconverter] and the MGF file were searched. Proteins identificati on were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against Citrus sinensis database (http://www.phytozome.net/cgi-bin/gbrowse/citrus/, 46147 sequences). Protein identification and quantification were processed by using Mascot software (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA, USA). The following search settings were used: MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of ±0.1 Da; threshold set-off at 0.05 Da in the ion-score cut-off; Peptide Length from 6 to 144; tryptic peptides with ≤2 missed cleavage site; pyrophosphorylation of glutamine and variable oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ labeling of tyrosine were set as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine the N-terminal amino group of peptides were set as fixed modification. Peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. Peptide change was set Mr, and monoisotopic mass was chosen. iTRAQ 8 plex was chosen for identification during the search simultaneously. The search results were passed through additional filters before exporting the data. For protein identification, the filters were set as follows: significance threshold P, 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and ion score or expected cutoff less than 0.05 (with 95% confidence).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrus sinensis, Aluminum, Proteomic analysis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lisong Chen
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University


