### Accession
PXD006755

### Title
human placenta LC-MS/MS

### Description
Hypertensive disorder in pregnancy (HDP) refers to a series of diseases that cause the hypertension during pregnancy, including HDP, preeclampsia (PE) and eclampsia. This study screens differentially expressed proteins of placenta tissues in PE cases using 2D LC-MS/MS quantitative proteomics strategy. A total of 2,281 proteins are quantified, of these, 145 altering expression proteins are successfully screened between PE and control cases (p<0.05). Bioinformatics analysis suggests that these proteins are mainly involved in many biological processes, such as oxidation reduction, mitochondrion organization, and acute inflammatory response. Especially, the glutamine metabolic process related molecules, GPX1, GPX3, SMS, GGCT, GSTK1, NFκB, GSTT2, SOD1 and GCLM, are involved in the switching process from oxidized glutathione (GSSG) conversion to the reduced glutathione (GSH) by glutathione, mercapturic acid and arginine metabolism process. Results of this study revealed that glutathione metabolism disorder of placenta tissues may contribute to the occurrence of PE disease.

### Sample Protocol
The potential changes between PE and health maternal groups were analyzed using iTRAQ coupled to two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D LC-MS/MS) strategy (Fig. 1.). To ensure the accuracy of quantitative proteomics, the placenta tissues were divided into the four groups, including two normal groups and two PE groups. To reduce the individual differences and homogenates, 10 independent placenta tissues in each group were pooled together and then were lysed with the lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 5 mM IAA, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and protein inhibitor cocktail) followed by sonication and centrifugation. The protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. The equal amount of lysates from each of pooled tissue sample (~100 μg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). The method of Trypsin/Lys-C Mix digestion in gel was performed according to the previous description. Briefly, 100 μg peptide samples from normal_1 and 2, PE_1 and 2 were labeled by iTRAQ4-113, 114, 115 and 116. Differentially labeled peptides were equally mixed, dried with a speed-vac and then desalted with Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges.

### Data Protocol
The labeled samples were separated into 20 fractions with off line Agilent 1100 HPLC system with Xbridge® Peptide BEH C18 column(3.5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm, Waters, Milford, MA). The fractionated peptides were measured by using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), which was equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water) and loaded on an home-made C18 capillary column (75 μm ID ×15 cm). Then peptides were eluted with a linear 60 min gradient of 8-38% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile), followed by 38-80% buffer B for 6 min and 80% buffer B for 4 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were ionized under 2.2 kV voltage by using nano-spray ion source (NSI). For the full MS scan, peptides were measured by Orbitrap analyzer, the mass range was set to 450-1, 500 m/z and the resolution was 60,000 at m/z 200. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 5×105, and maximum injection time was set to 50 ms. The 15 most intense ions were subjected to fragmentation via high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 40% normalized collision energy (NCE). The fixed first mass of 100 m/z was used for MS/MS scans in Orbitrap analyzer (resolution was 15,000 at m/z 200). The AGC target was set to 5×105, the isolation width was 1 m/z, the dynamic exclusion range was 60 s, and maximum ion injection time was set as 80 ms. All raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.1.2). Search engine was against the Uniprot human reference protein database (version June, 2016). And the results of bioinformatics analysis were visualized using R (version 3.2.3) package GOplot 1.1 . Cytoscape 3.3.0 software was used to assign the interaction network of the altering expression proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertensive disorder in pregnancy (HDP) refers to a series of diseases that cause the hypertension during pregnancy, including HDP, preeclampsia (PE) and eclampsia. This study screens differentially expressed proteins of placenta tissues in PE cases using 2D LC-MS/MS quantitative proteomics strategy. A total of 2281 proteins are quantified, of these, 145 altering expression proteins are successfully screened between PE and control cases (p&lt;0.05). Bioinformatics analysis suggests that these proteins are mainly involved in many biological processes, such as oxidation reduction, mitochondrion organization, and acute inflammatory response. Especially, the glutamine metabolic process related molecules, GPX1, GPX3, SMS, GGCT, GSTK1, NF&#x3ba;B, GSTT2, SOD1 and GCLM, are involved in the switching process from oxidized glutathione (GSSG) conversion to the reduced glutathione (GSH) by glutathione, mercapturic acid and arginine metabolism process. Results of this study revealed that glutathione metabolism disorder of placenta tissues may contribute to the occurrence of PE disease.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Preeclampsia, Placenta tissue

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Logistics University of Chinese People’s Armed Police Force
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling & Target Organ Injury, PingjinHospital Heart Center

### Submitter
Xiaohan Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhongwei Xu
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling & Target Organ Injury, PingjinHospital Heart Center


