### Accession
PXD005149

### Title
Functional proteomics defines differential signaling networks of the oncogenic kinases Bcr-Abl p210 and p185

### Description
The two major isoforms of the oncogenic Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, p210 and p185, are expressed upon the Philadelphia chromosome translocation. p210 is the hallmark of chronic myelogenous leukemia, whereas p185 occurs in the majority of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Differences in protein-protein interactions and activated signaling pathways that may be associated with the different diseases driven by p210 and p185 are unknown. We have performed a quantitative comparative proteomics study of p210 and p185 and found strong differences in the interactome and phosphoproteome. Whereas the AP2 endocytosis complex interacts preferentially with p185, the phosphatase Sts1 is enriched with p210. Stronger activation of STAT5 and ERK1/2 is observed with p210, whereas Lyn is activated by p185. These results were validated in human p210 and p185-positive cell lines. Our findings contribute to a more coherent understanding of Bcr-Abl signaling, mechanisms of oncogenic transformation, resulting disease pathobiology and responses to kinase inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteome sample preparation Cell lysis is accomplished in Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM Hepes, pH 7.6, 25 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM vanadate, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche), 1x HALT phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo)) using 2 mL buffer for 1*108 cells. After incubation for 10 min on ice samples are centrifuged at 20 000 xg, 20 min in a tabletop centrifuge. We mixed 10 mg of total cell lysate of each sample (light, medium and heavy labeled) to have a final of 30 mg SILAC sample for peptide preparation. The mixed lysates were then reduced, alkylated and digested using Lys-C and trypsin according to standard protocols. After desalting, samples were split for the respective downstream application and evaporated by Speed-Vac. Of the resulting peptides, two-thirds were used in the pY peptide enrichment and the total proteome analysis was done from a fraction of the remaining sample. Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched using a mixture of two phosphotyrosine antibodies. On the one hand, we employed the pY1000 antibody that is part of the PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit (Cell Signaling Technologies, catalogue number 8803). In addition, we added 50 µL NHS-coupled 4G10 antibody as preliminary tests had indicated a slightly increased number of captured peptides. The dried peptides corresponding to 20 mg total cell lysate were resoubilised in 1.2 mL IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, according to Cell Signaling Technologies). After removing the insoluble parts (10 000 xg, 5 min, 4°C) the supernatant was incubated with the pY antibody resin at 4°C over night. The resin was washed twice with 1x IAP buffer and three-times in H2O before elution in 0.15% TFA. Eluates were desalted using C18 Stage Tips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on TiO2 tips and were further desalted by C18 Stage Tip and dried. Interactome sample preparation by large-scale anti-Abl immunoprecipitation Cell lysis and purification was performed in TAP buffer (50 mM TRIS pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 0.2% (w/v) NP-40 Alternative) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (25 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM vanadate, 1 mM PMSF, 10 µg/mL TPCK, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche)). After resuspending the cell pellet in 10 mL TAP buffer per 1*10^9 cells, the lysate was incubated on ice for 10 min prior centrifugation at 20 000 xg, 20 min in a tabletop centrifuge. Protein concentration of the lysates was determined using a Bradford assay and equal mg amounts of each lysates were subsequently used for the immunoprecipitation.  The lysates were pre-cleared for 1 h at 4°C with the IgG-NHS resin and the supernatant then transferred to the Abl-NHS resin for another 3 h at 4°C. For each immunoprecipitation, 250 µl IgG resin 500 µl Abl resin were employed. The resin was washed with a total of 10 CV TAP buffer at 4°C and sequentially eluted with 5x 1 CV of 125 mM HCl.  Elution fractions were immediately neutralized with 1 M TEAB buffer in a 1:6 v/v ratio. The five elution fractions were analyzed for the presence of Bcr-Abl complexes by a-Abl immunoblotting and typically fraction 2 and 3 contained >80% of the total eluted Bcr-Abl complexes. Fractions E2 and E3 were thus pooled prior to mixing of the three individual immunoprecipitates of BaF3 parental, p210 and p185 with equal volumes and subsequently lyophilized.Samples were resuspended in 2% SDS (w/v), 50 mM Dithioerythritol (DTE) and digested with endoproteinase LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) using  the Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). Digested proteins were further desalted using C18 Stage Tip procedure and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were finally fractionated prior to LC-MS2 by Stage Tip strong cation exchange (SCX) protocol using volatile buffers LC MS/MS For LC MS/MS analysis, samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile , 0.1% Formic Acid (FA). Each pY enriched sample was injected in duplicates in order to maximize site quantifications between biological replicates. Peptides were trapped for 10 min on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo) 75µm x 2cm, C18, 3µm, 100Å precolumn and then separated on a 50 cm reversed phase column ( Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC (Thermo) 75µm x 50cm, C18, 2µm, 100Å ) over a 120 or 240 min gradient. Nano flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode where the 10 most intense ions with charge states >=2 were sequentially fragmented by High Collision Dissociation HCD using 27% Normalized collision Energy (NCE). Orbitrap MS survey scans resolution was set at 70’000 (at 200 m/z) and fragments were measured at 17’500 resolution

### Data Protocol
SILAC data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 against a database constituted of the Uniprot mouse database release 2015_04 (53217 entries) and the p210 Bcr-Abl sequence. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of seven amino acids were required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A cut-off was fixed at 1% FDR at the peptide and protein identification level.For the interactome database search carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Pyro-Glu (N-term E) were considered as variable modifications. Only phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) in the phosphoproteome data analysis were considered as variable modifications. SILAC quantifications was performed by Maxquant using the standard settings and with the requantification mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The two major isoforms of the oncogenic Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, p210 and p190, are expressed upon the Philadelphia chromosome translocation. p210 is the hallmark of chronic myelogenous leukemia, whereas p190 occurs in the majority of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Differences in protein interactions and activated signaling pathways that may be associated with the different diseases driven by p210 and p190 are unknown. We have performed a quantitative comparative proteomics study of p210 and p190. Strong differences in the interactome and tyrosine phosphoproteome were found and validated. Whereas the AP2 adaptor complex that regulates clathrin-mediated endocytosis interacts preferentially with p190, the phosphatase Sts1 is enriched with p210. Stronger activation of the Stat5 transcription factor and the Erk1/2 kinases is observed with p210, whereas Lyn kinase is activated by p190. Our findings provide a more coherent understanding of Bcr-Abl signaling, mechanisms of leukemic transformation, resulting disease pathobiology and responses to kinase inhibitors.

### Keywords
Bcr-abl tyrosine kinase, Interactome, Leukemia, Silac, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
PCF
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Hantschel
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


