### Accession
PXD022836

### Title
Comparative proteomics for identification of type I interferon response in primary human glioblastoma multiforme cells

### Description
Oncolytic virus therapy is a promising direction for cancer treatment. Numerous oncolytic virus strains are under development or examined in clinical trials, there are examples of FDA approved virus vaccines. Although evident progress exists, oncolytic viruses still suffer low efficiency and the mechanisms of their action remain poorly understood. Defects in antiviral mechanisms that include type I interferon (IFN) signaling, contribute to sensitivity of malignant cells to oncolytic viruses, however, this sensitivity significantly differs for different malignant cells. In this project, we present a collection of representative proteomics data for eight primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell cultures and one culture of normal astrocytes with established sensitivity to type I IFNs that comprehensively characterize the GBM cell responses to type I IFNs. Project consists of three parts: (1) label-free proteomics of primary GBM cultures on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; (2) label-free proteomics of primary GBM and normal astrocytes on Orbitrap QExactive HF; (3) label-based proteomics of wild type, IFIT3-deficient and PLSCR1-deficient DBTRG-05MG cells (ATCC) on Q-Exactive Plus.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended in 100 μL of lysis buffer and stirred for 60 min at 1000 rpm at room temperature. Lysis buffer contained 0.1 % w/v ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% v/v ACN. Lysis was performed by sonication for 5 minutes at 30% amplitude on ice (Bandelin Sonopuls HD2070, Berlin, Germany). The supernatant was collected after centrifugation. Total protein concentration was measured using Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Protein extracts were reduced in 10 mM DTT at 56ºC for 20 min and alkylated in 10 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min in dark. Then, samples were overnight digested at 37ºC using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA) added at the ratio of 1:50 w/w. Digestion was terminated by acetic acid (5% w/v). Samples were stirred (500 rpm) for 30 min at 45ºC followed by centrifugation. The supernatant was collected and  added to the 10 kDa filter unit (Millipore, USA), then centrifuged. After that, 100 μL of 50% formic acid was added to the filter unit and centrifuged again. Samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator and stored at −80ºC until further analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with UltiMate 3000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Loaded sample quantity was 1 μg per injection. Trap column μ-Precolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 300μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100Å) (Thermo Scientific), analytical С18 column (1.8 μm, 75μm i.d. x 300 mm, 100Å) home-packed with ReproSil ODS-3 2-μm sorbent (GL Sciences) were employed for separations. Column temperature was at room temperature or set to 50ºC. Mobile phases were: (A) 0.1% FA in water; (B) 95% ACN, 0.1% FA in water or (A) 0.1 v/v % FA in water; (B) 80 v/v % ACN, 0.1 v/v % FA in water. Pre-concentrated peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 5%B to 20%B for 105 min followed by a linear gradient to 32%B for 15 min at 270 nL/min flow rate. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed in data-dependent mode. Precursor ions were isolated in the m/z window of 0.7 Th followed by HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 30. Fragment ions were measured in the Orbitrap mass-analyzer with resolving power of 30,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were converted to mgf or mzML format using a command line tool msConvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml). Database search was performed using MSFragger (version MSFragger-20171106) or Identipy against the combined target-decoy database (db). The target db was SwissProt human (access date 18 June 2018); the decoy db was compiled by reversing the protein sequences from the target db. Search parameters were as follows: 10 ppm for precursor mass tolerance; 0.01 Da for fragment mass tolerance; maximum 2 missed cleavage sites; fixed carboxyamidomethyl-Cys. Settings for potential modifications were optimized based on the results of open search profiling within 200 Da precursor mass tolerance followed by MS/MS-based modification site assignment. Met oxidation (+15.9949 Da), peptide N-terminus formylation (+27.994915 Da) were set as potential modifications. Filtration to 1.0% protein false discovery rate, post-search validation, as well as NSAF calculation were performed using Scavager. Prior to statistical analysis of label-free data, protein abundances (NSAFs) were log-transformed and then normalized to eliminate global technical biases. Abundances of proteins which were not detected in some replicates were imputed by minimal NSAF observed in the respective replicate, using scaling factor either 10-3 or 1.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oncolytic viruses, Glioblastoma, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Interferone response

### Affiliations
NIBR
Laboratory of Physical and Chemical Methods for Structure Analysis, V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N.N. Semenov Federal Research Center for Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Elizaveta Solovyeva

### Lab Head
Dr Irina A Tarasova
Laboratory of Physical and Chemical Methods for Structure Analysis, V.L. Talrose Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics, N.N. Semenov Federal Research Center for Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia


