### Accession
PXD012018

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis glycoproteomic

### Description
Large scale characterization of the Mtb mannoprotein repertoire by MS based proteomic.

### Sample Protocol
M. tuberculosis (H37Rv) wild type and RV1002c complemented ΔRv1002c mutant [4] strains were grown aerobically at 37 °C as pellicle for up to 6 weeks on glycerol based Sauton medium M. tuberculosis culture filtrate (CF) protein extracts were obtained after cell harvesting by twice filtration of the culture mediums on 0.22µm membrane and concentration using Vivaspin 5k ultrafiltration devices (SartoriouStedim Biotech). Harvested cell pellets in suspension (1/1; v/v) in lysis buffer (pH=7.4; 50mM Tris-HCl, 5mM EDTA; 5mM DTT, 1% SDS, Sigma P8340 Protease inhibitor cocktail) were disrupted by bead beating using 0.1 mm glass beads (3/1:v/v, MerckEurolab, France) at maximum speed for 30s followed by 1 min cooling on ice (X 5 times). The homogenate was centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. Pellet was discarded and the supernatant was recovered as the “Cell lysate protein extract”. preparative gel electrophoresis for proteomics analysis were performed using 100 µg equivalent protein / lane on 12% hand-cast analytical SDS-polyacrylamide gels (0.75 or 1.5 mm thick, 8.3 × 7.3 cm) with a Mini-PROTEAN 3 electrophoresis system (Bio-Rad). Samples were run at a constant 20 mA for 1 h in 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 0.1% SDS and the gels were developed with InstantBlue (Expedeon) according manufacturer recommendation. Gel lane was cut into 17 homogenous slices and treated as described [4]. The peptides mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate3000 system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive mode . The peptides were loaded on a 300-μm inner diameter × 5-mm PepMap C18 precolumn (LC Packings, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After desalting for 5 min, peptides were separated on line on a 75-μm inner diameter × 15-cm C18 column (packed in-house with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3-μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were eluted using a 5–50% gradient of solvent B during 80 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300–2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The twenty most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear ion trap (LTQ). The normalized collision energy was set to 35% and activation times to 10 ms and 150 ms. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 s to limit repetitive selection of the same peptide.

### Data Protocol
The Mascot Daemon software (version 2.6, Matrix Science, London) was used to perform database searches, using the Extract_msn.exe macro provided with Xcalibur (version 2.0 SR2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peaklists. The following parameters were set for creation of the peaklists: parent ions in the mass range 400-4500, no grouping of MS/MS scans, threshold at 1000. A peaklist was created for each analyzed fraction (i.e. gel slice) and individual Mascot (version 2.6) searches were performed for each fraction. Data were searched against the TubercuList reference database (release 27; 4031 entries). The following list of variable modifications was used: carbamidomethylation of cysteines, propionamidation of cysteines, oxidation of methionine, mono-glycosylation (Hexose) of serine/threonine and di-glycosylation (2 Hexoses) of serine/threonine. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and the instrument setting was specified as “ESI-TRAP”. In order to calculate the False Discovery Rate (FDR), the search was performed using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Protein groups were validated based on this Mascot MudPIT score to obtain a FDR of 1% at the protein level: FDR = number of validated decoy hits / (number of validated target hits + number of validated decoy hits) x 100.

### Publication Abstract
To date, <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) remains the world's greatest infectious killer. The rise of multidrug-resistant strains stresses the need to identify new therapeutic targets to fight the epidemic. We previously demonstrated that bacterial protein-<i>O-</i>mannosylation is crucial for Mtb infectiousness, renewing the interest of the bacterial-secreted mannoproteins as potential drug-targetable virulence factors. The difficulty of inventorying the mannoprotein repertoire expressed by Mtb led us to design a stringent multi-step workflow for the reliable identification of glycosylated peptides by large-scale mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Applied to the differential analyses of glycoproteins secreted by the wild-type Mtb strain-and by its derived mutant invalidated for the protein-<i>O-</i>mannosylating enzyme PMTub-this approach led to the identification of not only most already known mannoproteins, but also of yet-unknown mannosylated proteins. In addition, analysis of the glycoproteome expressed by the isogenic recombinant Mtb strain overexpressing the PMTub gene revealed an unexpected mannosylation of proteins, with predicted or demonstrated functions in Mtb growth and interaction with the host cell. Since in parallel, a transient increased expression of the PMTub gene has been observed in the wild-type bacilli when infecting macrophages, our results strongly suggest that the Mtb mannoproteome may undergo adaptive regulation during infection of the host cells. Overall, our results provide deeper insights into the complexity of the repertoire of mannosylated proteins expressed by Mtb, and open the way to novel opportunities to search for still-unexploited potential therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Gel based shotgun proteomic, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mannoprotein, Neutral loss

### Affiliations
CNRS-IPBS Immunomodulation By Mycobacterial Lipids and Glycoconjugates 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse cedex 4
IPBS CNRS

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Mouton Barbosa

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Rivière
CNRS-IPBS Immunomodulation By Mycobacterial Lipids and Glycoconjugates 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse cedex 4


