### Accession
PXD033346

### Title
Structural basis for the c-di-AMP - dependent regulation of the stringent response by DarB

### Description
The bacterial second messenger c-di-AMP controls various cellular processes including potassium and osmolyte homeostasis. The c-di-AMP receptor protein DarB of Bacillus subtilis binds to the Rel protein and triggers the Rel-dependent stringent response. Here we report crystal structures of DarB in the ligand-free state and of DarB complexes with c-di-AMP, 3´3´-cGAMP and AMP. DarB consists of two CBS domains and forms a homo-dimer with a parallel, head-to-head assembly of the monomers. The DarB dimer binds two cyclic di-nucleotide molecules or two AMP molecules. Only one adenine of bound c-di-AMP is specifically recognized by DarB, while the second one protrudes out of the donut-shaped protein. This enables DarB to bind also 3´3´-cGAMP, as only the adenine fits to the active site, but not the guanine. In absence of c-di-AMP DarB binds to Rel and stimulates (p)ppGpp synthesis, whereas the presence of c-di-AMP abolishes the interaction. The DarB crystal structures reveal no conformational changes upon c-di-AMP binding, hence, the regulatory function of DarB on Rel must be controlled directly by the bound c-di-AMP. A structural model of the DarB-Rel complex was erived from in silico docking, validated with a mass spectrometric analysis of the chemically cross-linked DarB-Rel complex and mutagenesis studies. Based on the predicted complex structure a mechanism of stringent response regulation by c-di-AMP is suggested.

### Sample Protocol
The purified DarB-RelNTD complex was crosslinked with 2 mM BS3 for 2 hrs on ice. The crosslinking  reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl. Crosslinked proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with the ndoproteinase  trypsin in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 in the presence of 1 M urea at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was terminated with 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) and peptides were desalted on MicroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer’s instructions. Vacuum-dried  peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 30 % acetonitrile/0.1 % TFA. Cross-linked peptides were enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography (SuperdexPeptide 3.2/300 column, GE Healthcare). Fractions of 50 µl were collected. Early eluting fractions that contain crosslinked peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Cross-linked peptides were measured in technical duplicates on a QExactive HF Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated applying the following gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (FA, v/v), mobile phase B of 80 % ACN/0.08 % FA (v/v). The gradient started at 5 % B, increasing to 10, 15 or 20 % B within 3 min (according to fraction), followed by a continuous increase to 48 % B within 45 min, then keeping B constant at 90 % for 8 min. After each gradient the column was again equilibrated to 5 % B for 2 min. The flow rate was set to 300  nL/min. MS1 full scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an injection time (IT) of 50 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1×106. Dynamic exclusion (DE) was set to 30 s and only charge states between 3 and 8 were considered for fragmentation. MS2  spectra were acquired of the 20 most abundant precursor ions; the resolution was set to 30,000; the IT was set to 128 ms and the AGC target to 1×105. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 % NCE.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by pLink 2 (v. 2.3.9) for the identification of crosslinked peptides with the following parameters: BS3 was selected as crosslinker; global FDR was set to 5 % on spectrum level; the protein database contained the amino acid sequences of RelA and DarB.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial second messenger c-di-AMP controls essential cellular processes, including potassium and osmolyte homeostasis. This makes synthesizing enzymes and components involved in c-di-AMP signal transduction intriguing as potential targets for drug development. The c-di-AMP receptor protein DarB of Bacillus subtilis binds the Rel protein and triggers the Rel-dependent stringent response to stress conditions; however, the structural basis for this trigger is unclear. Here, we report crystal structures of DarB in the ligand-free state and of DarB complexed with c-di-AMP, 3'3'-cGAMP, and AMP. We show that DarB forms a homodimer with a parallel, head-to-head assembly of the monomers. We also confirm the DarB dimer binds two cyclic dinucleotide molecules or two AMP molecules; only one adenine of bound c-di-AMP is specifically recognized by DarB, while the second protrudes out of the donut-shaped protein. This enables DarB to bind also 3'3'-cGAMP, as only the adenine fits in the active site. In absence of c-di-AMP, DarB binds to Rel and stimulates (p)ppGpp synthesis, whereas the presence of c-di-AMP abolishes this interaction. Furthermore, the DarB crystal structures reveal no conformational changes upon c-di-AMP binding, leading us to conclude the regulatory function of DarB on Rel must be controlled directly by the bound c-di-AMP. We thus derived a structural model of the DarB-Rel complex via in silico docking, which was validated with mass spectrometric analysis of the chemically crosslinked DarB-Rel complex and mutagenesis studies. We suggest, based on the predicted complex structure, a mechanism of stringent response regulation by c-di-AMP.

### Keywords
Bs3, Cx-ms, Darb

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Goettingen Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Goettingen

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Goettingen Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Goettingen


