### Accession
PXD047467

### Title
Tuina reverses capsule fibrosis in Frozen Shoulder as indicated via protemocis

### Description
Frozen shoulder (FS) is a common disorder often treated with Tuina, but the mechanisms involved remain unclear. We employed proteomics to investigate the mechanisms associated with the treatment of capsule fibrosis in FS rats. We used a method composed of three weeks of cast immobilization to establish a model of FS. We then administered Tuina once daily for 14 days, identified differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) using proteomics. Then we used bioinformatics methods to study the mechanism of tuina therapy

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded with liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics).  The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s

### Data Protocol
1.Annotation Methods 1.1 GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) analysis is a bioinformatics analysis method that can organically link the various information of genes and gene products (such as proteins) to provide statistical information. In proteomics projects, GO mainly has the following uses: 1. As a database of various information of proteins and genes; 2. Providing various information of proteins and genes and classifying proteins and genes according to the information; 3. As A tool that provides the most comprehensive annotation and classification services for all proteins in the project. GO analysis mainly includes three aspects: 1. Cellular Component: Refers to the specific component of the cell. In the GO system, it should the component of the larger element of the cell. For example, some cell structures in anatomy.(rough endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, etc.), or a series of gene products, such as the basic structure of some complex components (ribosomes, protein dimers, etc.); 2. Molecular Function: Mainly describe the chemical activity of the molecule, such as the catalytic activity or binding activity at the molecular level; 3. Biological Process: A series of elements in the body executed a specific function in order, which is called the biological process. GO annotation is to annotate and analyze the identified proteins with eggnog-mapper software (v2.0). The software is based on the EggNOG database. The latest version is the 5th edition, covering 5,090 organisms (477 eukaryotes, 4445 representative bacteria and 168 archaebacteria) and 2502 virus genome-wide coding protein sequences. Extracting the GO ID from the results of each protein note, and then classified the protein according to Cellular Component, Molecular Function and Biological Process. 1.2 KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) can integrate the information known at present, such as pathways and related complexes (Pathway database), genes and gene products (Gene database), biological complexes and related reactions (Compound and Reaction database). The KEGG pathway mainly includes: metabolism, genetic information processing, environmental information processing, cellular processes, human diseases, drug development, and the like. We annotated the protein pathways based on the KEGG pathway database, and performed BLAST alignments (blastp, evalue≤1e-4) of the identified proteins. For the BLAST alignment results of each sequence, the alignment with the highest score (score) was selected to annotate. 2Functional Enrichment 2.1 Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis  GO annotations of proteins are divided into three broad categories: Biological Process, Cellular Component, and Molecular Function. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of GO enrichment of differentially expressed proteins (using the identified protein as the background), and P value <0.05 were considered significant. 2.2 Enrichment of KEGG pathway analysis Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used for KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of KEGG pathway enrichment of differentially expressed proteins (using the identified protein as the background) , and P value <0.05 were considered significant. 2.3 Enrichment of protein domain analysis Pfam database was used for protein domain enrichment analysis. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of protein domain enrichment of differentially expressed proteins with the identified protein as the background, and P value <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Frozen shoulder (FS) is a common disorder often treated with Tuina, but the mechanisms involved remain unclear. We employed proteomics and phosphoproteomics to investigate the mechanisms associated with the treatment of capsule fibrosis in FS rats. We used a method composed of three weeks of cast immobilization to establish a model of FS. We then administered Tuina once daily for 14&#xa0;days, evaluated glenohumeral range of motion (ROM), assessed histological changes, and identified differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) using proteomics and phosphoproteomics. This study demonstrated that Tuina could improve glenohumeral ROM and reserve capsule fibrosis in FS rats. Proteomics revealed proteins regulated by Tuina belonging to the PI3K-AKT and ECM receptor interaction signaling pathways. Phosphoproteomics detected differentially phosphorylated proteins regulated by Tuina to be enriched in the MAPK signaling pathway. The combination of proteomics and phosphoproteomics for Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network analysis revealed that the phosphorylation of Myh3 and Srsf1 with a node degree larger than the average degree were considered the central regulatory protein modulated by Tuina to reverse capsule fibrosis. Thbs1, Vtn, and Tenascin-W were significantly enriched in PI3K-AKT and ECM receptor interaction signaling pathways and highly expressed in model rats. Tuina resulted in reduced expression of these proteins. Our findings demonstrated some of mechanisms behind the reversal of FS capsule fibrosis following Tuina, a scientific medical therapy for FS patients.

### Keywords
Frozen shoulder; tuina; proteomics; capsule; fibrosis; rat

### Affiliations
Shandong university of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Yingjie Qiao

### Lab Head
Dr Yingjie Qiao
Shandong university of Traditional Chinese Medicine


