### Accession
PXD026281

### Title
Mapping of phosphorylation sites on Sgk3 by LC-MS/MS

### Description
The phosphorylation profile of Sgk3 protein expressed either in Sf9 insect cells or HEK 293T human cells was assessed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal GST-tagged Sgk3 was expressed in Sf9 insect cells and purified by affinity chromatography using glutathione-sepharose 4B beads under stringent phosphatase inhibition regime. The GST tag was cleaved off with TEV protease and untagged Sgk3 was further purified by anion exchange chromatography followed by size exclusion chromatography. For mammalian expression the GST-tagged Sgk3 was expressed in transiently transfected HEK 293T cells and purified by affinity chromatography and anion-exchange chromatography as described above. Purity of protein preparations was confirmed by intact mass spectrometry. For phosphomapping the reduced protein was denatured in 4 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The sample was diluted with 50 mM ABC down to 0.5 M urea and then digested overnight using sequencing-grade endoproteinase GluC (Roche) at 25 °C. Protease-protein ratio was 1:30. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% and the peptides were desalted using custom-made C18 stagetips. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, both Dionex-Thermo Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% FA acid; solvent A: 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 60 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans were obtained in a scan range of 375–1500 m/z, at a resolution of 60000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16, http://www.maxquant.org/) and searched against a custom database containing the sequences of the Sgk3 constructs, as well as all Spodoptera spp. protein sequences and the Bombyx mori reference proteome respectively the human proteome (all available on Uniprot -www.uniprot.org) plus the sequences of common contaminants. The search was performed C-terminal cleavage to glutamate and aspartate allowing 4 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications—all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at a false discovery rate of 5% at the peptide and 1% at the protein level. Spectra assigned to phosphorylated Sgk3 peptides were validated manually.

### Publication Abstract
Serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 3 (Sgk3) is a serine/threonine protein kinase activated by the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) downstream of growth factor signaling via class I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling and by class III PI3K/Vps34-mediated PI3P production on endosomes. Upregulation of Sgk3 activity has recently been linked to a number of human cancers; however, the precise mechanism of activation of Sgk3 is unknown. Here, we use a wide range of cell biological, biochemical, and biophysical techniques, including hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, to investigate the mechanism of activation of Sgk3 by PI3P. We show that Sgk3 is regulated by a combination of phosphorylation and allosteric activation. We demonstrate that binding of Sgk3 to PI3P via its regulatory phox homology (PX) domain induces large conformational changes in Sgk3 associated with its activation and that the PI3P-binding pocket of the PX domain of Sgk3 is sequestered in its inactive conformation. Finally, we reconstitute Sgk3 activation via Vps34-mediated PI3P synthesis on phosphatidylinositol liposomes in&#xa0;vitro. In addition to identifying the mechanism of Sgk3 activation by PI3P, our findings open up potential therapeutic avenues in allosteric inhibitor development to target Sgk3 in cancer.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hydrophobic motif, Sgk3, Turn motif, Activation loop

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A. Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria


