### Accession
PXD011292

### Title
Alteration of Proteomes in First-generation Cultures of Bacillus pumilus Spores Exposed to Outer Space

### Description
Bacillus pumilus SAFR-032 was originally isolated from the Jet Propulsion Lab Spacecraft Assembly Facility and thoroughly characterized for its enhanced resistance to UV irradiation and oxidative stress. This unusual resistance of SAFR-032 is of particular concern in the context of planetary protection and calls for development of novel disinfection techniques to prevent extraterrestrial contamination. Previously, spores of SAFR-032 were exposed for 18 months to a variety of space conditions on board the International Space Station to investigate its resistance to Mars conditions and space travel. Here, proteomic characterization of vegetative SAFR-032 cells from space-surviving spores is presented in comparison to a ground control. Vegetative cells of the first passage were processed and subjected to quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tags. Approximately 60% of all proteins encoded by SAFR-032 were identified and 301 proteins were differentially expressed among the strains. The functional analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed the downregulation of proteins related to carbohydrate transport/metabolism and energy production/conversion, which was validated by enzymatic assays. The same space-surviving strains showed upregulation of proteins related to competitive growth and stress response. Observed protein profiles provide insights into the possible molecular mechanisms of B. pumilus SAFR-032 to adapt and resist extreme extraterrestrial environments.

### Sample Protocol
Five B. pumilus SAFR-032 strains, ground control, UV-Space (56T2), UV-Mars (183T1), Dark-Space (40T5), and Dark-Mars (168T5) were cultured under aerobic conditions in trypticase soy broth medium for 48 hours. About 1 g of cell pellets were lysed with the buffer consisted of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 1:100 Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. 200 µg proteins from each sample were TCA precipitated, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin/LysC. The digested peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTsixplex) and fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. The resulting fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph, a 75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trapping column, and a 75 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, and an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT searching engines against a Bacillus pumilus SAFR-032 database from NCBI containing 3601 sequences.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bacillus pumilus</i> SAFR-032 was originally isolated from the Jet Propulsion Lab Spacecraft Assembly Facility and thoroughly characterized for its enhanced resistance to UV irradiation and oxidative stress. This unusual resistance of SAFR-032 is of particular concern in the context of planetary protection and calls for development of novel disinfection techniques to prevent extraterrestrial contamination. Previously, spores of SAFR-032 were exposed for 18&#x2009;months to a variety of space conditions on board the International Space Station to investigate their resistance to Mars-like conditions and space travel. Here, proteomic characterization of vegetative SAFR-032 cells from space-surviving spores is presented in comparison to a ground control. Vegetative cells of the first passage were processed and subjected to quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tags. Approximately 60% of all proteins encoded by SAFR-032 were identified, and 301 proteins were differentially expressed among the strains. We found that proteins predicted to be involved in carbohydrate transport/metabolism and energy production/conversion had lower abundance than those of the ground control. For three proteins, we showed that the expected metabolic activities were decreased, as expected with direct enzymatic assays. This was consistent with a decrease of ATP production in the space-surviving strains. The same space-surviving strains showed increased abundance of proteins related to survival, growth advantage, and stress response. Such alterations in the proteomes provide insights into possible molecular mechanisms of <i>B. pumilus</i> SAFR-032 to adapt to and resist extreme extraterrestrial environments.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Spore-forming bacteria are well known for their resistance to harsh environments and are of concern for spreading contamination to extraterrestrial bodies during future life detection missions. <i>Bacillus pumilus</i> has been regularly isolated from spacecraft-associated surfaces and exhibited unusual resistance to ultraviolet light and other sterilization techniques. A better understanding of the mechanisms of microbial survival and enhanced resistance is essential for developing novel disinfection protocols for the purpose of planetary protection. While genomic analyses did not reveal the unique characteristics that explain elevated UV resistance of space-exposed <i>B. pumilus</i>, the proteomics study presented here provided intriguing insight on key metabolic changes. The observed proteomics aberrations reveal a complex biological phenomenon that plays a role in bacterial survival and adaptation under long-term exposure to outer space. This adaptive ability of microorganisms needs to be considered by those tasked with eliminating forward contamination.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Uv resistance, Bacillus pumilus safr-032, Mars atmosphere, Space conditions

### Affiliations
City of Hope
Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope

### Submitter
Abby Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope


