### Accession
PXD001339

### Title
Huh-7 exosomes and HBV -  Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Exosome Protein Content Changes Induced by Hepatitis B Virus in Huh-7 Cells Using SILAC Labeling and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection could cause hepatitis, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV-mediated pathogenesis is only partially understood, but X protein (HBx) reportedly possesses oncogenic potential. Exosomes are small membrane vesicles with diverse functions released by various cells including hepatocytes, and HBV harnesses cellular exosome biogenesis and export machineries for virion morphogenesis and secretion. Therefore, HBV infection might cause changes in exosome contents with functional implications for both virus and host. In this project, exosome protein content changes induced by HBV and HBx were quantitatively analyzed by SILAC/LC-MS/MS. Exosomes prepared from SILAC-labeled hepatoma cell line Huh-7 transfected with HBx, wildtype or HBx-null HBV replicon plasmids were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Huh-7 cells were  labeled using 'heavy' (R10K8) or 'medium' (R6K4) weight isotope amino acids. Unlabeled and labeled cells were then transfected with empty vector pCMV, HBx expression plasmid pCMV-HA-HBx, and replicon plasmids harboring terminally redundant wild type (pCMV-HBV1.1) or HBx-null mutant HBV [pCMV-HBV1.1(X-)] genomes. To study the effects of HBx over-expression, exosomes from vector transfected unlabeled 'light' cells and pCMV-HA-HBx transfected R10K8-labeled 'heavy' cells were combined at 1:1 ratio (Set1). To study the effects of expression and replication of wildtype and HBx-null HBV, exosomes from vector transfected unlabeled 'light' cells, pCMV-HBV1.1 transfected R10K8-labeled 'heavy' cells and pCMV-HBV1.1(X-) transfected R6K4-labeled 'medium' cells were combined at 1:1:1 ratio (Set2). The combined exosome samples were then processed using two slightly different methods: in Method I, samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE first and gel slices were prepared after silver staining; in Method II, samples were embedded into a small volume of SDS-PAGE separation gel during preparation and the gels were directly used in subsequent steps without electrophoresis. Gels were then processed through the conventional in-gel trypsin digestion/LC-MS/MS pipeline.

### Data Protocol
Set1 and Set2 samples from two independent transfection replications were processed using both Method I and Method II and analyzed by LC-MS/MS following in-gel trypsin digestion. Raw data generated by MS were then passed to MaxQuant for protein identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection could cause hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV-mediated pathogenesis is only partially understood, but X protein (HBx) reportedly possesses oncogenic potential. Exosomes are small membrane vesicles with diverse functions released by various cells including hepatocytes, and HBV harnesses cellular exosome biogenesis and export machineries for virion morphogenesis and secretion. Therefore, HBV infection might cause changes in exosome contents with functional implications for both virus and host. In this work, exosome protein content changes induced by HBV and HBx were quantitatively analyzed by SILAC/LC-MS/MS. Exosomes prepared from SILAC-labeled hepatoma cell line Huh-7 transfected with HBx, wildtype, or HBx-null HBV replicon plasmids were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Systematic analyses of MS data and confirmatory immunoblotting showed that HBx overexpression and HBV, with or without HBx, replication in Huh-7 cells indeed caused marked and specific changes in exosome protein contents. Furthermore, specific changes in protein contents were also detected in exosomes purified from HBV-infected patients' sera compared with control sera negative for HBV markers. These results illustrate a new aspect of interactions between HBV and the host and provide the foundation for future research into roles played by exosomes in HBV infection and pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus, Exosome, Hbx

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/MOH) and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University
Fudan University

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Youhua Xie
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/MOH) and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University


