### Accession
PXD013746

### Title
Transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic profiling and metabolite analyses reveal the mechanism of NaHCO3-induced organic acid secretion in grapevine roots

### Description
Organic acid secretion is a widespread physiological response of plants to alkalinity. However, the features of alkali-induced secretion of organic acid and the underlying mechanism are poorly understood. Herein, it was indicated that oxalate was the main organic acid synthesized and secreted in vine roots, and acetate synthesis and malate secretion were also promoted under NaHCO3 stress. NaHCO3 stress enhanced H+ efflux rate of vine roots, which was related to plasma membrane H+-ATPase activity. Transcriptomic profiling revealed that carbohydrate metabolism was the most significantly altered biological process under NaHCO3 stress; a total of seven genes related to organic acid metabolism were significantly altered, including two PEPCs and PEPCKs. Additionally, the expression levels of five ABC transporters, particularly ABCB19, as well as two malate transporter ALMT2s, were largely upregulated by NaHCO3 stress. Phosphoproteomic profiling demonstrated that the altered phosphoproteins were primarily related to binding, catalytic activity and transporter activity in light of their molecular functions. The phosphorylation levels of PEPC3, two plasma membrane H+-ATPases 4 and ABC transporters ABCB19 and PDR12 were significantly increased. Additionally, the inhibition of ethylene synthesis and perception completely blocked NaHCO3-induced organic acid secretion, while the inhibition of IAA synthesis reduced NaHCO3-induced organic acid secretion. Collectively, our results demonstrated oxalate as the main organic acid under alkali stress and the necessity of ethylene in mediating organic acid secretion, as well as further identified several candidate genes and phosphoproteins responsible for organic acid metabolism and secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Organic acid determination of grapevine roots and root exudate solutions  Five-week-old grapevine in vitro shoot cultures were transferred to glass bottles with a 10-cm height and 5-cm diameter. The vines were treated with 50 ml water (pH 7.0) as control, 75 mM NaCl (pH 7.0) and NaHCO3 (pH 8.7). Each glass bottle was provided with sufficient oxygen with an oxygen machine (SenSen Group, China). The vines were grown in a controlled-environment growth cabinet with 25 ℃ temperature, 16-h photoperiod and 600 µmol/m2/s of light intensity. At different time points after different treatments, the roots were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for organic acid extraction; the treatment solution was collected and evaporated to dryness with a rotary evaporator, and the residue was dissolved in 1 ml double distilled water; the filtrate which passed through a 0.45-µm filter was used for organic acid determination. Extraction of organic acids in roots and their determination for root extract and treatment solutions were performed using a capillary electrophoresis system (Beckman P/ACE, Palo Alto, CA) as described in our previous study (19).  H+ secretion test H+ secretion was detected according to the methods of Yan et al. (2002)(20). Five-week-old vine in vitro shoot cultures of A15 were treated with water (pH 7.0), 75 mM NaCl (pH 7.0), 75 mM NaHCO3 (pH 8.7), and 75 mM NaHCO3 plus 0.1 mM Na3VO3 for 6 h. Then, the roots were rinsed, carefully spread in Petri dishes and covered by the solid medium (pH 5.8) which consisted of 0.006% bromocresol purple (pH indicator, discoloration range of 5.2-6.8), 1 mmol l-1 CaSO4, 2.5 mmol l-1 K2SO4 and 0.8% agar. The vines were grown in a controlled-environment growth cabinet with 25℃ temperature and continuous illumination with 400 µmol/m2/s of light intensity. Measurement of H+-ATPase activity and H+ flux in roots Plant materials were the same as in the organic acid determination Section. Extraction of plasma membrane (PM) protein and activity determinations of PM H+-ATPase of the root tips were conducted according to the method of Yan et al. (2002)(20). The activity of H+-ATPase was determined by the Pi amount after 30 min of reaction in 0.5 ml of 30 mM BTP/MES buffer (pH 6.5), 5 mM MgSO4, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM Na2MoO4, 1 mM NaN3, 5 mM ATP, and Brij 58 (0.02% w/v).The reaction was initiated by adding 5 mg of membrane protein and stopped with 1 ml of stopping reagent (2% H2SO4, 5% SDS, and 0.7% (NH4)2MoO4) followed immediately by 50 µl ascorbic acid (10% w/v). The color development was completed after 30 min. The absorbance at 820 nm was measured using a spectrophotometer.    Root H+ fluxes were measured using the scanning ion-selective electrode technique with a Noninvasive Microtest Technology System (NMT, Xuyue Beijing Sci. & Tech. Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The 10-mm long roots from the root apex were equilibrated in the measurement solution for 20 min, then immobilized in the measurement chamber in 5 ml of fresh measuring solution. Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale Four the transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic profiling three biological replicates were generated for the control and NaHCO3 treatment. Unigenes that were differentially expressed between two samples were screened using false discovery rate <0.05 and absolute log2 (fold change) ≥1 as the threshold. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Vitis vinifera proteome concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidations on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. RNA-Seq and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) Total RNA of 10-mm-long grapevine roots from the apex was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and mRNA was isolated using poly-T oligo attached magnetic beads. The transcriptome sequencing and analysis were conducted by OE Biotech Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Sequencing libraries, constructed using NEBNext® UltraTM RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (#7530L, NEB, United States), were sequenced on an Illumina Hiseq 4000 platform, and 150-bp paired-end reads were generated. Clean reads were assembled into transcripts using Cufflinks referencing the grape genome (http://genomes.cribi.unipd.it/grape/). The unigene expression levels were quantified using reads per fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (RPKM).  qRT-PCR was performed using SYBR Green MasterMix (SYBR Premix EX Taq TM, Dalian, China) on a BIO-RAD iQ5 (Hercules, CA, United States) instrument, and the primers were listed in Table S1.

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide and phosphoprotein identification and quantification    Proteins from grapevines were extracted and quantified with the BCA kit (Beyotime, Beijing, China). After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB (Sigma) and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Torrance, CA, USA). The tryptic peptides were then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 µM particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). The phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC microspheres, and they were eluted from IMAC microspheres through adding elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH. The solution containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis in our research is supported by Jingjie PTM BioLabs (Hangzhou, China). IAA extraction and determination Extractions of IAA were performed according to our previous study (21). IAA was determined using an LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS instrument. Ten microliters of the extract was injected into a Thermo Scientific Hypersil Gold column (50 × 2.1 mm, 1.9 μm) in a Scientific Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA). The mobile phases for HPLC were 0.5% acetic acid in water (A) and methanol (B). The flow rate was set to be 1.0 ml min−1. The two mobile phases were used in the gradient mode under the following times/concentrations (min/%) of B: 0.0/20, 0.5/20, 2.5/90, 3.5/90,3.6/20, and 5.0/20. Detection and quantification were performed using a TSQ Quantum Access MAX system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA). IAA was detected in the ESI negative mode by selected reaction monitoring with the following parameters: parent mass by charge (m/z) of 263.1; daughter mass by charge (m/z) of 153.0; collision energy of 14 eV. Determination of ethylene production rate The ethylene production rate was measured using a GC-9A gas chromatograph (Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a GDX-502 column and a flame ionization detector. The vine roots were enclosed in a 5-mL centrifuge tube with sealing film and incubated at 25℃ for 3 h. Five milliliters of the headspace gas was withdrawn from each tube through the septum stopper using a gas-tight syringe and assayed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alkali stress, Transcriptome, Grapevine, Organic acid secretion, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Fruit & Vegetable Quality and Efficient Production, College of Horticulture Science and Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai-An, Shandong 271018, China

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxin Yao
State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Fruit & Vegetable Quality and Efficient Production, College of Horticulture Science and Engineering, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai-An, Shandong 271018, China


