### Accession
PXD040175

### Title
Clinical and pulmonary function analysis in long-COVID revealed that long-term pulmonary dysfunction is associated with vascular inflammation pathways and metabolic syndrome

### Description
Several studies have reported diverse and prolonged symptoms after COVID-19; however, how long-term pulmonary dysfunction (L-TPD) post-COVID-19 is manifested, which variables support it, and which are the concomitant consequences remain unknown. In this study patients with L-TPD were identified according to their computer-tomography and diffusing capacity-for-carbon-monoxide evaluations at 4-month post-infection. Regarding the acute phase, L-TPD was favored in elderly patients with comorbidities, supported by pathways such as cardiac dysfunction and chemotaxis of phagocytes. At 4-months post-infection, L-TPD patients exhibited a restrictive lung condition favored by CXCL9, platelets and an inhibited FCgamma-receptor-mediated-phagocytosis due to reduced CD16 expression in their monocytes, suggesting that phagocytosis of virus-antibody immune complexes was compromised in this group. Finally, one-year post infection, patients with L-TPD worsened metabolic syndrome and augmented body mass index in comparison with other patient groups. Overall, our data suggest that COVID-19 survivors required a personalized follow-up and adequate intervention to reduce long-term sequelae and the appearance of further metabolic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The serum proteins were depleted with HU-14 Protein Depletion Spin Columns (Agilent, USA). 800 ug of serum native proteins were added per column, following the protocol suggested by the manufacturer. The depleted proteins were subjected to precipitation using 5:1 v/v cold acetone 100% v/v and incubated overnight at -20°C, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000 xg for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed 3 times with acetone at 90% v/v, later, the proteins were dried in a rotary concentrator at 4°C, and finally they were resuspended in 8 M urea with 25mM of ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. The proteins were reduced using a final concentration of 20mM DTT for one hour, then they were alkylated incubating for 1h with 20mM iodoacetamide in the dark, then the proteins were quantified using the Qubit protein quantification kit and 10 ug of proteins. Total proteins were diluted to 1 M urea using 25mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, then the proteins were digested with trypsin / LyC (Promega) in a 1:50 ratio overnight at 37°C. The peptides were cleaned using SepPack Vac C18 (Waters, USA) using the protocol suggested by the manufacturer, the eluted peptides were dried using a rotary concentrator at 4°C and resuspended in 2% ACN with 0.1% v/v Formic Acid (MERCK Germany) and quantified using DirectDetect (MERCK Milliport). The peptide fractionation for spectral library construction was performed through high pH reversed-phase fractionation on chromatograph ÄKTA Avant25 (General Electric) coupled to a refrigerated fraction collection. Purified peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column BHE 2.1 cm x 5 cm (Waters) at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min at pH 10. The binary gradient started from 3% buffer B (90% ACN in 5 mM Ammonium Formate pH 10), followed by linear increases to first 40% B within 30 min, to 60% B within 15 min, and finally to 85% B within 5 min. Each sample was fractionated into 24 fractions in 400 µl volume intervals. The fractions were dried in a vacuum-centrifuge and reconstituted in water with 2% ACN and 0.1% FA and concatenated in 8 fractions. Each fraction was injected into a nanoELUTE nano liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics), Peptides (200 ng of digest) were separated within 60 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min on a reversed-phase column Aurora Series CSI (25 cm x 75µm i.d. C18 1.6 µm) (ionopticks Australia) with 50°C. Mobile phases A and B were water and acetonitrile with 0.1 vol% FA, respectively. The %B was linearly increased from 2 to 17% within 37min, followed by an increase to 25% B within 15 min and further to 35% within 8 min, followed by a washing step at 85% B and re-equilibration. All fractions were analyzed on a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TIMS-TOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. The MS was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) for the ion mobility-enhanced spectral library generation. We set the accumulation and ramp time was 100ms each and recorded mass spectra in the range from m/z 100–1700 in positive electrospray mode. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm2. The overall acquisition cycle of 1.16 s comprised one full TIMS-MS scan and 10 parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) MS/MS scans. To perform DIA runs, we define quadrupole isolation windows as a function of the TIMS scan time to achieve seamless and synchronous ramps for all applied voltages. We defined up to 16 windows for single 100 ms TIMS scans according to the m/z-ion mobility plane. During PASEF MSMS scanning, the collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs/cm2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was generated by FragPipe computational platform (version 15.0) with MSFragger (version 3.2), Philosopher (version 3.4.13) and EasyPQP (version 0.1.9). The default parameters were used except the precursor mass tolerance was set from -20 to 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. All data was searched against human proteome (UP000005640) from UniProt-Swissprot (downloaded on Feb. 15, 2021) and common contaminant proteins. Additionally, Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification; Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, -18.0106 Da on N-terminal Glutamic acid, -17.0265 Da on N-terminal Glutamine and Cysteine were set as variable modifications. A  maximum of two missed cleavages and three variable modifications per peptide were allowed. The final spectral library was filtered for an 1% FDR in FragPipe options. DIA-NN (version 1.7.15) was used to analyze the raw diaPASEF experiment against the serum-specific library, previously generated. The default settings were used, the precursors m/z range and fragment m/z range were restricted from 100 to 1,700. DIA-NN was operated with maximum mass accuracy of 13 ppm for both MS1 spectra. Quantification strategy was set to “Any LC (high accuracy)”. DIA-NN output was filtered at precursor q-value < 1% and global protein q-value < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulmonary dysfunction, Covid-19, Sequelae, Cardiac dysfunction, Chemokines

### Affiliations
MELISA Institute
Molecular and Translational Immunology Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Pharmacy Faculty, University of Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile.

### Submitter
Guillermo Nourdin

### Lab Head
Dr Estefanía Nova-Lamperti
Molecular and Translational Immunology Laboratory, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology, Pharmacy Faculty, University of Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile.


