### Accession
PXD010045

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of potato leaves infected withPhytophthora infestans provides insights into coordinated and altered protein expression during early and late disease stages in Solanum tuberosum (cv. Sarpo Mira)

### Description
Potato (Solanum tuberosum) late blight disease caused by Phytophthora. infestans is one of the most critical crop diseases in the world. We investigated the proteome of Solanum tubersoum (cv. Sarpo Mira) by quantitative proteomics after foliar application of encysted zoospore suspension from P. infestans isolate. Also, we examined changes in protein abundance of cv. Sarpo Mira in response to P. infestans infection at three key timepoints 0 hpi (L), 48 hpi (M) and 120 hpi (H), divided into early and late disease stages and analyzed the protein-protein interaction during the disease stages. In response to P. infestans oomycete infection, the iTRAQ comparative proteome survey revealed a total of 1229 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the pairwise comparison of disease stages, which included DEPs specific to early disease stage, DEPs specific to late disease stage and commonly shared DEPs. Over 80% of the change in protein abundance were up-regulated in the early stages of infection while about 61% of the DEPs in the later disease stage were down-regulated. The analysis of expression patterns, functional category, and enrichment tests highlighted significant coordination and enrichment of cell wall-associated defense response proteins in the early stages and cellular protein modification process as well as membrane protein complex formation in the late stages. Furthermore, strong protein interactions were observed in the late disease stage that might relate to disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
we examined changes in protein abundance of cv. Sarpo Mira in response to P. infestans infection at three key timepoints 0 hpi (L), 48 hpi (M) and 120 hpi (H), each timepiont has 12 samples，every 4 samples were pooled as a replicate,so each timepint has three replicates.For each plant tissue sample, a 1 g subsample was weighed and homogenized by grinding in liquid nitrogen. The powdered sample was moved quickly to a 50 mL pre-cooled test-tube and then 25 mL precooled acetone (−20 °C) containing 10 % (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added. After thorough mixing, the homogenate was precipitated for 2 h at −20 °C and then centrifuged for 30 min at 16000 g at 4 °C. The supernatant was carefully removed, and the pellet was then rinsed three times with 20 mL cold acetone (−20 °C), left at −20 °C for 30 min, and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The precipitation was collected and vacuum freeze-dried. A 250 mg sample of the freeze-dried pellets was weighed and placed in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. The pellets were dissolved in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, pH 8.0) and then boiled for 5 min. After boiling and vortex mixing for 30 s, the mixture was intermittently sonicated in an ice bath, with 5 s sonication followed by 10 s break, for 5 min at 100W. The mixture was then boiled again for 5 min, followed by 30 min centrifugation (12000g, 20℃). The supernatant was collected in a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, filtered through a 0.22-μm Millipore filter and collected as lysate. Protein concentration in the lysate was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay with a BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). The rest of the lysate was frozen at −80 °C until use.After protein degestion with Trypsin in FASP method,TMT labeling was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 100μL of dissolution buffer(TEAB). The label method of every sample (100μg) using TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set（Thermo Scientific）. The labeling solution reaction was then incubated at room temperature for 1.5h prior to further analysis. The ten labeled samples were pooled into one sample and dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature. The TMT-labeled peptides were subjected to High-pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation in 1100 Series HPLC Value System (Agilent) equipped with a Gemini-NX (Phenomenex, 00F-4453-E0) column (4.6x150mm, 3µm, 110Å)[3, 4]. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 10mM Ammonium acetate, pH 10.0 and Buffer B consisted of 10mM Ammonium acetate, 90% v/v ACN, pH 10.0. Both were filter sterilized. The following gradient was applied to perform separation: 100% Buffer A for40 min, 0-5% Buffer B for 3 min, 5-35% Buffer B for 30 min, 35-70% Buffer B for 10 min, 70-75% Buffer B for10min, 75-100% Buffer B for7min, 100% Buffer B for 15 min, and finally 100% Buffer A for 15min. The elution process was monitored by measuring absorbances at 214nm, and fractions were collected every 1.25min. The collected fractions (approximately 40) were finally combined into 10 pools. Each fraction was concentrated via vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40μL of 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at −80 ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The TMT-labeled samples were analyzed using Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC system connected to Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 1μg of each sample was loaded onto Thermo Scientific EASY column (two columns) using an autosampler at a flow rate of 200nL/min. The sequential separation of peptides on Thermo Scientific EASY trap column (100μm×2cm, 5μm, 100Å, C18) and analytical column (75μm×25 cm, 5μm, 100 Å, C18) was accomplished using a segmented 2h gradient from 5% to 28% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) for 90 min, followed by 28-35% Solvent B for 10 min，35-90% Solvent B for 2 min and then 90% Solvent B for 18 min. The column was re-equilibrated to its initial highly aqueous solvent composition before each analysis.The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and MS spectra were acquired over a range of 350-2000 m/z. The resolving powers of the MS scan and MS/MS scan at 100 m/z for the Orbitrap Elite were set as 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. The top sixteen most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window was 2m/z, and ions were fragmented through higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 35eV. The maximum ion injection times were set at 10ms for the survey scan and 100ms for the MS/MS scans, and the automatic gain control target values for full scan modes was set to 1e6 and for MS/MS was 5e4. The dynamic exclusion duration was 30s.The raw files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search for the fragmentation spectra was performed using the MASCOT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer against the uniprot_potato_55715_20171221.fasta. The following search parameters were used: monoisotopic mass, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages, TMT 10plex labeling and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, and peptide charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+, and the oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.1 Da for the fragment ions. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 1%. The relative quantitative analysis of the proteins in the samples based on the ratios of TMT reporter ions from all unique peptides representing each protein was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1). The relative peak intensities of the TMT reporter ions released in each of the MS/MS spectra were used. Then, the final ratios obtained from the relative protein quantifications were first normalized based on the median average protein quantification ratio，then the median of each sample channel and IS channel protein quantification ratio. Protein ratios represent the median of the unique peptides of the protein.

### Publication Abstract
In order to get a better understanding of protein association during <i>Solanum tuberosum</i> (cv. Sarpo Mira)&#x207b;<i>Phytophthora infestans</i> incompatible interaction, we investigated the proteome dynamics of cv. Sarpo Mira, after foliar application of zoospore suspension from <i>P. infestans</i> isolate, at three key time-points: zero hours post inoculation (hpi) (Control), 48 hpi (EI), and 120 hpi (LI); divided into early and late disease stages by the tandem mass tagging (TMT) method. A total of 1229 differentially-expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in cv. Sarpo Mira in a pairwise comparison of the two disease stages, including commonly shared DEPs, specific DEPs in early and late disease stages, respectively. Over 80% of the changes in protein abundance were up-regulated in the early stages of infection, whereas more DEPs (61%) were down-regulated in the later disease stage. Expression patterns, functional category, and enrichment tests highlighted significant coordination and enrichment of cell wall-associated defense response proteins during the early stage of infection. The late stage was characterized by a cellular protein modification process, membrane protein complex formation, and cell death induction. These results, together with phenotypic observations, provide further insight into the molecular mechanism of <i>P. infestans</i> resistance in potatos.

### Keywords
Potato, Sarpo mira, Phytophthora infestans, Late blight, Proteome, Early and late disease stages.

### Affiliations
Hu Bei province,enshi Acandemy of Agricutural sciences
China

### Submitter
qian zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Chunfang Xiao
Hu Bei province,enshi Acandemy of Agricutural sciences


