### Accession
PXD024967

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of urine from COVID-19 patients for detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigen and to study host response

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 infection has become a major public health burden and is known to affect many organs with the respiratory system being involved in a majority of cases. Here we undertook a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to test whether viral proteins could be detected in urine of patients with COVID-19. Urine samples from 39 patients positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR were analyzed by mass spectrometry. We detected peptides from the nucleocapsid protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in 12 out of 35 urine samples. A set of five samples each from positive and negative groups were further used to study the host response. In conclusion, we demonstrated the identification of viral antigens in urine using mass spectrometry which further suggests that urine could be a potential source of infection with implications in disease transmission and also the changes in protein composition in urine may provide insights in understanding the disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Urine sample from negative patients and COVID-19 patient were collected and were inactivated at 70°C for 30 minutes. These samples were then incubated with1 µg of anti-nucleocapsid antibody. After overnight incubation at 4 ºC, the samples were incubated with 50 µl of streptavidin beads for 30 minutes. The immunoprecipitated samples were then washed three times with PBS. After the last wash, the beads were left to dry and captured nucleocapsid protein was eluted with two successive additions of 25 µl of elution buffer (0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), 50% acetonitrile, 0.02% ZWITTERGENT® 3-16 Detergent. Eluted nucleocapsid protein was neutralized with 150 µl of Rapid Digest buffer.  The samples were then digested with 0.5 µg of trypsin at 70°C for 1 hour. The digested peptides were then cleaned and analyzed on high resolution Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer interfaced with nanoflow liquid chromatography system. Five positives and five negative samples were then digested. The digested peptides were Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelled as per the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was searched using Sequest and Mascot through Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) against a combined protein database of SARS-CoV-2 proteins, SARS-Co-V proteins, common coronaviruses (OC43, HKU1, NL63 and L229E) and UniProt human protein database including common MS contaminants. The search parameters included trypsin as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages: N-terminal acetylation and oxidation at methionine as variable modifications. TMT-labelled samples were searched using TMT 10-plex modification.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infection has become a major public health burden and affects many organs including lungs, kidneys, the liver, and the brain. Although the virus is readily detected and diagnosed using nasopharyngeal swabs by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), detection of its presence in body fluids is fraught with difficulties. A number of published studies have failed to detect viral RNA by RT-PCR methods in urine. Although microbial identification in clinical microbiology using mass spectrometry is undertaken after culture, here we undertook a mass spectrometry-based approach that employed an enrichment step to capture and detect SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein directly from urine of COVID-19 patients without any culture. We detected SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein-derived peptides from 13 out of 39 urine samples. Further, a subset of COVID-19 positive and COVID-19 negative urine samples validated by mass spectrometry were used for the quantitative proteomics analysis. Proteins with increased abundance in urine of SARS-CoV-2 positive individuals were enriched in the acute phase response, regulation of complement system, and immune response. Notably, a number of renal proteins such as podocin (NPHS2), an amino acid transporter (SLC36A2), and sodium/glucose cotransporter 5 (SLC5A10), which are intimately involved in normal kidney function, were decreased in the urine of COVID-19 patients. Overall, the detection of viral antigens in urine using mass spectrometry and alterations of the urinary proteome could provide insights into understanding the pathogenesis of COVID-19.

### Keywords
Host response, Covid-19 urine, Quantitative proteomics, Antigen detection

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA


