### Accession
PXD011844

### Title
Human osteoblasts quantitative proteomic analysis after cocultivation with endothelial cells

### Description
We previously described that the coculture of primary human osteoblasts (hOBs) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) improves the differentiation of both cell types, leading to the formation of functional blood vessels and enhanced bone regeneration. The objective of this study was to further delineate the multifaceted interactions between both cell types. To investigate the proteome of hOBs after cocultivation with HUVECs we used stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture

### Sample Protocol
hOBs and HUVECs were labeled with stable isotopes using ECGM basal SILAC with an addition of L‐Arginine‐10 and L‐Lysine‐8 beside 10% dialyzed FCS and supplements as other required nonlabeled amino acids. The cells were cultivated in monoculture for two weeks at 37°C, 5% CO2, in a humidified atmosphere and medium changes every 72hours. An equal number of hOBs and HUVECs were also cultivated in monoculture using medium containing no labeled amino acids supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS and EGM‐2 SingleQuots for the same amount of time and under similar conditions. The cells were then used for coculture experiments where respectively labeled hOBs and HUVECs were mixed at a ratio of 1:1 and nonlabeled hOBs were cultivated in monoculture as a control and vice versa. Labeled cell cultures were cultivated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 48 hours using the SILAC medium, for nonlabeled cell cultures we used the previously described ECGM medium and similar culture conditions. After this period of time, the cocultures underwent the same immunomagnetic separation method as previously mentioned. Nonlabeled monocultivated hOBs and labeled cocultivated hOBs and, respectively, labeled monocultivated hOBs and nonlabeled cocultivated hOBs were then resuspended using a lysis buffer (4% SDS and 100 mmol Tris‐HCl pH 7.2), and a Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit was used to determine the total amount of proteins in the supernatant after centrifugation. The probes were then mixed at a ratio of 1:1 in two samples in which high designed labeled proteins and low nonlabeled proteins (Sample 1 containing monoculti- vated hOBs low and cocultivated hOBs high and sample 2 containing monocultivated hOBs high and cocultivated hOBs low). Both samples were then run through a classic 4% to 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS‐PAGE) (after being reduced with Dithio- threitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide) for 45 minutes with 200V. After being stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain, the lanes were cut out of the gel and divided into 10 portions, subsequently each portion was cut into small 1 mm pieces and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped using 2% Trifluoroacetic acid and the peptides were isolated through centrifugation out of the gel pieces. The supernatants were concentrated using a SpeedVac and the samples were loaded into C‐18 columns after equilibration. For the measurement an LTQ Orbitrap XL was used.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant Version 1.2.1.2 and presented in Excel 2002 format. Search of all significant up- or downregulated proteins in both experiments. Quantitative analysis through ratio of peak intensities in the mass spectrum for peptide pairs.

### Publication Abstract
Coculturing of bone-forming and blood vessel-forming cells is a strategy aimed at increasing vascularity of implanted bone constructs in tissue-engineering applications. We previously described that the coculture of primary human osteoblasts (hOBs) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) improves the differentiation of both cell types, leading to the formation of functional blood vessels and enhanced bone regeneration. The objective of this study was to further delineate the multifaceted interactions between both cell types. To investigate the proteome of hOBs after cocultivation with HUVECs we used stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture, revealing 49 significantly upregulated, and 54 significantly downregulated proteins. Amongst the highest regulated proteins, we found the proteins important for osteoblast differentiation, cellular adhesion, and extracellular matrix function, notably: connective tissue growth factor, desmoplakin, galectin-3, and cyclin-dependent kinase 6. The findings were confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. We also investigated whether the mRNA transcripts correlate with the changes in protein levels by quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. In addition, the data was compared to our previous microarray analysis of hOB transcriptome. Taken together, this in-depth analysis delivers reliable data suggesting the importance of coculturing of hOBs and HUVECs in tissue engineering.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Quantitative proteomics, Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (silac), Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (huvecs), Primary human osteoblasts (hobs), Bone tissue engineering

### Affiliations
Chief, Section of Research and Tissue Engineering, Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Germany
University Medical Center Freiburg, Hand and Plastic Surgery

### Submitter
Oscar Winninger

### Lab Head
Dr Günter Finkenzeller
Chief, Section of Research and Tissue Engineering, Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Germany


