### Accession
PXD000397

### Title
MDA-MB-231 Breast Cancer Bone Tropic vs Parental Hypoxic Secretome Analysis

### Description
The project profiled the expression patterns in hypoxia induced secretomes between MDA-MB-231 parental and MDA-MB-231 Bone Tropic (BT) breast cancer cell lines which have been previously generated by Massague and colleagues (Kang et al. Cancer Cell 2003).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured for 24 hours in serum free DMEM without phenol red at either 21% oxygen (normoxia) or 1% oxygen (hypoxia) in a Hypoxystation (Don Whitley Scientific). Conditioned Media (CM) was collected and filtered before use. For SILAC experiments, tumour cells were grown in DMEM containing labelled isotopic amino acids, either light isotope (12C,14N Arginine; 12C,14N Lysine), or heavy isotope (13C,15N Arginine; 13C,15N Lysine). A minimum of 97-98% incorporation, with no detectable proline conversion was required. After collection, label-free and SILAC labelled CMs were filtered and reduced in volume using 10kDa MW cutoff filters. The remaining protein was dissolved in 6M Urea, 2M Thiourea and 10mM Hepes pH8. In SILAC labelled repeats, the 2 SILAC labels (R10/K8 and R0/K0) were mixed 1:1. In label-free repeats, the samples were left unmixed, but equal amounts of starting material was used for processing. Proteins were reduced in 1mM DTT, alkylated for 45 minutes using 5.5mM Chloroacetamide, and digested with 1:50 (enzyme : protein ratio) of MS grade trypsin overnight. Peptides were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 2%, and peptides were loaded on a 50cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using an Easy nanoLC 1000. Peptides were eluted over a 4hr gradient ranging from 6-60% of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid, and the Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was run in a DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3e6 or maximum injection time of 20ms and a scan range of 300-1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1e6 or maximum injection time of 60ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45s, and ions with a charge state < 2 or unknown were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant v1.5 and Perseus v1.4 and results analysed using scripts written in-house in Python, and statistically tested for significance using the quantile function in the R statistical framework. To ensure high confidence identifications and quantitation, a MaxQuant score of >50 and a minimum of 3 unique peptides per protein seen by MS/MS in all repeats were required. Initial analysis was undertaken using a label-free approach (2x repeats), and data subsequently validated in a standard- and reverse-label SILAC approach (2x repeats). Identified intracellular contaminants were removed and secreted proteins retained by using the cellular compartment annotations in Ensembl and PantherDB and Gene Ontology annotation enrichment for extracellular associated terms.

### Publication Abstract
The cancer secretome includes all of the macromolecules secreted by cells into their microenvironment. Cancer cell secretomes are significantly different to that of normal cells reflecting the changes that normal cells have undergone during their transition to malignancy. More importantly, cancer secretomes are known to be active mediators of both local and distant host cells and play an important role in the progression and dissemination of cancer. Here we have quantitatively profiled both the composition of breast cancer secretomes associated with osteotropism, and their modulation under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. We detect and quantify 162 secretome proteins across all conditions which show differential hypoxic induction and association with osteotropism. Mass Spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD000397 and the complete proteomic, bioinformatic and biological analyses are reported in Cox et al. (2015) [1].

### Keywords
Lysyl oxidase; breast cancer; hypoxia; secretome; pre-metastatic niche; bone

### Affiliations
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, Australia
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) University of Copenhagen Ole Maaløes Vej 5 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Thomas Cox

### Lab Head
Dr Janine T Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC) University of Copenhagen Ole Maaløes Vej 5 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


