### Accession
PXD012062

### Title
Metaproteomics of plastic biofilms in marine environments

### Description
To characterize the taxonomic and functional diversity of biofilms on plastics in marine environments, plastic pellets (PE and PS, ø 3mm) and wooden pellets (as organic control) were incubated at three stations: at the Baltic Sea coast in Heiligendamm (coast), in a dead branch of the river Warnow in Warnemünde (inlet), and in the Warnow estuary (estuary). After two weeks of incubation, all pellets were frozen for subsequent metagenome sequencing and metaproteomic analysis. Biofilm communities in the samples were compared on multiple levels: a) between the two plastic materials, b) between the individual incubation sites, and c) between the plastic materials and the wooden control. Using a semiquantitative approach, we established metaproteome profiles, which reflect the dominant taxonomic groups as well as abundant metabolic functions in the respective samples.

### Sample Protocol
HDPE (ExxonMobilTM HDPE HTA 108, density 0.961 g/cm3; ø 3mm), PS (BASF Polystyrole 143E, density 1.04 g/ cm3, ø 3mm), and wooden beads (Heinz XXX) were incubated in situ for 14 days (19./20. August - 03./04. September 2014), with three replicates per material. Incubators with a 500 µm pore-sized gauze were used to keep the beads inside while assuring sufficient flow-though. Recovered plastic and wooden beads were rinsed with sterile station water, shock frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until further processing. For protein extraction, PE, PS and wood beads were covered with 10 ml TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl , 1 mM EDTA) in 50 ml tubes. Cells attached to the beads were disrupted by sonication (step 1: five cycles of 45 s, 50% power, 30 s cooling on ice after each cycle). The complete aqueous fraction, now containing soluble proteins and cell debris, was removed from the beads and transferred to a new tube. Subsequently, beads were covered with TE buffer again to wash off remaining cell debris by vigorous agitation (step 2). The resultant aqueous fractions from both steps were combined and mixed with ice-cold acetone (1:1 volume ratio) for protein precipitation overnight. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation. The resulting protein pellets were vacuum-dried and dissolved in SDS solubilization buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 2% SDS, 12.5 mM DTT). Proteins were denatured at 90 °C for 10 min and protein concentrations in the samples were determined using the Pierce BCA assay. Approximately 40 µg of protein were loaded onto pre-cast 4-20% SDS mini gels (BioRad) and separated by 1D PAGE at 150 V for 50 min. Proteins in the gels were fixed (10% acetic acid, 40% ethanol, 30 min) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) overnight. Excess CBB was removed by washing in distilled water and protein-containing gel lanes were excised and cut into 20 equal pieces. Gel pieces were thoroughly destained with washing solution (200 mM NH4HCO3, 30% acetonitrile, 37 °C, 200 rpm) and briefly vacuum-dried. After overnight digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) at 37 °C, the resulting peptides were eluted from the gel pieces using a sonication bath (15 min). Peptide mixes were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted using C18 ZipTip columns (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were frozen at – 80 °C until LC-MS/MS analyis. Purified peptides were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). In-house self-packed nano-LC columns (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 material (Aeris PEPTIDE, 3.6 µm (phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany)) were used to perform LC with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% acetic acid (v/v)). Subsequently, the peptides were eluted by a non-linear binary gradient of 80 minutes from 5 % to 99 % solvent B (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v), 99.9 % ACN (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. After injection into the mass spectrometer, a full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap (m/z 300-1,700) with a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID). Unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected and the lock mass correction was enabled. Selected ions were fragmented with 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed in data-dependent MS/MS in the linear trap quadrupole (LTQ).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a total of nine sample type-specific databases was constructed, containing all proteins encoded in the individual metagenomes (PE1, PE2, PE4, PS1, PS2, PS4, L1, L2, L4), as well as common laboratory contaminants. All sequences were reversed and added as decoy sequences to allow for the determination of false discovery rates (FDR). MS/MS spectra were searched against these target-decoy databases using the Sorcerer Sequest software.  The results were filtered using the Scaffold framework (version 4.3.0 , http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/) using the following criteria: 1) 1% peptide FDR and 5% protein FDR, and 2) at least two unique peptides needed to be recorded for a protein or protein group to be identified. The fact that many protein sequences in our databases were truncated precluded the possibility to normalize spectral counts to protein size. We therefore abandoned the calculation of normalized spectral abundance factors (%NSAF), which are usually used to describe protein abundance in proteomics (Florens et al., 2006 ). For relative semi-quantitative analysis of the identified proteins or protein groups, we instead normalized spectral count values against the sum of all spectral counts in the respective sample (%SpC). Note that this approach does not take into account that bigger proteins have more peptides and may thus produce more spectral counts. Our %SpC values do therefore not reflect classical protein “abundance” values, but rather describe the percentage of proteinaceous biomass for the respective protein or protein group (Kleiner et al. 2017 ). %SpC values of three biological replicates were averaged. For proteins that were detected in only two out of three replicates, only these two %SpC values were averaged. Proteins that were detected in only one of the replicates are considered in the total identifications count, but were excluded from quantitative analysis, i.e., they are not included in %SpC calculations. For an overview of all samples and results files included in this PRIDE data set, please refer to the summary table given in Sample_types_overview_PXD012062_plastic_biofilms.pdf.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biofilms, Lc-msms, Metaproteome, Microplastics, Baltic sea

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


