### Accession
PXD022213

### Title
Murine Podocyte Membrane Proteomics

### Description
Podocytes are essential cells of the renal blood filter. They structurally compose the renal blood filter by interdigitating with neighboring podocytes by the means of a modified adherens junction, the slit membrane. In podocyte injury, loss of podocytes is a common feature. Podocyte loss could be mediated by the cleavage of podocyte cell adhesion molecules through the A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase 10 (ADAM10). Here we show that ADAM10 is highly abundant at the site of blood filtration, namely at podocyte foot processes. Podocyte-expressed ADAM10 is not required for the development of the renal filter but plays a major role in podocyte injury. Following antibody-mediated injury, ADAM10 is upregulated in humans and mice. ADAM10 activity results in the cleavage of cell-cell adhesion molecules. This cleavage paves the way for an activation of the injury related Wnt/-catenin signaling pathway and for podocyte loss. We therefore conclude that ADAM10-mediated ectodomain shedding of injury-related cadherins drives podocyte injury. As part of this project, we have analyzed the membrane proteome of murin podocytes to evaluate the abundance of membrane bound proteases.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane preparations were lysed in STET lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7.5). Lysate was incubated for 20 min on ice with intermediate vortexing and cleared from cellular debris by a centrifugation step at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. A protein amount of 15 µg per sample was subjected to proteolytic digestion with 0.3 µg LysC (Promega) and 0.15 µg trypsin (Promega) using the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) with 30 kDa Vivacon spin filters (Sartorius). Proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction with C18 tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. A data-dependent acquisition method was used. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400, AGC target: 3E+6). The 10 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000, isolation width: 2.0 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data was analysed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.6.1.0 (Cox et al., 2014). The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt including (download: January 17th 2018, 16954 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Podocytes, Kidney

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 D-81377 Munich Germany


