### Accession
PXD045662

### Title
Ubiquiton – an inducible, linkage-specific polyubiquitylation tool

### Description
Here we introduce a set of engineered ubiquitin protein ligases and matching ubiquitin acceptor tags for the rapid, inducible linear (M1-), K48-, or K63-linked polyubiquitylation of proteins in yeast and mammalian cells. By applying the so-called ‘Ubiquiton’ (Ubo) system to proteasomal targeting and the endocytic pathway, we validate this tool for soluble cytoplasmic and nuclear as well as chromatin-associated and integral membrane proteins and demonstrate how it can be used to control the localization and stability of its targets. SILAC-based and label-free quantitative proteomics experiments were performed to verify the linkages of the polyubiquitin chains produced on a model substrate, GFP, in yeast and to identify potential off-target effects of a transgenic E3 system in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiments in yeast were performed in triplicates in diploid lys1Δ cells expressing combinations of NUbo- and CUbo-tagged proteins [K48: NUbo-E3(48)-VSV with His6-CUbo-GFP or His6-CUbo(K48R)-GFP and overexpression of UBC7; K63: NUbo-E3(63)-VSV with His6-CUbo-GFP or His6-CUbo(K63R)-GFP and overexpression of UBC13 and MMS2]. Conditions were as follows: ‘light’ – without rapamycin-induced ubiquitylation; ‘medium’ – Ubo acceptor site mutants with rapamycin induced ubiquitylation; ‘heavy’ – functional Ubo with rapamycin-induced ubiquitylation. For each linkage, samples corresponding to ‘light’, ‘medium’, and ‘heavy’ labeled cells (100 OD600 units each) were pooled and subjected to denaturing Ni-NTA pulldown. For the M1-Ubiquiton in yeast, label-free experiments were performed in triplicate in diploid cells expressing myc-E3(1)-CUbo-VSV with NUbo-GFP-His6 or His7-NUbo-GFP. Samples were subjected separately to denaturing Ni-NTA pulldown. All samples were processed using the SP3 method and digested with trypsin. SILAC experiments in HEK 293T cells were performed in triplicate: for two replicates, Ubo-enzymes were transfected into ‘heavy’- and empty vector into ‘light’-labeled cells; for the third replicate, labels were swapped. Lysates from ‘light’ and ‘heavy’ labeled cells were mixed 1:1 (corresponding to 5 mg of protein each), and proteins were precipitated in acetone. Proteins were digested with trypsin and the resultant peptides were subjected to enrichment for Lys-ϵ-Gly-Gly (GlyGly)-modified peptides. All samples were measured by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 2.1.3.0). MS/MS mass spectra were searched using Andromeda search engine against a target-decoy database containing the forward and reverse protein sequences of UniProt S. cerevisiae (6,089 entries) or H. sapiens (101,761 entries) reference proteome release 2022_03, together with the protein sequences of the corresponding transgenic proteins and a default list of common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Search for GlyGly(K) sites was activated.

### Publication Abstract
The posttranslational modifier ubiquitin regulates most cellular processes. Its ability to form polymeric chains of distinct linkages is key to its diverse functionality. Yet, we still lack the experimental tools to induce linkage-specific polyubiquitylation of a protein of interest in cells. Here, we introduce a set of engineered ubiquitin protein ligases and matching ubiquitin acceptor tags for the rapid, inducible linear (M1-), K48-, or K63-linked polyubiquitylation of proteins in yeast and mammalian cells. By applying the so-called "Ubiquiton" system to proteasomal targeting and the endocytic pathway, we validate this tool for soluble cytoplasmic and nuclear as well as chromatin-associated and integral membrane proteins and demonstrate how it can be used to control the localization and stability of its targets. We expect that the Ubiquiton system will serve as a versatile, broadly applicable research tool to explore the signaling functions of polyubiquitin chains in many biological contexts.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitination, Yeast, E3 ligase, Linkage type

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Helle Ulrich
Institute of Molecular Biology, Mainz, Germany


