### Accession
PXD006435

### Title
Quantitative Profiling of N-linked Glycosylation Machinery in Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Asparagine-linked glycosylation is a common posttranslational protein modification regulating the structure, stability and function of many proteins. The N-linked glycosylation machinery involves enzymes responsible for the assembly of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO), which is then transferred to the asparagine residues on the polypeptides by the enzyme oligosaccharyltransferase (OST).  A major goal in the study of protein glycosylation is to establish quantitative methods for the analysis of site-specific extent of glycosylation. We developed a sensitive approach to examine glycosylation site occupancy in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by coupling stable isotope labelling (SILAC) approach to parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry (MS). We combined the method with genetic tools and validated the approach with the identification of novel glycosylation sites dependent on the Ost3p and Ost6p regulatory subunits of OST. Based on the observations that alternations in LLO substrate structure and OST subunits activity differentially alter the systemic output of OST, we conclude that sequon recognition is a direct property of the catalytic subunit Stt3p, whereas auxiliary subunits such as Ost3p and Ost6p extend the OST substrate range by modulating interfering pathways such as protein folding. In addition, our proteomics approach revealed a novel regulatory network that connects isoprenoid lipid biosynthesis and LLO substrate assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were prepared as described (39). In brief, yeast cells were lysed at 4°C using glass beads, and the microsomal fraction was pelleted by centrifugation (16000 x g; 20 min), resuspended in 0.1 M Na2CO3, 1 mM EDTA, pH 11.3 buffer and pelleted again. Samples were resuspended in SDS buffer (2% SDS (w/v), 50 mM DTT, 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 7.6) and processed using the filter assisted sample preparation protocol (40). Membrane proteins were digested first with endopeptidase LysC (20 µg/ml; Wako Pure Chemical, Richmond, VA) at room temperature for 16 h followed by digestion with trypsin (20 µg/ml; Promega) at 37°C for 4 h. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA)-based experiments in the discovery phase of PRM assay development, sample was enriched for glyco-peptides using SPE ZIC-HILIC (SeQuant) column and collected in a single fraction as described (41). For PRM experiments protein digestion was directly followed by digestion of N-glycans with endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase H (EndoH; 500 U; New England Biolabs) in sodium citrate buffer (50 mM, pH 5.5) at 37°C with agitation for 40 h. Peptides were desalted using Sep Pak C18 classic (Waters) and dried using speed vacuum. Desalted peptides were resuspended in ACN/H2O (3:97 (v/v)) with formic acid (FA; 0.1% (v/v)) and analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Membrane proteins were prepared as described (39). In brief, yeast cells were lysed at 4°C using glass beads, and the microsomal fraction was pelleted by centrifugation (16000 x g; 20 min), resuspended in 0.1 M Na2CO3, 1 mM EDTA, pH 11.3 buffer and pelleted again. Samples were resuspended in SDS buffer (2% SDS (w/v), 50 mM DTT, 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 7.6) and processed using the filter assisted sample preparation protocol (40). Membrane proteins were digested first with endopeptidase LysC (20 µg/ml; Wako Pure Chemical, Richmond, VA) at room temperature for 16 h followed by digestion with trypsin (20 µg/ml; Promega) at 37°C for 4 h. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA)-based experiments in the discovery phase of PRM assay development, sample was enriched for glyco-peptides using SPE ZIC-HILIC (SeQuant) column and collected in a single fraction as described (41). For PRM experiments protein digestion was directly followed by digestion of N-glycans with endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase H (EndoH; 500 U; New England Biolabs) in sodium citrate buffer (50 mM, pH 5.5) at 37°C with agitation for 40 h. Peptides were desalted using Sep Pak C18 classic (Waters) and dried using speed vacuum. Desalted peptides were resuspended in ACN/H2O (3:97 (v/v)) with formic acid (FA; 0.1% (v/v)) and analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS.score reported for some glyco-peptides is 0. Such sites were accepted given that they only contain one asparagine as possible glycosylation site (corresponding to known glycosylation motif Asn-X-Ser/Thr) (Supplementary Table 4).   The Mascot search results (dat. files) were imported into the Skyline software (v2.6.0) (44) and spectral libraries were built using the BiblioSpec algorithm (45). Additionally published spectral libraries (46) were used to populate the final PRM assays. For glyco-peptides where ion libraries could not be obtained at the time, fragment ions were manually selected based on MS2 spectra obtained directly from the mascot search results.  We have used the normalized retention time (iRT) concept described before to calculate iRT values of the target peptides obtained in the DDA-MS (Escher et al., 2012). The retention time of the target peptides was normalized and transformed into iRT values using the coordinates of the spiked iRT-C18 reference peptides from Biognosys AG, Zurich.

### Publication Abstract
Asparagine-linked glycosylation is a common posttranslational protein modification regulating the structure, stability and function of many proteins. The <i>N</i>-linked glycosylation machinery involves enzymes responsible for the assembly of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO), which is then transferred to the asparagine residues on the polypeptides by the enzyme oligosaccharyltransferase (OST). A major goal in the study of protein glycosylation is to establish quantitative methods for the analysis of site-specific extent of glycosylation. We developed a sensitive approach to examine glycosylation site occupancy in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> by coupling stable isotope labeling (SILAC) approach to parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry (MS). We combined the method with genetic tools and validated the approach with the identification of novel glycosylation sites dependent on the Ost3p and Ost6p regulatory subunits of OST. Based on the observations that alternations in LLO substrate structure and OST subunits activity differentially alter the systemic output of OST, we conclude that sequon recognition is a direct property of the catalytic subunit Stt3p, auxiliary subunits such as Ost3p and Ost6p extend the OST substrate range by modulating interfering pathways such as protein folding. In addition, our proteomics approach revealed a novel regulatory network that connects isoprenoid lipid biosynthesis and LLO substrate assembly.

### Keywords
Er (endoplasmatic reticulum) ost (oligosaccharyltransferase) glcnac (n-acetyl-glucosamine) llo (lipid-linked oligosaccharide) ms (mass spectrometry) prm (parallel reaction monitoring) silac (stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture)

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institut für Mikrobiologie ETH Zürich, HCI F 407 Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10 8093 Zurich Switzerland

### Submitter
Kristina Poljak

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Aebi
Institut für Mikrobiologie ETH Zürich, HCI F 407 Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10 8093 Zurich Switzerland


