### Accession
PXD045650

### Title
Quantitative profiling of proteome extracted from zebrafish embryos exposed to different concentrations of the fungicide difenoconazole against untreated control groups.

### Description
In the present study OMICs analysis was employed to investigate the early molecular responses of zebrafish embryos to exposure to the fungicide difenoconazole. Difenoconazole, a sterol biosynthesis inhibitor according to Fungicide Resistance Action Committee (FRAC) classification, may also induce adverse effects on non-target organisms inhabiting the environment. Early molecular responses in terms of transcriptome and proteome analysis were investigated and refined to select potentially substance specific biomarker candidates for early prediction of difenoconazole toxicity in zebrafish embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish embryos were exposed to difenoconazole (CAS  119446-68-3) according to OECD guidelines (OECD test No. 236). Fifteen embryos were exposed to two sublethal concentrations of difenoconazole, three biological replicates representing zebrafish embryos originating from three different mating tanks were exposed to each test concentration for 96 hours in addition to three untreated control groups as well. At the end of exposure time (96 hours), simultaneous RNA and protein extraction from 10 embryos was performed using a NucleoSpin RNA/Protein kit (Macherey-Nagel). The obtained protein pellets were then dissolved, digested and labelled with 6-plex TMT kit according to manufacturer’s description (ThermoFisherScientific). The obtained labelled peptides were quantified using Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were first trapped on ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap column (waters, Massachusetts, USA) for 3 mins at a flow rate of 5 µL/min, then separated using a 25 cm long ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 separation column (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) using two mobile phases (mobile A= 0.1 % FA in water, mobile B= 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN) linear gradient from 3 to 97 % B for 170 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ionization of the Eluted peptides at 1.8 kV and 275 ◦C capillary temperature was then conducted by electrospray (nanospray ion source, ThermoFisher Scientific).  The LC-MS/MS data were acquired in 375-1500 m/z range, using a resolving power of 70,000 at 200 m/z for the MS and 35,000 for MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC–MS/MS data were aligned to the reference proteome of zebrafish using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 software with false discovery rate of 1%. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was adjusted and the integration of fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites in the database search was applied. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as static modification, while the acetylation of protein N-terminal and the oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. The proteinGroup and evidence tables aquired from MaxQuant analysis were used to analyse protein differential expression using MSstatsTMT package (version 1.8.2) in R.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, we applied OMICs analysis to identify substance-specific biomarker candidates, which may act as early indicators for specific ecotoxic modes of actions (MoA). Zebrafish embryos were exposed to two sublethal concentrations of difenoconazole and metalaxyl according to a modified protocol of the OECD test guideline No. 236. At the end of exposure, total RNA and protein were extracted, followed by transcriptomics and proteomics analysis. The analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) revealed a positive exposure-response correlation in all test concentrations for both fungicides. Similarly, also a positive correlation between the obtained transcriptome and proteome data was observed, highlighting the robustness of our approach. From the detected DEGs, candidate biomarkers specific for difenoconazole (apoa1b, gatm, mylpfb and acta1b) and metalaxyl (lgals2b, abat, fabp1b.1 and myh9a) were selected, and their biological functions were discussed to assess the predictive potential.

### Keywords
Zebrafish embryos, Omics, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Fungicide

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular biology and Applied Ecology (IME) 
Department Ecotoxicogenomics, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Schmallenberg.

### Submitter
Fatma Marghany

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Steve Ayobahan
Department Ecotoxicogenomics, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Schmallenberg.


