### Accession
PXD006759

### Title
Phosphoproteome analysis of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells infected by Francisella tularensis – proteome dataset

### Description
Francisella tularensis is a highly infective Gram-negative bacterium, also known as the causative agent of tularemia. The disease is characterized by the delayed onset of the adaptive immune response which provides time for the bacterial replication. As an intracellular pathogen, Francisella proliferates mainly in the cytosol of host phagocytes, which are linkers between the innate and the adaptive immunity. In particular, dendritic cells (DCs) are known to be the most effective antigen-presenting cells and thus they are crucial for the induction of the adaptive response. However, Francisella is able to invade and to proliferate inside DCs while avoiding their effective activation and maturation.  The uploaded dataset relates to phosphoproteome analysis of DCs infected by virulent and attenuated Francisella strains (dataset identifier PXD005747) and provides data of DC proteome changes at 60 min p.i.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow-derived DCs were SILAC-labelled (Arg+6 and Lys+6) and 'light' cells were infected either by F. tularensis subsp. holarctica FSC200 strain or its attenuated mutant lacking dsbA gene and left for 10, 30 and 60 minutes. 'Heavy' cells were left as control/untreated groups. The whole experiment was done in biological triplicate with one label swap experiment (raw files containing 'LS' in name). Treated cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (containing NH4HCO3, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and phosphatase inhibitors) by placing the cell suspensions into boiling water bath for 5 min. Corresponding 'light' and 'heavy' isotope-labelled lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on the protein content. Proteins were reduced by dithiotreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide , and digested by trypsin (Promega) overnight. Digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA to precipitate SDC, which was removed by ethyl acetate extraction. Peptides were then desalted and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography on HPLC. Through the gradient elution window, 10 fractions were manually collected and fractions 1 and 2 were pooled with fractions 9 and 10, respectively. Each fraction was analyzed by reversed-phase nano LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano connected to Q-Exactive) employing DDA approach (Top12). MS spectra of 350-1650 m/z range were acquired at resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200). Only multiply charged precursors ions with minimal threshold intensity of 6×10^4 counts and not fragmented during previous 30 s were admitted for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Tandem mass spectra were acquired with following settings; resolution at 17,500, AGC target value at 1×10^5, maximum ion injection time at 100 ms, and normalized collision energy set to 27. Data acquisition was under control of Xcalibur software v3.0.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant ver. 1.5.2.8 coupled with Andromeda search engine was used for phosphosite identification and quantification. Data were searched against FASTA database consisting of reference proteome for Mus musculus (UP000000589; June 16, 2015; 53,245 sequences) and Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL database entry for Francisella tularensis subsp. holartica FSC200 strain (January 27, 2015; 1424 sequences), both downloaded from Uniprot site. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation of peptide identification was based on target-decoy approach using reverted search database (with swap of lysine and arginine with neighboring amino acid) as a decoy. Parameters of MaxQuant search were: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled); maximum of 2 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide z = 7; minimal length of peptide 7 amino acids, maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to 5. Trypsin with no cleavage restriction was set as a protease. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm, taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was 0.01 with separate FDR filtering for each modification set to 0.01. For peptide quantitation, Arg+6 [13C6] and Lys+6 [13C6] were set as labels in heavy channel (or in light channel for label-swap experiments to obtain inverted H/L ratios) with re-quantify function enabled. For protein quantitation, only protein groups with at least one unique or razor peptide having SILAC ratio and only those protein groups passing FDR filtering set to 0.01 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Dendritic cells (DCs) infected by <i>Francisella tularensis</i> are poorly activated and do not undergo classical maturation process. Although reasons of such unresponsiveness are not fully understood, their impact on the priming of immunity is well appreciated. Previous attempts to explain the behavior of <i>Francisella</i>-infected DCs were hypothesis-driven and focused on events at later stages of infection. Here, we took an alternative unbiased approach by applying methods of global phosphoproteomics to analyze the dynamics of cell signaling in primary DCs during the first hour of infection by <i>Francisella tularensis</i> Presented results show that the early response of DCs to <i>Francisella</i> occurs in phases and that ERK and p38 signaling modules induced at the later stage are differentially regulated by virulent and attenuated &#x394;<i>dsbA</i> strain. These findings imply that the temporal orchestration of host proinflammatory pathways represents the integral part of <i>Francisella</i> life-cycle inside hijacked DCs.

### Keywords
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells, Phosphoproteome, Mapk signaling, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defence, Trebesska 1575, 500 01 Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


