### Accession
PXD017463

### Title
Dynamic complexome profiling identifies impaired protein turnover in mouse CLPP-/-embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
We studied dynamics within mitochondrial complexes in MEFs from CLPP-/- and wildtype mice.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and pSILAC metabolic labeling in MEFs: Wild type (+/+) and CLPP deficient (-/-) MEFs were cultured till 100 % confluency in a complete DMEM medium (10% FBS, 4.5 g/L glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin). Cells were washed with a pre-warmed PBS and switched to the SILAC labeling medium [L-arginine / L-lysine free DMEM supplemented with 13C6,15N4-L-Arginine, 13C6,15N2-L-Lysine (Silantes), 10% dialyzed FBS, 4.5 g/L glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin). After 5 hours cells were washed with PBS and collected by scraping. Cells were homogenized using a pre-cooled homogenized with a rotating Teflon potter (Potter S, Sartorious, 40 strokes, 1200 rpm) in 83 mM sucrose, 3.3 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7, 0.3 mM EDTA, 1.7 mM 6-aminohexanoic acid. Homogenates were centrifuged for 5 min at 850 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation for 5 min at 10´000g. Blue native electrophoresis for pSILAC complexome profiling: Mitochondrial fraction from 400 µg mitochondria from MEFs were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% digitonin (Serva) and centrifuged for 20 min at 22000g. Supernatants were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Sample preparation for pSILAC complexome profiling: Each lane of a BN-PAGE gel was cut into 48 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% ACN and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 50 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for pSILAC complexome: For data analysis MaxQuant v1.6.0.1, Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 52538 entries, released in 2/2018. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as a fixed modification on cysteines. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. Heatmap of proteins containing light isotopes represents the abundance normalized to a maximum appearance in a BN-PAGE lane. Protein abundance of newly translated heavy isotopes was normalized to the maximum appearance of light labeled proteins and visualized as heatmap (See table sheet). Slice number of the maximum appearance of mouse mitochondrial complex III dimer (483272 Da), Complex IV (213172 Da), complex V (537939 Da), complex I (979577 Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing complex I, III dimer and one copy of complex IV (1676021 Da) was used for native mass calibration.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of the turnover of complex I (CI), the largest mitochondrial respiratory chain complex, remains enigmatic despite huge advancement in understanding its structure and the assembly. Here, we report that the NADH-oxidizing N-module of CI is turned over at a higher rate and largely independently of the rest of the complex by mitochondrial matrix protease ClpXP, which selectively removes and degrades damaged subunits. The observed mechanism seems to be a safeguard against the accumulation of dysfunctional CI arising from the inactivation of the N-module subunits due to attrition caused by its constant activity under physiological conditions. This CI salvage pathway maintains highly functional CI through a favorable mechanism that demands much lower energetic cost than de novo synthesis and reassembly of the entire CI. Our results also identify ClpXP activity as an unforeseen target for therapeutic interventions in the large group of mitochondrial diseases characterized by the CI instability.

### Keywords
Psilac, Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Complex i

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne,  Cologne; Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Trifunovic
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne,  Cologne; Germany


