### Accession
PXD033636

### Title
Analysis of of the ole of NOMO1 in early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC)

### Description
Early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC; age younger than 50 years) incidence has been steadily increasing over the last decades worldwide with causes unexplained. A unique molecular feature of EOCRC is that these cases harbor a greater incidence of Nodal Modulator 1 (NOMO1) somatic deletions compared with late-onset CRC. Yet the mechanisms of NOMO1 in early-onset colorectal carcinogenesis are currently unknown. Here we show that 50% of heterozygous NOMO1 deleted–EOCRCs presented pathogenic mutations in this gene, suggesting that NOMO1 can be inactivated by deletion or mutation in EOCRC. To study its role in EOCRC, CRISPR/cas9 technology was used to generate NOMO1 knockout HCT-116 (EOCRC) and HS-5 (bone marrow) cell lines. Loss of NOMO1 in these cell lines did not perturb Nodal pathway signaling. Results from expression microarray, RNA sequencing and protein expression analysis by LC-IMS/MS revealed that NOMO1 inactivation deregulates other signaling pathways independent of the Nodal pathway such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Importantly, NOMO1 inactivation increased the migration capacity of CRC cells. Additionally, a gut-specific conditional KO mouse model of NOMO1 revealed no subsequent tumor development in mice. Overall, these findings suggest that NOMO1 could not be a driver of early-onset colorectal carcinogenesis, but its loss promotes an increased migration capacity of CRC cells. Further study is warranted to explore other signaling pathways deregulated by the loss of NOMO1 that may play a relevant role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted in a sample containing 7M urea 2M Thiourea 4% CHAPS and 5mM DTT, then digested following the filter-aided FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al36 with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:20, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed in a timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a Evosep ONE liquid chromatograph (Evosep). 200ng were directly loaded onto the Evosep ONE and resolved using the 30 samples-per-day protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software [Cox 2008] using default settings except for the match between runs (match time window 4 min, alignment tie window 20min) and an LFQ min. ratio count of 1. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human protein entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data (LFQ intensities) was loaded onto Perseus platform [Tyanova 2016] and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation) before statistical analysis (Student’s t-test, ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC; age younger than 50 years) has been progressively increasing over the last decades globally, with causes unexplained. A distinct molecular feature of EOCRC is that compared with cases of late-onset colorectal cancer, in EOCRC cases, there is a higher incidence of <i>Nodal Modulator 1</i> (<i>NOMO1)</i> somatic deletions. However, the mechanisms of <i>NOMO1</i> in early-onset colorectal carcinogenesis are currently unknown. In this study, we show that in 30% of EOCRCs with heterozygous deletion of <i>NOMO1</i>, there were pathogenic mutations in this gene, suggesting that <i>NOMO1</i> can be inactivated by deletion or mutation in EOCRC. To study the role of <i>NOMO1</i> in EOCRC, CRISPR/cas9 technology was employed to generate <i>NOMO1</i> knockout HCT-116 (EOCRC) and HS-5 (bone marrow) cell lines. <i>NOMO1</i> loss in these cell lines did not perturb Nodal pathway signaling nor cell proliferation. Expression microarrays, RNA sequencing, and protein expression analysis by LC-IMS/MS showed that <i>NOMO1</i> inactivation deregulates other signaling pathways independent of the Nodal pathway, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cell migration. Significantly, <i>NOMO1</i> loss increased the migration capacity of CRC cells. Additionally, a gut-specific conditional <i>NOMO1</i> KO mouse model revealed no subsequent tumor development in mice. Overall, these findings suggest that <i>NOMO1</i> could play a secondary role in early-onset colorectal carcinogenesis because its loss increases the migration capacity of CRC cells. Therefore, further study is warranted to explore other signalling pathways deregulated by <i>NOMO1</i> loss that may play a significant role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Eocrc, Label free

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Protomic Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Protomic Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain


