### Accession
PXD000887

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the effect of Slf1 deletion on yeast response to oxidative stress via LC-MSMS

### Description
The mechanisms by which RNA-binding proteins control the translation of subsets of mRNAs are not yet clear. Slf1p is an atypical La motif containing protein (LARP). LARPs are members of a superfamily of RNA-binding proteins conserved across eukaryotes. Transcriptomics and RIP-Seq analysis suggested an effect of Slf1 on the amount of mRNA of genes involved in the response to oxidative stress. To quantify these effects at the protein level, we used label-free mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of wild-type and slf1Δ mutant strains following oxidative stress conditions. This analysis identified several proteins which are normally induced in response to hydrogen peroxide, but where this increase is attenuated in the slf1Δ mutant.

### Sample Protocol
Quintuplicate repeats of the wild-type and slf1Δ strains were grown in SCD media to exponential phase, split in two, and half treated with 0.4 mM hydrogen peroxide for 1 h. Cultures were harvested, washed in 3% glucose with 2x amino acids and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed using the 6870 freezer mill (Spex) into 8 ml of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche). Ground samples were defrosted, cleared by centrifugation (15,000g 10 minutes), and 100 g of cleared lysate was diluted to a final volume of 160 µl containing 1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters Corporation). Samples were incubated at 80°C for 10 minutes, reduced using a final concentration of 3.5 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 60°C for 10 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. A final concentration of 0.01 µg/µl trypsin in 10 mM acetic acid was added and samples were digested for 4.5h at 37°C.  Hydrochloric acid was added to a final concentration of 13 mM and a second identical trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37°C. 0.5 µl of trifluoroacetic acid was added and incubated at 37°C for 2h.  7.5 µl of acetonitrile:water (2:1) was added and incubated at 4°C for 2h and centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 minutes.  Supernatant was removed and desalted using OLIGO™ R3 reversed-phase media on a microplate system. Peptides were eluted in three cycles of 50% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted to 10 µL with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 mM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data from five replicates of the four conditions were analysed using Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times in each sample were aligned using one LC-MS run as a reference, then the “Automatic Alignment” algorithm was used to create maximal overlay of the two-dimensional feature maps. Features with charges ≥ +5 were masked and excluded from further analyses, as were features with less than 3 isotope peaks. The resulting peaklists were searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, version 3rd February 2011) using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Science). Search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set to variable. The Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS for annotation of peptide peaks.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which RNA-binding proteins control the translation of subsets of mRNAs are not yet clear. Slf1p and Sro9p are atypical-La motif containing proteins which are members of a superfamily of RNA-binding proteins conserved in eukaryotes. RIP-Seq analysis of these two yeast proteins identified overlapping and distinct sets of mRNA targets, including highly translated mRNAs such as those encoding ribosomal proteins. In paralell, transcriptome analysis of slf1&#x394; and sro9&#x394; mutant strains indicated altered gene expression in similar functional classes of mRNAs following loss of each factor. The loss of SLF1 had a greater impact on the transcriptome, and in particular, revealed changes in genes involved in the oxidative stress response. slf1&#x394; cells are more sensitive to oxidants and RIP-Seq analysis of oxidatively stressed cells enriched Slf1p targets encoding antioxidants and other proteins required for oxidant tolerance. To quantify these effects at the protein level, we used label-free mass spectrometry to compare the proteomes of wild-type and slf1&#x394; strains following oxidative stress. This analysis identified several proteins which are normally induced in response to hydrogen peroxide, but where this increase is attenuated in the slf1&#x394; mutant. Importantly, a significant number of the mRNAs encoding these targets were also identified as Slf1p-mRNA targets. We show that Slf1p remains associated with the few translating ribosomes following hydrogen peroxide stress and that Slf1p co-immunoprecipitates ribosomes and members of the eIF4E/eIF4G/Pab1p 'closed loop' complex suggesting that Slf1p interacts with actively translated mRNAs following stress. Finally, mutational analysis of SLF1 revealed a novel ribosome interacting domain in Slf1p, independent of its RNA binding La-motif. Together, our results indicate that Slf1p mediates a translational response to oxidative stress via mRNA-specific translational control.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Lc-msms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Talavera

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Grant
Faculty of Life Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom


