### Accession
PXD018305

### Title
Analysis of Amino Acid Variants in Malignant Melanoma Cells Resistant to BRAF inhibition

### Description
Analysis of patient-specific nucleotide variants is a cornerstone of personalised medicine. Although only 2% of the genomic sequence is protein-coding, mutations occurring in these regions have the potential to influence protein structure and may have severe impact on disease aetiology. Of special importance are variants that affect modifiable amino acid residues, as protein modifications involved in signal transduction networks cannot be analysed by genomics. Proteogenomics enables analysis of proteomes in context of patient- or tissue-specific non-synonymous nucleotide variants. Here, we developed a proteogenomics workflow and applied it to study resistance to serine/threonine-protein kinase B-raf (BRAF) inhibitor (BRAFi) vemurafenib in malignant melanoma cell line A375. This approach resulted in high identification and quantification of non-synonymous nucleotide variants and (phospho)proteins. We integrated multi-omic datasets to reconstruct the perturbed signalling networks associated with BRAFi resistance and to predict drug therapies with the potential to disrupt BRAFi resistance mechanism in A375 cells. Notably, we showed that aurora kinase A (AURKA) inhibition is effective and specific against BRAFi resistant A375 cells. Furthermore, we investigated nucleotide variants that interfere with protein post-translational modification (PTM) status and potentially influence cell signalling. Mass spectrometry (MS) measurements confirmed variant-driven PTM changes in 12 proteins; among them was the runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) displaying a variant on a known phosphorylation site S(Ph)276L. We confirmed the loss of phosphorylation site by MS and demonstrated the impact of this variant on RUNX1 interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture - The human metastatic BRAFV600E-mutated melanoma cell line A375 was used in this study. The generation of the cell line with acquired resistance to vemurafenib analogue PLX4720 was conducted as described previously (Sinnberg et al., 2016). A375 S/R was grown in RPMI medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with FBS (10%, PAN Biotech) and penicillin/streptavidin (100 U/ml, PAN Biotech) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Overexpression of Runx1 and immunoprecipitation - For immunoprecipitation assays, cells were grown in RPMI-1640 SILAC lacking arginine, lysine and leucine. Leucine (12.5 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich), penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml, PAN), dialyzed FBS (10%, PAN) and stable isotope-encoded arginine and lysine were added to the SILAC medium. Immunoprecipitation (IP) of overexpressed Flag-tagged Runx1 in A375 S SILAC cells was performed with Flag M2 antibody in three biological replicates. Site-directed mutagenesis, in order to generate pCMV_Flag_RUNX1_S276L, was performed using QuickChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For IPs of Runx1, 1 mg of each SILAC labelled cell line were mixed according to the protein amount. Cell lysates were precleared for 1 h at 4°C with washed Pierce Protein G magnetic beads using 5 µl per mg lysate. Flag-antibody M2 was coupled to the beads and washed. Precleared cell lysates and Flag-tagged Pierce Protein G magnetic beads were incubated in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Beads were washed thrice before eluting proteins. Samples were in-gel digested with Trypsin and then purified on C18 StageTips. Pulldown assays with synthetic peptides and on-bead digestion - Synthetic peptides comprising 17 amino acids and a biotinylated linker in the N-terminus were dissolved and each peptide was used for three pulldowns. Peptides were coupled to streptavidin magnetic beads. For each peptide pulldown 2 mg of pre-cleared input material was used and beads without synthetic peptides were used as a control. Cell extracts and peptides were incubated in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Bound proteins from synthetic peptide pulldowns were digested directly on the beads using trypsin. Digested proteins were purified on C18 StageTips. Protein Extraction and digestion of cell lines - Cells were harvested at 80% confluence with lysis buffer complemented with protease, phosphatase inhibitors. DNA and RNA was removed from the cell lysate. Proteins were precipitated from cell lysates. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. 2-3 mg of extracted proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, pre-digested with Lys-C and digested with trypsin. To stop the digestion, 1% TFA was added. High pH reversed-phase chromatography - The (phospho)proteomics data is derived from two sets of samples prepared and analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For the first screen, a total of 114 runs were performed with 60 min gradient for fractionated proteome and phosphoproteome measurements on an Exploris mass spectrometer. A375 S and A375 R cells were used for proteome and phosphoproteome measurements (three biological replicates per cell line, with 19 samples per replicate consisting of nine fractionated proteome samples and ten rounds of phosphopeptide enrichment). For the second screen, a total of 21 runs were performed with 60 min gradient for immunoprecipitation and 90 min gradient for peptide pulldown measurements on Q Exactive HF-X and HF mass spectrometers. Immunoprecipitation assays of Flag-tagged RUNX1, SILAC labelled A375 S RUNX1_KO cells transfected with pCMV_Flag_RUNX1 plasmid, pCMV_Flag_RUNX1_S276L plasmid or with empty vector plasmid (pCMV_Flag) were used (‘light’: ‘medium’: ‘heavy’) (three biological replicates). For synthetic peptide pulldowns in A375 S cells, label-free quantification between three independent replicates was performed (nine samples). Beads only were used as a control (three replicates). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Selected peptides were fragmented via higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.8.0 and 1.5.2.8) (24). The Andromeda search engine searched MS/MS data against H. sapiens reference (99,354 entries) and cell line-specific alternate databases (A375 = 29,104 entries), as well as UniProt H. sapiens (95,943 entries) database and commonly observed contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine were defined as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as a protease. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. The MS tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 20 ppm for the analysis using HCD fragmentation method. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 1%. For label-free quantification, a minimum of one peptide was required. For quantification of proteins in the immunoprecipitation experiments, the amino acids (Lys4)/(Arg6) and (Lys8)/(Arg10) were defined as ‘medium’ and ‘heavy’ labels for the comparison of RUNX1 overexpressed cell lines. For all other parameters, the default settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of nucleotide variants is a cornerstone of cancer medicine. Although only 2% of the genomic sequence is protein coding, mutations occurring in these regions have the potential to influence protein structure or modification status and may have severe impact on disease aetiology. Proteogenomics enables the analysis of sample-specific nonsynonymous nucleotide variants with regard to their effect at the proteome and phosphoproteome levels. Here, we developed a proof-of-concept proteogenomics workflow and applied it to the malignant melanoma cell line A375. Initially, we studied the resistance to serine/threonine-protein kinase B-raf (BRAF) inhibitor (BRAFi) vemurafenib in A375 cells. This allowed identification of several oncogenic nonsynonymous nucleotide variants, including a gain-of-function variant on aurora kinase A (AURKA) at F31I. We also detected significant changes in abundance among (phospho)proteins, which led to reactivation of the MAPK signaling pathway in BRAFi-resistant A375 cells. Upon reconstruction of the multiomic integrated signaling networks, we predicted drug therapies with the potential to disrupt BRAFi resistance mechanism in A375 cells. Notably, we showed that AURKA inhibition is effective and specific against BRAFi-resistant A375 cells. Subsequently, we investigated amino acid variants that interfere with protein posttranslational modification (PTM) status and potentially influence A375 cell signaling irrespective of BRAFi resistance. Mass spectrometry (MS) measurements confirmed variant-driven PTM changes in 12 proteins. Among them was the runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) displaying a variant on a known phosphorylation site S(Ph)276L. We confirmed the loss of phosphorylation site by MS and demonstrated the impact of this variant on RUNX1 interactome.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteogenomics, Melanoma, Nucleotide sequencing, Brafi resistance, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Macek
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


