### Accession
PXD022808

### Title
Proteomic alterations in oral cancer patients delineated by tobacco using habits

### Description
Molecular alterations induced by tobacco usage are not well characterized in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Tobacco consumption in chewing or smoking forms is a known risk factor in oral cancer. To understand proteomic changes due to tobacco usage in oral cancer patients we carried out comparative proteomic analysis in oral cancer patients who had history of tobacco using habits (patients who chewed tobacco and patients who smoked tobacco) and those with no history of tobacco consumption. Proteomic analysis resulted in the quantification of 5,848 proteins in smoker cohort, 5,216 in chewer, and 5,320 in non-user cohort. Among these 443, 72 and 139 were significantly dysregulated proteins (p-value≤ 0.05 and 2-fold change) in smoker, chewer and non-user cohorts, respectively. Gene ontology and pathway analysis of significantly dysregulated proteins revealed enrichment of distinct biological processes and pathways in each patient cohort. Proteins associated with collagen formation and antigen processing/presentation pathway were dysregulated in oral cancer patients who smoked tobacco, while keratinization process was enriched in patients who chewed tobacco. We also observed dysregulated proteins in non-users to be involved in ECM proteoglycans, metabolism of carbohydrates and glycosaminoglycans. Immune signaling pathways and muscle contraction were identified as common events dysregulated in all three cohorts. This study helps us to decipher the proteomic alterations induced by tobacco usage in oral cancer patients and will assist in identification of early detection markers to identify high risk population

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and TMT-labeling 12 tumor-normal pairs of OSCC tissue samples comprising 4 samples from patients who chewed tobacco, 4 from patients who smoked tobacco and 4 from those who had not any tobacco or alcohol consumption habit were crushed into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and then sonicated in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, TEABC, pH 8.0). Samples were reduced (5mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (20mM iodoacetamide) and precipitated (acetone). Precipitated proteins were reconstituted in TEABC followed by trypsin digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) used in the ratio of 1:20 (Enzyme: protein). Three TMT-10plex experiments were carried out for paired tumor and matched normal samples from oral cancer patients (chewers, smokers and non-users). Labeling of peptide samples was performed by tandem mass tag (TMT) from 10plex kit (Catalogue # 90110 Thermo Fischer Scientific) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, peptides were reconstituted in 100mM TEABC, pH 8.0. Two bridging samples were used in each TMT-experiment along with 4 pairs of tissue samples (tumor and adjacent normal). Bridging sample contains pooled mixture of peptide digests from all samples. Bridging samples were labeled with 126 and 131 TMT-labels, 127N, 128N, 129N and 130N were used for labeling tumor samples whereas adjacent normal samples were labeled with 127C, 128C, 129C and 130C TMT-labels.  Fractionation and LC–MS/MS analysis TMT-labeled samples were pooled and then fractionated using basic pH reversed phase liquid chromatography. Briefly, TMT-labeled peptides were loaded onto C18 XBridge column (4.6x250 mm, 5 µm; Waters). 96 fractions were collected which were then concatenated into 12 fractions, dried in SpeedVac, desalted using C18 Stage Tips and stored at -80⁰C until LC-MS/MS analysis. 12 fractions from each cohort were analyzed in triplicate on Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced to Dionex Ultimate RSLC 3000 system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired in 130-minute total run time. Top 15 intense precursor ions were selected for MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from each cohort were searched in Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany, version 2.2.0.388) against Human RefSeq 89 database using SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms. Common contaminants including trypsin (protease) were added to the RefSeq database before searching raw data. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion, TMT labeled at peptide N-terminus and lysine residue and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residue were set as static modifications whereas oxidation of methionine was defined as variable modification. Mass tolerance at precursor level was set as 10ppm and 0.05Da at fragment level. 1% false discovery rate was set at the PSM and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oral cancer; tobacco; proteomics; immune signaling; muscle contraction, Smoking

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore


