### Accession
PXD041922

### Title
The effect of epinephrine on immature and mature planktonic cultures and biofilms of a commensal actinobacterium Micrococcus luteus C01

### Description
The importance of the impact of human hormones on commensal microbiota and microbial biofilms is established in lots of studies. In the present investigation, we studied the proteome of the biofilm matrix of the commensal actinobacterium Micrococcus luteus C01. In our investigation, we tested the effect of epinephrine in concentration 4.9×10-9 M on immature (24 h ) and mature (72 h) planktonic cultures and biofilms in comparison with controls without the hormone administration. Also, we investigated the temporal changes in the total proteome during the incubation in control samples and in samples with epinephrine. The present database contains the raw data of proteins changes in their concentrations in described conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation of biofilms and planktonic cultures. Planktonic cultures were obtained in 250 mL conical flasks filled with 100 mL of Reinforced clostridial medium (RCM). Briefly, 1.5 mL of prepared M. luteus culture (OD540 = 0.5) were added into the medium containing 4.9 nM epinephrine (the concentration closer to the physiological blood plasma level and used in previous studies. The control flasks were without additions. Cultures were incubated for 24 h or 72 h at 33℃ and 150 rpm. Then, the biomass was centrifuged at 14000 g (RT) for 20 min and washed twice with a sterile physiological saline (0.9% NaCl). Pellets were harvested into the 1/5 mL microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, Germany) and stored at -80℃.  Biofilms were obtained in Petri dishes on the 1.5% agarized RCM. Briefly, 20 mL of the 1.5% RCM agar with or without 4.9 nM epinephrine were administered into 100 mm Petri dishes, then cellulose filters were placed onto the agar and 0.5 mL of prepared micrococci culture was distributed over the filter surface. Plates were incubated at 33℃ for 24 or 72 h. After the end of incubation, the biomass from two plates was erased and transferred into 1.5 mL microtubes and stored at -80℃ in the same way as the planktonic pellets. Isolation of proteins. Biomass was resuspended in the sterile physiological saline to obtain the final volume 10 mL (OD600 = 1.0). Then, the suspensions were centrifuged at 4000 g (RT) for 20 min to obtain the pellet. After the supernatant removal the pellets were resuspended in 600 µL of lysis buffer. The composition of the buffer was based on the Cold Spring harbor protocol with alterations. We used 0.5 mM PMSF as a protease inhibitor and Triton X-100 instead of NP-40 as a detergent. The samples were transferred into the FastPrep tubes with abrasive material and disrupted for 20 s at the FastPrep disintegrator (speed regime 6) three times in a row. Then the tubes were centrifuged at 13000 g for 1 min to precipitate the abrasive and cell debris. After that the concentration of proteins was measured via standard Bradford test. The sample volumes were adjusted to the sample with the lowest protein concentration by addition of lysis buffer. When the cell lysate was transferred into 15 mL conical centrifuge tubes and mixed with 4x volume of acetone to precipitate the proteins at the RT for 10 min. After that tubes were centrifuged at 4000 g for 20 min to precipitate the pellet, the liquid was removed and samples were dried at the RT overnight. Digestion of proteins with trypsin in solution  Reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins in solution were performed as described previously [Kulak NA et al., 2014, doi:10.1038/nmeth.2834] with minor modifications.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20x0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GL Sciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 300x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in a loading solution (98% 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) and eluted with a linear gradient: 3–35% solution B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 105 min; 35-55% B for 18 min, 55-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was reequilibrated with solution A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 10 min. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time – 30 msec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with HCD collision energy 29%, max injection time – 80 msec, AGC target – 1x105. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw spectra were processed using in MaxQuant 2.0.3.1 (MQ) and Perseus 2.0.3.1. The data was searched against Micrococcus luteus Uniprot Tremble database, containing canonical and isoform proteins, version from 15.03.2021 MaxQuant search was performed with the default parameter set, including Trypsin/p protease specificity, max 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation, Protein N-term acetylation and NQ deamidation as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, max 5 modifications per peptide, 1% PSM and protein FDR. The following options were turned on: second peptide, maxLFQ, match between runs. All runs were analyzed as independent experiments and processed in Perseus.  In Perseus the protein group results were filtered for contaminants, reverse and “identified only by site” proteins. Only the proteins with maxLFQ values min 3 in at least one group LC-MS runs were used. For them, missing values were imputed from normal distribution with 0.3 intensity distribution sigma width and 2.2 intensity distribution center downshift. Two-sample t-test with Permutation based FDR 5% was applied to search for significantly changing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In the current study, extensive Orbitrap mass spectrometry analysis was conducted for skin strain <i>Micrococcus luteus</i> C01 planktonic cultures and biofilms after 24 h and 72 h of incubation either in the presence of epinephrine or without any implementations. The investigation revealed the complex and conditionally extensive effect of epinephrine at concentrations closer to normal blood plasma concentrations on both planktonic cultures and biofilms of skin strain <i>M. luteus</i> C01. The concentrations of hundreds of proteins changed during the shift from planktonic growth mode to biofilm and hundreds of proteins were downregulated or upregulated in the presence of epinephrine. Ribosomal, TCA, and cell division proteins appear to be the most altered in their amounts in the presence of the hormone. Potentially, the regulatory mechanism of this process is connected with c-di-GMP and histidine kinases, which were affected by epinephrine in different samples. The phenomenon of epinephrine-based biofilm regulation in <i>M. luteus</i> C01 has wide implications for microbial endocrinology and other research areas.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Epinephrine, Proteome, Micrococcus luteus

### Affiliations
Laboratory of viability of microorganisms, Federal research center “Fundamentals of biotechnology” of Russian Academy of sciences, Moscow, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Yury A. Nikolayev
Laboratory of viability of microorganisms, Federal research center “Fundamentals of biotechnology” of Russian Academy of sciences, Moscow, Russia


