### Accession
PXD033544

### Title
Phosphorylation status of histone H1 in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
The aim was to characterize PTMs on histone H1 variants in embryonic stem cells by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, histones were isolated from wild-type mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), D3 line (mESCs wt, wild-type) and mESCs that were deficient in HDAC 1 (HDAC1 dn mESCs). A 150 μg portion of histone sample was diluted with acidified acetonitrile solution (80% acetonitrile, 2% FA). MS Phospho-mix standards (MSP1L, MSP2L, and MSP3L; Merck, Czech Republic) were added to the samples. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the Pierce Magnetic Titanium Dioxide Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit (#88811, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to manufacturer protocol. Eluates were concentrated under vacuum to 3 μL, diluted with 90 μl of 0.1% FA, and purified using a Hypersep SpinTip C-18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Phospho-enriched histone peptides represented by 3-4 replicates of each condition were analyzed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Elite hybrid spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometric data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with in-house Mascot search engine to compare acquired spectra with entries in the in-house histone Mus musculus database. Settings for all searches included trypsin enzyme specificity and up to five missed cleavages. The following variable modifications were set for searches: methyl (R, K), di-methyl (K), tri-methyl (K), acetyl (K, protein N-term), and phosphorylation (S, T, Y). Mass tolerances of peptides and MS/MS fragments for MS/MS ion searches were 7 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Manual peak labeling and calculation of the peak area corresponding to each precursor ion from the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) were done via Skyline 21.1 software. A spectral library was created using the Proteome discoverer platform (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Only peptides with statistically significant peptide scores (p < 0.01) were included. Rank 1 peptides with Mascot expectation value <0.01 and at least six amino acids were considered. Peptide identifications were manually verified and quantitative data were evaluated using Skyline 21.1 software. Precursor areas of phosphorylated histone peptides were normalized to signals of MS Phosphomix standards.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Histone h1, Embryonic stem cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CEITEC, Masaryk University
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC, Masaryk University


