### Accession
PXD014250

### Title
Profiling of Escherichia coli isolated from Crohn’s disease patients after adhesion and invasion in CaCo cell line.

### Description
Three AIEC strains were isolated from CD patients. We analyzed three types of cell: before adhesion and adhesion-invasion(control), after adhesion-invasion and after invasion. Proteins were assessed in an untargeted label-free bottom-up proteomic experiment using IDA approach (i.e. Information Dependent Acquisition) on Sciex TripleTOF 6600 Q-TOF mass-spectrometer couplet with LFQ (label-free quantification) by MaxQuant software. Dataset covers 54 samples (three biological replicates and two technical).

### Sample Protocol
Pathogenic AIEC strain were used in this study and were cultivated on Lysogeny Broth (LB). Night culture (37oC, 17 hours on shake) cultivated till log phase. After centrifugation (5 000g 5 min) pellet was resuspended in sterile PBS buffer, and then, diluted to OD=0.2 with 𝛌=600 nm (xMark, Bio-Rad, USA). 500 uL mix of cells suspension and DMEM + 20%FBS (150 uL cell and 5 mL DMEM) added to a monolayer of CaCo cell line. Infected cells were incubated 3h at 37oC.   For adhesion and invasion, a monolayer of CaCo cell was washed twice with sterile PBS buffer pH 8.0. To 200 uL added 0,05% Trypsin solution in sterile PBS and incubated 15 min at RT. Then we resuspended monolayer and added 200 uL DMEM + 20% FBS and 200 uL 1% Triton X100 with follow dilution 10-2 and 10-3. Each dilution of 50 uL cultivated on a dish with LB agar dish and incubated overnight at 37oC.      For invasion, a monolayer of CaCo cell was washed twice with sterile PBS buffer. After we added 1 mL DMEM + 20% FBS with 300 ug/mL gentamicin. Then cells were incubated 1h at 37C and antibiotic resistance control was cultivated without preliminary dilution. We added 200 uL 0,05% Trypsin solution in sterile PBS and incubated 15 min at RT. Then we resuspended monolayer and added 200 uL DMEM + 20% FBS and 200 uL 1% Triton X100 with follow dilution 100. Each dilution of 50 uL cultivated on a dish with LB agar dish and incubated overnight at 37oC.  Extraction of proteins of the outer membranes was performed using the carbonate method. The culture of bacteria in the log phase was collected by centrifugation (2500g 8 min). The pellet was washed once with PBS and resuspended in 200 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 with the addition of 1 μl of a mixture of nucleases (GE Healthcare). Cells were lysed by ultrasound for 1 minute at 4°C, clarified by centrifugation (2500g 8 min).  1.5 ml of 100 mM Na2CO3 (Sigma) was added to the supernatant and incubated on ice with stirring for 1 h. The membrane fraction was precipitated by ultracentrifugation (115000 g 30 min), the precipitate was washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and collected again at the same speed. For protein trypsinolysis cell pellets were washed with PBS. The bacterial pellet was resuspended in 15 μl 10% of sodium deoxycholate (DCNa) and 1 μl nuclease mix (Promega) were added to the sample. The suspension was incubated for 1 h at +4 °C. Then the sample was diluted with 100 μl of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 with and 2.5mM EDTA and incubated 30 min at RT. After centrifugation for 10 min at 14 000 g, protein concentration was measured in supernatant by Bradford assay (Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay, BioRad) and samples were equalized. 5 mM (final concentration) of TCEP was added to the supernatant, incubated for 1h at room 37C, then supernatant was incubated 30 min at RT in the dark with 30 mM (final concentration) IAA. Finally, we added 2.5 TCEP and incubated 20 min at RT. After that samples were diluted with 6 × volume of 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and protein hydrolysis was performed by addition of trypsin (in ratio trypsin: protein equal 1: 50, Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in 0.1% DCNa and incubation at 37 °C for 17h. At this point, trypsinolysis stopped by addition of 50% TFA till pH 2.0. After centrifugation for 15 min at 14 000 g, the supernatant was collected and cleaned with cartridges C18 (Discovery DSC-18 Tube, (Supelco) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Achieved peptide extracts were dried at SpeedVac (Labconco) and dissolved in 15 μl of LC-MS-MS sample buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The equivalent of 5 μg of protein was loaded onto HPLC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis of the tryptic peptides was performed using a microflow HPLC system EksigentEkspert (Sciex, USA) with autosampler EksigentEkspert 400 (Sciex, USA) coupled to ABSciex 6600 with a microflow ABSciexDuoSpray Ion Source (Sciex, USA). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed with Eksigent Column, 2.7 μm, HALO Fused-Core C18, 50 x 0.5 mm 805-10100. Chromatographic separation was performed with the following parameters: a flow rate of 5 uL/min: a 12-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in water with 1% methanol and 0.1% formic acid,.The ion source settings are as follows: the flow rate of the nebulizer gas - 10 L/min, the voltage applied to the capillary - 4000 V. The mode of obtaining MS spectra is as follows: accumulation time 50 ms, mass/charge ratio range from 100 to 2500 m/z, criteria for preferred selection of ions for isolation and fragmentation - charge 2-5, the number parent ions from one MS spectrum - 25, the minimum intensity is 5000. After the first analysis, the ion is excluded from candidates for fragmentation for 5 s. The fragmentation parameters are as follows: the accumulation time of the spectra fragmentation - 20 ms, mass/charge ratio range from 100 to 2000 m/z, full cycle time is 600 ms.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification analysis were performed with MaxQuant software against a database of all proteins of E. coli created directly for each CD-isolated strain with default settings. K5_RCE05_proteint.fasta – was formed on the basis genome of AIEC strain isolated from patient two with Crohn’s disease. BruB2_RCE03_proteint.fasta – was formed on the basis genome of AIEC strain isolated from patient two with Crohn’s disease. ZvL_RCE07_proteint.fasta – was formed on the basis genome of AIEC strain isolated from patient two with Crohn’s disease. All sequence was annotated with Prokka software and Human keratins were added to all databases to avoid misinterpretation of contaminating proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Crohn's disease (CD) is a type of inflammatory bowel disease (IDB). The endoscopic picture of Crohn's disease includes thickened submucosa, transmural inflammation, fissuring ulceration, and non-caseating granulomas. Intestinal microbiome dysbiosis has been described systematically in patients with IBD. In recent decades it was detailed that <i>Escherichia coli</i>, especially adherent-invasive <i>E. coli</i> (AIEC) pathotype, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of IBD, including Crohn's disease (Palmela, et al., 2018). In comparison with commensal strains of <i>E. coli</i>, AIEC strains have a large adhesive-invasive potential therefore its surface composition is of great interest. We presented a dataset of the membrane proteins of strains isolated from patients with Crohn's disease. From the set of <i>Escherichia coli</i> isolated from Crohn's disease patients [2] we chose three isolates with strongest AIEC pathotype. We performed proteome-wide LC-MS analysis of membrane fraction of this isolates after invasion or adhesion-invasion to human intestinal CaCo-2&#xa0;cell line and prior to this (control). The data including LC-MS/MS raw files and exported MaxQuant search results with fasta files were deposited to the PRIDE repository project accession PXD014250.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Escherichia coli, Aiec, Proteome, Crohn’s disease

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency

### Submitter
Olga Bukato

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency


