### Accession
PXD036777

### Title
Aspergillus niger O1 strain and alpha-glucosidase knockout mutants proteomic data

### Description
To explore the changes of secreted proteins in fermentation process, filtered supernatants were analyzed using liquid chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Label-free quantitative proteomics approach was used to study the enzyme profile in the fermentation cultures.

### Sample Protocol
A. niger O1 and mutants were cultured in fermentation medium and the cultures of 2 days, 4 days and 6 days were collected. The cultures were centrifuged and then filtered through a 0.22-μm PES membrane (Millipore). Protein concentrations of the culture supernatants were determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard according to the manufacturer’s instructions.About 2-3 μg protein was subjected to trypsin digestion. A NanoLC system (NanoLC-2D Ultra, Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) was used for Liquid Chromatography-Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry (LC MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were trapped on a NanoLC trap column (Chromxp C18CL, 3 μm, 120Å, 350 μm ×0.5 mm, Eksigent) and then eluted onto an analytical column (Chromxp C18CL, 3 μm, 120Å, 75μm × 150 mm, Eksigent) and separated by a 60-min gradient as follows: Buffer B from 5% to 60% (Buffer A: 2% Acetonitrile, 98% H2O, 0.1% Fomic acid , Buffer B: 98% Acetonitrile, 2% H2O, 0.1% Fomic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full-scan MS was performed in the positive ion mode with a nano-ion spray voltage of 2.5 kv from 350 to 1500 (m/z). For Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA), survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 30 product ion scans (m/z 100–1500) were collected if exceeding a threshold of 125 counts per second (counts/s) and with a +2 to +5 charge-state. The top 40 precursor ions with the most intensity were fragmented with 22 s of dynamic exclusion time. The WIFF files from shotgun data acquisition were searched against the Uniprot database of Aspergillus niger (strain CBS 513.88/FGSC A1513,2020.04, 14084 entries) in MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.3.4) search engine. Trypsin was set as the specific enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.05 Da. For protein identification, the peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Dextrose equivalent of glucose from starch hydrolysis is a critical index for starch-hydrolysis industry. Improving glucose yield and decreasing the non]-fermentable sugars which caused by transglycosylation activity of the enzymes during the starch saccharification is an important direction. In this study, we identified two key &#x3b1;-glucosidases responsible for producing non-fermentable sugars in an industrial glucoamylase-producing strain <i>Aspergillus niger</i> O1. The results showed the transglycosylation product panose was decreased by more than 88.0% in <i>agdA</i>/<i>agdB</i> double knock-out strains than strain O1. Additionally, the B-P1 domain of agdB was found accountable as starch hydrolysis activity only, and B-P1 overexpression in &#x394;<i>A</i>&#x394;<i>B</i>-21 significantly increased glucoamylase activity whereas keeping the glucoamylase cocktail low transglycosylation activity. The total amounts of the transglycosylation products isomaltose and panose were significantly decreased in final strain B-P1-3 by 40.7% and 44.5%, respectively. The application of engineered strains will decrease the cost and add the value of product for starch biorefinery.

### Keywords
Aspergillus niger, An eksigent nano lc coupled to triple-tof 5600 mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, People’s Republic of China
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, China.

### Submitter
Qian Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chaoguang Tian
Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, People’s Republic of China


