### Accession
PXD027136

### Title
Breast cancer hypoxia secretome LC-MS/MS

### Description
Hypoxia is an important driver of cancer progression, and rapidly growing tumors often result in intratumoral hypoxic regions. Hypoxia is associated with metabolic reprogramming and angiogenesis, resulting in enhanced tumor progression. Here, we aimed to study breast cancer hypoxia responses at the proteomic level, and we wanted to identify differences in protein secretion from luminal-like and basal-like cell lines before and after hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Samples are conditioned media samples from breast cancer cell lines (BT-474, MCF7 Hs 578T, MDA-MB-231) conditioned at normoxic conditions (21% oxygen) or hypoxic conditions (1.2% oxygen).   Samples were concentrated prior to sample preparation using 3 kDa Amicon® Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units.   10 µg proteins in each sample were digested using the in-solution protein digestion protocol with the following steps:  Dissolving proteins in 20 µL 8M urea/20mM methylamine for denaturation.  Added 20 µL 50mM Tris/1mM CaCl2.  Reduction with 4 µL 100mM dithiotreitol, 1 h incubation.  Alkylation with 5 µL 200mM iodoacetamide, 1 h incubation, dark.  Added 0.8 µL 100mM dithiotreitol to avoid unwanted protease alkylation, 10 min incubation.  Added 110.2 µL 50mM Tris/1mM CaCl2 to dilute samples to 1M urea concentration.  Digestion with 0.5 µg/µL trypsin in 50mM acetic acid in 1:50 ratio of protein-to-trypsin. Added 0.2 µL trypsin solution to 10 µg protein in each sample. Incubation 16 h, 37C, on shaker.  Acidification to stop protease activity with 15 µL 10% formic acid.   Samples were desalted using Oasis HLB µElution plates and lysophilized. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid solution.   Samples were analyzed during a 60 min gradient on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system. The peptides were separated on a 15 cm x 75 µm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 ID nanoViper column) packed with 2 µm C18 beads. The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Raw data were acquired through Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30) with recommended settings for label-free quantification (Cox, J. et al. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics 13, 2513-2526, doi:10.1074/mcp.M113.031591 (2014)). MS/MS spectra were searched in the Andromeda search engine against the forward and reverse Human UniProt database.

### Publication Abstract
An electroreductive strategy for radical hydroxyl fluorosulfonylation of alkenes with sulfuryl chlorofluoride and molecular oxygen from air is described. This mild protocol displays excellent functional group compatibility, broad scope, and good scalability, providing convenient access to diverse &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluorides. These &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluoride products can be further converted to valuable aliphatic sulfonyl fluorides, &#x3b2;-keto sulfonyl fluorides, and &#x3b2;-alkenyl sulfonyl fluorides. Further, some of these products showed excellent inhibitory activity against Botrytis cinerea or Bursaphelenchus xylophilus, which could be useful for potent agrochemical discovery. Preliminary mechanistic studies indicate that this transformation is achieved through rapid O<sub>2</sub> interception by the alkyl radical and subsequent reduction of the peroxy radical, which outcompete other side reactions such as chlorine atom transfer, hydrogen atom transfer, and Russell fragmentation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia, Secretome, Breast cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Silje Kjølle

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Andreas Akslen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


