### Accession
PXD003519

### Title
Single Cell Immuno-laser Microdissection Coupled to Label-free Proteomics to Reveal the Proteotypes of Human Brain Cells After Ischemia

### Description
Cerebral ischemia entails rapid tissue damage in the affected brain area causing devastating neurological disorders. The use of biomarkers in stroke might have a major impact in patients’ management, both in the diagnosis and the prognosis. Thus, the analysis of the brain proteome is a straightforward approach for the identification of specific biomarkers and for the detection of potential new therapeutic targets for neuroprotection or recovery strategies.  In this study, post-mortem brain slices from ischemic stroke patients were obtained corresponding to infarcted (IC) and contralateral (CL) areas. By means of laser microdissection, neurons and blood brain barrier structures (BBB) were isolated and analyzed in a label-free manner on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS following a gas phase fractionation approach for precursor ion selection. Ninety one proteins were identified only in neurons, 261 proteins only in BBB and 260 proteins in both cell types (peptides≥2). Gene ontology analyses revealed the alteration of metabolic processes after brain ischemia and also changes regarding catalytic activity and binding. Antioxidant activity and enzyme regulator activity appeared as cell-specific altered molecular functions. A total of 25 proteins showing p<0.05 and fold-change>|2| between IC and CL areas were considered significant in this study: 11 in neurons, 11 in BBB and 3 in both cell types. Twelve of these proteins were selected as candidates and analyzed by immunohistochemistry in independent brains. The MS findings were verified for neuronal SAHH2 and SRSF1 and for EAA2 in both cell types. In addition, SAHH2 showed its potential as prognostic biomarker when analyzed early in plasma of ischemic stroke patients.  Therefore, our results will contribute to increase the knowledge about the molecular mechanisms of ischemic stroke pathology and launch new proteins that might represent putative biomarkers of brain ischemia or therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Laser microdissection (LMD) Snap frozen brain samples were embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT (Sakura Finetek, USA) to be cut at 10 µm-thick sections using a HM505E cryostat (Microm International GmbH, Germany). Samples were mounted onto ultraviolet-irradiated 2 µm polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)-membrane slides (MicroDissect GmbH, Germany) and stored at -80ºC for less than one week with silica desiccant pads.  Rapid fluorescence detection of brain structures was done following the procedure previously described [16] (Cuadrado E, J Proteome Res 2009). Briefly, neurons were immunostained using a mouse anti-neuronal nuclei antibody (NeuN, 1:50; cat.#: MAB377, Millipore, USA) and a secondary anti-mouse antibody (AlexaFluor®568, 1:50; cat.#: A11004, Invitrogen, USA) while endothelial cells from brain microvessels were stained using a FITC conjugated Ulex europaeus agglutinin I (UEA-I, 1:20; cat.#: L9006). Immediately after staining, laser microdissection was performed on individual cells, either neuronal bodies or BBB structures, since astrocytes’ end-feet and pericytes are closely-related to the endothelial cells and the brain microvasculature cannot be exclusively isolated [27,28] (Abbott NJ, Epilepsia 2012; Muoio V, Acta Physiol 2014). The 20x objective of a LMD6000 microscope (Leica Microsystem, Germany) was used to dissect the cells in a contact-free manner into dry 0.65 mL tube caps (Sorenson BioScience, USA) at a power of 45 KW, an aperture of 11 and a speed of 14 ns for a maximum of 4.5 hours. Approximate total areas of 106 µm2 of neurons (~2,500 cells) and BBB (~4,000 units) were collected from both IC and CL areas (Figure 1) in 60 µl of 0.1% Rapigest surfactant (Waters, USA) in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were sonicated on ice at 70% amplitude for intervals of 10 seconds for a total of 2 min and stored at -80ºC until use. An equivalent area of PEN-membrane pieces without brain tissue was also dissected as negative control.   2.4 Proteomics analysis 2.4.1 Sample preparation Thirty µl of each sample enriched in human neurons or BBB as well as LMD negative controls were reduced with 2 µl of freshly prepared 50 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 60ºC, alkylated with 1 µl of freshly prepared 400 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature under agitation in the dark, and finally digested with 2 µl of 0.05 µg/µl trypsin (Promega, USA) in 0.1M TEAB overnight at 37ºC. Afterwards, Rapigest was removed from the preparation by precipitation with 20 µl of 3.5% TFA for 1 hour at 37ºC. Samples were centrifuged 20 min at 13,000 g and supernatants were dried under vacuum. Samples were solubilized in 300 µl of 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA), purified using microspin C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried again under vacuum. Lyophilized samples were solubilized in 20 µl of 5% ACN 0.1% FA, centrifuged 5 min at 14,000 g, transferred to a sample vial and frozen at -20ºC until use.  2.4.2 Protein analysis by Orbitrap MS LMD samples were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity system (Waters). Four technical replicates of each sample (4 ul) were injected. Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 μm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Unichrom Scientific, PR China) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a commercial 0.075 x 150 mm 5 μm 100 Å C18 analytical nanocolumn (Nikkyo Technology, Japan). The analytical separation was performed using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and ACN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B) as follows: 0-1 min 95 % A and 5 % B, 55 min 65 % A and 35 % B, 65 min and 20 % A and 80 % B at a flow rate of 220 nL/min.  For MS survey scans, the Orbitrap resolution was set to 60,000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105. Up to five precursor ions were selected for CID in the LTQ. The ion population was set to 104 with an isolation width of 2 m/z. The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID. Gas phase fractionation (GPF) [29](Scherl A, Anal Chem 2008) was performed using four mass ranges for data-dependent MS/MS selection. The GPF ranges were the following:  400-520 m/z; 515-690 m/z; 685-979 m/z and 974-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification and identification Progenesis LC-MS® software v4.0 (Nonlinear dynamics, UK) was used for MS data analysis using default settings. In this study, neurons and BBB samples were considered as independent experiments and were analyzed separately. Each GPF range was analyzed independently and all MS runs were automatically aligned to an automatically selected reference sample with manual supervision and were automatically normalized to all features. Label-free protein abundance quantification was based on the sum of the peak areas within the isotope boundaries found in MS of unique peptides for that particular protein. Only non-conflicting features within 400 to 1,500 m/z range, 20 to 80 min retention time and with positive charges between 2 to 7 were considered for quantification. The complete peak list of each GPF range was exported for peptide searching by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK). Protein identification was done using SwissProt-human database (January 2014), setting precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Oxidized methionine was considered as variable amino acid modification together with carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to one missed cleavage. Significant threshold for protein identification was set to p<0.05, with a minimum ion score of 17 and at least 2 hits.  Finally, the 4 GPF ranges were combined into one single Progenesis experiment to perform a paired statistical analysis, comparing IC and CL areas in both neurons and BBB experiments. Only those proteins quantified and identified with at least 2 unique peptides and with an Anova p-value <0.05 and a fold-change >|2| were considered significant. Fold-change was calculated dividing the highest mean normalized protein abundance by the lowest mean normalized protein abundance. We added a minus sign (-) when the highest abundance was found in CL area to indicate that protein levels were lower in IC area.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral ischemia entails rapid tissue damage in the affected brain area causing devastating neurological dysfunction. How each component of the neurovascular unit contributes or responds to the ischemic insult in the context of the human brain has not been solved yet. Thus, the analysis of the proteome is a straightforward approach to unraveling these cell proteotypes. In this study, post-mortem brain slices from ischemic stroke patients were obtained corresponding to infarcted (IC) and contralateral (CL) areas. By means of laser microdissection, neurons and blood brain barrier structures (BBB) were isolated and analyzed using label-free quantification. MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003519. Ninety proteins were identified only in neurons, 260 proteins only in the BBB and 261 proteins in both cell types. Bioinformatics analyses revealed that repair processes, mainly related to synaptic plasticity, are outlined in microdissected neurons, with nonexclusive important functions found in the BBB. A total of 30 proteins showing <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 and fold-change&gt; 2 between IC and CL areas were considered meaningful in this study: 13 in neurons, 14 in the BBB and 3 in both cell types. Twelve of these proteins were selected as candidates and analyzed by immunohistofluorescence in independent brains. The MS findings were completely verified for neuronal SAHH2 and SRSF1 whereas the presence in both cell types of GABT and EAA2 was only validated in neurons. In addition, SAHH2 showed its potential as a prognostic biomarker of neurological improvement when analyzed early in the plasma of ischemic stroke patients. Therefore, the quantitative proteomes of neurons and the BBB (or proteotypes) after human brain ischemia presented here contribute to increasing the knowledge regarding the molecular mechanisms of ischemic stroke pathology and highlight new proteins that might represent putative biomarkers of brain ischemia or therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Stroke, Biomarker, Laser micro-dissection, Proteomics, Brain ischemia, Label-free

### Affiliations
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall Hebron Institute of Research, Barcelona, Spain.
Vall Hebrón Institute of Research

### Submitter
Víctor Llombart

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Montaner
Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Vall Hebron Institute of Research, Barcelona, Spain.


