### Accession
PXD031593

### Title
EGF promotes PKM2 O-GlcNAcylation by stimulating O-GlcNAc transferase phosphorylation at Y976 and their subsequent association

### Description
EGF is one of the most well-characterized growth factors and plays a crucial role in cell proliferation and differentiation. EGFR has been extensively explored as a therapeutic target against multiple types of cancers, such as lung cancer and glioblastoma. Recent studies have established a connection between deregulated EGF signaling and metabolic reprogramming, especially rewiring in aerobic glycolysis, which is also known as the Warburg effect and recognized as a hallmark in cancer. Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) is a rate-limiting enzyme controlling the final step of glycolysis and serves as a major regulator of the Warburg effect. We previously showed that PKM2 T405/S406 O-GlcNAcylation, a critical mark important for PKM2 detetramerization and activity, was markedly upregulated by EGF. However, the mechanism by which EGF regulates PKM2 O-GlcNAcylation still remains uncharacterized. Here we demonstrated that EGF promoted O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) binding to PKM2 by stimulating OGT Y976 phosphorylation. As a consequence, PKM2 O-GlcNAcylation and detetramerization were upregulated, leading to a significant decrease in PKM2 activity. Moreover, other than PKM2, the association of additional phosphotyrosine binding proteins, including STAT1, STAT3, STAT5, PKCδ and p85, which are reported factors bearing O-GlcNAcylation, with OGT was also enhanced when Y976 was phosphorylated. Together, EGF-dependent Y976 phosphorylation is critical for OGT-PKM2 interaction and we propose that this post-translational modification might be important for the substrate selection by OGT.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis for OGT phosphorylation. In A549 cells (5×108 cells) pre-treated with or without EGF (100 ng/ml) for 1 h respectively, endogenous OGT proteins were isolated by IP followed by SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel protein digestion and peptides recovery. The operation steps are as follows: Cut three excised gel slices from each gel into 1 mm3 cubes, add 500 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) solution and wash until coomassie blue disappear. Remove the supernatant, add 500 μl of acetonitrile and incubate for 10 min. Remove the acetonitrile, rehydrate the gel slices in 10 mM DTT/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to completely cover the gel slices and incubate at 56 °C for 1 h. Remove the supernatant, add 500 μl of acetonitrile and incubate for 10 min. Remove the acetonitrile and add the 50 mM IAA/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to completely cover the gel slices. Incubate for 60 min at room temperature in the dark. Remove the IAA/ammonium bicarbonate, add 500 μl of acetonitrile and incubate for 10 min. Remove the acetonitrile solution and add just enough enzyme digestion solution to cover the gel slices. Incubate the gel pieces on ice for 45 min. Add 10 μl of enzyme digestion solution to keep the gel pieces wet during enzymatic digestion. Incubate overnight at 37 °C. Add 100 μl extraction solution (5% TFA-50% ACN-45% ddH2O) at 37 °C water bath for 1 h, sonicate, centrifuge then transfer the extract to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. Lyophilize the extracted peptides to near dryness. Resuspend peptides in 10 μl of 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The solutions containing peptides released during in-gel digestion were measured using Nanoflow UPLC (Ultimate 3000 system, Thermo) coupled to Mass Spectrometer (Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™, Thermo). Briefly, the trypsinized peptides were firstly trapped and desalted on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap Column (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo) with a pump system supplied moving phase A (0.1% formic acid in distilled water) and moving phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The profile of the gradient moving phase was as follows: 0~4 min, 5% B; 4~30 min, 5-40% B; 30~35 min, 40-80% B; 35~45 min, 80% B; 45-45.1 min, 5% B; 45.1-60 min, 5% B; and the flow-rate was 0.4 μl/min. The peptides were then reverse eluted and loaded into the analytical capillary C18 column (Venusil×BPC, 75 μm × 10 cm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Agela Technologies, Tianjin, China) connected inline to the mass spectrometer. Different fractions of the eluate were injected into the Q-Exactive mass spectrometry set in a positive ion mode and the data dependent manner with a full MS scan from 350 to 2000 m/z. High collision energy dissociation was employed as the MS/MS acquisition method. Raw MS/MS data were converted into an MGF format using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo). The exported MGF files were searched with Mascot v2.3.01 against the human OGT database (UniProt_O15294; 1 sequence; 1046 residues) with a tryptic specificity allowing two missed cleavage. The sequences coverage is ~90%. Carbamidomethylation (C) was considered as fixed modification whereas oxidation (M) and Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was 15 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Proteins with false discovery rates<0.05 were further analyzed. The result was filtered by score >25.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is one of the most well-characterized growth factors and plays a crucial role in cell proliferation and differentiation. Its receptor EGFR has been extensively explored as a therapeutic target against multiple types of cancers, such as lung cancer and glioblastoma. Recent studies have established a connection between deregulated EGF signaling and metabolic reprogramming, especially rewiring in aerobic glycolysis, which is also known as the Warburg effect and recognized as a hallmark in cancer. Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) is a rate-limiting enzyme controlling the final step of glycolysis and serves as a major regulator of the Warburg effect. We previously showed that PKM2 T405/S406 O-GlcNAcylation, a critical mark important for PKM2 detetramerization and activity, was markedly upregulated by EGF.&#xa0;However, the mechanism by which EGF regulates PKM2 O-GlcNAcylation still remains uncharacterized. Here, we demonstrated that EGF promoted O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) binding to PKM2 by stimulating OGT Y976 phosphorylation. As a consequence, we found PKM2 O-GlcNAcylation and detetramerization were upregulated, leading to a significant decrease in PKM2 activity. Moreover, distinct from PKM2, we observed that the association of additional phosphotyrosine-binding proteins with OGT was also enhanced when Y976 was phosphorylated. These proteins included STAT1, STAT3, STAT5, PKC&#x3b4;, and p85, which are reported to be O-GlcNAcylated. Together, we show EGF-dependent Y976 phosphorylation is critical for OGT-PKM2 interaction and propose that this posttranslational modification might be important for substrate selection by OGT.

### Keywords
Phosphotyrosine binding protein, Phosphorylation, Epidermal growth factor (egf), O-glcnac transferase (ogt), O-glcnacylation, Pyruvate kinase m2 (pkm2)

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), Northeast Normal University
Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), Northeast Normal University, 5268 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin, 130024, China

### Submitter
Min Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Min Wei
Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), Northeast Normal University, 5268 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin, 130024, China


