### Accession
PXD012065

### Title
The Effect of Fatty Acids in Hepatic Insulin Resistance - Part 1

### Description
Monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) oleic acid (OA) has been reported to restore saturated fatty acid palmitic acid (PA)-induced hepatic insulin resistance (IR). However, the detailed molecular mechanism remains elusive. In addition, -3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) such as Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) has also exerted opposite effects to PA in muscle IR. But whether it plays the same role in hepatic IR and the possible mechanism involved needs to be further explored. Here, we compared the proteome change of HepG2 cells after different fatty acids treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The SILAC strategy was applied to investigate the effects of OA and EPA on PA-induced IR.To generate triple SILAC labeling states, DMEM medium without arginine and lysine (Invitrogen) was supplemented with L-[12C6,14N2]-lysine (Lys0) and L-[12C6,14N4]-arginine (Arg0) (Sigma) as “light” labeling, L-[2H4]-lysine (Lys4) and L-[13C6]-arginine (Arg6) as “medium” labeling, and L-[13C6,15N2]-lysine (Lys8) and L-[13C6,15N4]-arginine (Arg10) as “heavy” labeling. for forward labeling experiments, cells with light labeling were incubated with 0.5 mM PA, ones with medium labeling were incubated with the vehicle control, and ones with heavy labeling were incubated with 0.5 mM PA plus 0.15 mM EPA. For reverse labeling experiments, cells with light labeling were incubated with 0.5 mM PA plus 0.15 mM EPA, ones with medium labeling were incubated with the vehicle control, and ones with heavy labeling were incubated with 0.5 mM PA

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4). Percolator and Sequest HT search engine were respectively used for false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identification. Uniprot human protein database (updated on 02-2016 including 92382 entries) and supplemented with 247 known contaminants was used for data retrieval.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty acids; insulin resistance; pa; epa

### Affiliations
the institute of biophysics chinese academy of science
1 Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

### Submitter
Yaping Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
1 Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China


