### Accession
PXD007191

### Title
Optimising sample preparation of the plasma peptidome

### Description
We further expanded on previous optimizations to isolate the plasma peptidome and compared various methods to maximize identifications with speed and ease. Previous studies have reported loss of polypeptides binding to high abundant proteins during depletion strategies.  We hypothesized that rapid chaotropic denaturation of plasma with urea under reducing conditions would liberate non-covalently bound peptides to improve recovery during protein depletion. We also compared depletion strategies to isolate the peptidome including protein precipitation and removal with either TCA, acetone or acetonitrile (AcN). Following centrifugation of precipitated proteins, the supernatant containing peptides was collected. For acetone and AcN precipitations, an additional vacuum centrifugation step was required followed by resuspension of peptides in aqueous buffer. Our comparison of peptidome isolation also included removal of proteins with size-exclusion 10 kDa MWCO filters. All peptide isolations were acidified to 0.1% TFA, adjusted to 5% acetonitrile and desalted with HLB-SPE. Peptides were analysed by single-shot nanoUHPLC-MS/MS employing both HCD and EThcD and quantified by LFQ

### Sample Protocol
For plasma peptidome isolation comparisons, 100 μl aliquots of the identical plasma was mixed 1:1 with either PBS or Urea Buffer [8 M urea, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acids (HEPES), pH 8.0], and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. The diluted plasma aliquots were mixed with either; i) 1 volume of 20% trichloroacetic (TCA),  ii) 5 volumes of 100% acetonitrile (AcN), or iii) 5 volumes of 100% acetone and incubated for 60 min at 4°C to precipitate proteins. The precipitate was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min and the supernatant containing peptides collected. Supernatants from the AcN and acetone precipitations were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 5% AcN, 0.1% TFA. Additional 100 μl aliquots of the same plasma sample were diluted with either PBS or Urea Buffer and applied to 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filters and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. The filters were washed once with either PBS or Urea Buffer by a second centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 30 min and filtrates adjusted to 5% AcN, 0.1% TFA. All peptide preparations were desalted with hydrophilic-lipophilic balance solid-phase extraction (HLB-SPE) columns (Waters, MA). Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
For peptidomics analysis, peptides were analyzed on a Dionex 3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer in positive mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 40 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1550 (120,000 resolution, 5e5 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition with HCD and detection in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 120 ms injection time, 40 NCE, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width) and, EThcD (20) and detection in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 120 ms injection time, calibrated charge-dependent ETD reaction times [2+ 121 ms; 3+ 54 ms; 4+ 30 ms; 5+ 20ms; 6+ 13 ms; 7+; 10 ms], 25 NCE for HCD supplemental activation, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width).  Data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) using the Byonic node (v1.0.334) against the UniProt human database containing only the primary accession of an open reading frame without isoforms (January 2016, 20,955 entries). For Byonic analysis, the precursor MS, HCD MS/MS and EThcD MS/MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm with non-specific enzyme searching. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine and C-terminus amidation set as variable modification. A precursor isotope off set was enabled (narrow) to account for incorrect precursor monoisotopic reporting (+/- 1.0 Da). All data were searched as a single batch with PSM and protein FDR set to 1% using a target decoy approach in Byonic. Quantification of peptidomics data was performed with the precursor area detector node for LFQin Proteome Discoverer. For LFQ, extracted ion chromatograms were generated at 2 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise is extremely beneficial to whole body health reducing the risk of a number of chronic human diseases. Some of these physiological benefits appear to be mediated via the secretion of peptide/protein hormones into the blood stream. The plasma peptidome contains the entire complement of low molecular weight endogenous peptides derived from secretion, protease activity and PTMs, and is a rich source of hormones. In the current study we have quantified the effects of intense exercise on the plasma peptidome to identify novel exercise regulated secretory factors in humans. We developed an optimized 2D-LC-MS/MS method and used multiple fragmentation methods including HCD and EThcD to analyze endogenous peptides. This resulted in quantification of 5,548 unique peptides during a time course of exercise and recovery. The plasma peptidome underwent dynamic and large changes during exercise on a time-scale of minutes with many rapidly reversible following exercise cessation. Among acutely regulated peptides, many were known hormones including insulin, glucagon, ghrelin, bradykinin, cholecystokinin and secretogranins validating the method. Prediction of bioactive peptides regulated with exercise identified <i>C</i>-terminal peptides from Transgelins, which were increased in plasma during exercise. <i>In vitro</i> experiments using synthetic peptides identified a role for transgelin peptides on the regulation of cell-cycle, extracellular matrix remodeling and cell migration. We investigated the effects of exercise on the regulation of PTMs and proteolytic processing by building a site-specific network of protease/substrate activity. Collectively, our deep peptidomic analysis of plasma revealed that exercise rapidly modulates the circulation of hundreds of bioactive peptides through a network of proteases and PTMs. These findings illustrate that peptidomics is an ideal method for quantifying changes in circulating factors on a global scale in response to physiological perturbations such as exercise. This will likely be a key method for pinpointing exercise regulated factors that generate health benefits.

### Keywords
Plasma, Sample preparation, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


