### Accession
PXD006889

### Title
Mass spec analysis of primary human erythroid cultures (healthy or thalassemic and treated or untreated with Decitabine)

### Description
Reactivation of gamma-globin is considered a promising approach for the treatment of beta-thalassaemia and sickle cell disease. Therapeutic induction of gamma-globin expression is fraught with lack of suitable therapeutic targets. In order to identify new potential targets we analysed the changes in the proteome of human primary erythroid progenitor cells by treatment with decitabine, a known, yet not clinically safe, gamma-globin inducer. Significant differentially expressed proteins were identified which were involved in various biological pathways and functional categories.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion and iTRAQ Labeling: Cell pellets from primary human erythroid cultures (un-treated and treated with 300nM decitabine) were dissolved in 200uL dissolution buffer (0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 0.05% SDS). Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (BioRad). For each sample, 100ug of total protein had undergone cysteine disulphide bonds reduction, cysteine blockage and trypsinization as described previously (Papachristou el al. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 2078-2089). Tryptic digested peptides were labelled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent kit (AB Sciex) according to the manufacturer instructions. Samples from healthy primary cultures were labelled using 113, 115 tags (un-treated) and 114, 116 (treated), whereas for samples from thalassaemic primary cultures, tags 117, 119 (un-treated) and 118, 121 (treated) were used. In total three iTRAQ 8plex experiments took place. Each 8plex experiment contained two healthy samples (un-treated and treated with 300nM decitabine) and two thalassaemic samples (un-treated and treated with 300nM decitabine). In total six healthy and six thalassaemic samples (in both conditions of un-treated and treated with 300nM decitabine) were labelled. Following the completion of labeling reactions, samples were pooled, dried with a speedvac concentrator and stored at -20 celsius degrees  until the high-pH Reverse Phase fractionation.  High-pH Reverse Phase (RP) Peptide Fractionation: High-pH RP C18 fractionation of the iTRAQ 8plex labelled peptides was performed on the Dionex P680 pump equipped with PDA-100 photodiode array detector using the Waters, XBridge C18 columm (150 x 4.6 mm, 3.5 um) as described previously (Papachristou el al.  J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 2078-2089). Signal was monitored at 280, 254 and 215 nm and the column temperature was set to 30 celsius degrees. The every one minute collected fractions were finally dried with speedvac concentrator for 4-5 h and stored at -20 celsius degrees until the LC-MS analysis.   LC-MS Analysis: All LC-MS experiments were performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high resolution Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described previously (Papachristou el al. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 2078-2089). Individual high-pH RP peptide fractions were reconstituted in 30 uL loading solution composed of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. A 5 uL volume was injected and loaded for 8 min on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 um x 2 cm C18, 5 um, 100 A trapping column with the ulPickUp Injection mode with the loading pump operating at flow rate 5 uL/min. For the peptide separation the Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 um x 25 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 um, 100 A column retrofitted to a PicoTip emitter (FS360-20-10-D-20-C7) was used for multi-step gradient elution. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) was composed of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted under a 315 minute gradient from 2% (B) to 33% (B). Flow rate was 300 nL/min and column temperature was set at 35 celsius degrees. Gaseous phase transition of the separated peptides was achieved with positive ion electrospray ionization applying a voltage of 2.5 kV. Thermo Xcalibur software was used for spectrum acquisition and quality control. For every MS survey scan, the top 10 most abundant multiply charged precursor ions between m/z ratio 300 and 2200 and intensity threshold 500 counts were selected with FT mass resolution of 60000 and subjected to HCD fragmentation with an isolation window of 1.2 Da. Tandem mass spectra were acquired with FT resolution of 15000. Normalized collision energy was set to 33 and already targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 sec with 5 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
The HCD tandem mass spectra collected from RP fractions were analyzed through the Proteome Discoverer software (v 1.4) for peptide and protein identifications with the following settings: MS1 Precursor Selection and spectrum properties filter (min. precursor mass 600Da and max. precursor mass 5000Da). All spectra were searched against a UniProt Fasta file containing 20,236 human reviewed entries. The search parameters were the following: Max Missed Cleavage Sites=2, Min Peptide Length = 6, Precursor Mass Tolerance 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05Da, Dynamic Modification was Oxidation (M) and Static Modifications iTRAQ-8plex (N-Terminus), iTRAQ-8plex (K) and Methylthio (C). iTRAQ quantification was also performed through the same software. Protein ratios were normalized to protein median and peptides with missing iTRAQ channels were excluded from relative protein quantification. Only high confidence peptides (p<0.01) were used for the analysis. Peptides were assigned to proteins using the maximum parsimony principle. The percolator module in Proteome Discoverer software (v 1.4) was used to evaluate the certainty of identifications and controlling the FDR with the following settings (Input data: Maximun Delta Cn 0.05, Decoy Database Search: Target FDR (Strict) 0.01, Target FDR (Relaxed) 0.05 and Validation based on q-value). The three iTRAQ batches, maintaining the same iTRAQ labels for the same samples, were pooled and analysed by Proteome Discoverer software (v 1.4) in a single run. Log transformation of iTRAQ ratios resulted in normal distribution as checked by Kolmogorov-Smirnof test for normality. Consequently p-values corresponding to the magnitude of differential expression were calculated from the log transformed iTRAQ ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Reactivation of &#x3b3;-globin is considered a promising approach for the treatment of &#x3b2;-thalassemia and sickle cell disease. Therapeutic induction of &#x3b3;-globin expression, however, is fraught with lack of suitable therapeutic targets. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects that treatment with decitabine has on the proteome of human primary erythroid cells from healthy and thalassemic volunteers, as a means of identifying new potential pharmacological targets. Decitabine is a known &#x3b3;-globin inducer, which is not, however, safe enough for clinical use. A proteomic approach utilizing isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) analysis, in combination with high-pH reverse phase peptide fractionation followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), was employed to investigate the effects of decitabine treatment. Bioinformatics analysis making use of the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) was employed for functional annotation of the 192 differentially expressed proteins identified. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006889. The proteins fall into various biological pathways, such as the NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, and into many functional categories including regulation of cell proliferation, transcription factor and DNA binding, protein stabilization, chromatin modification and organization, and oxidative stress proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Primary erythroid cultures, Decitabine, Hbf

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens Basic Research Center Soranou tou Ephessiou 4 115.27 Athens Greece Tel:         +30 210 6597221  Fax:        +30 210 6597545 www.bioacademy.gr
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens

### Submitter
Eleni Katsantoni

### Lab Head
Dr Eleni Katsantoni
Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens Basic Research Center Soranou tou Ephessiou 4 115.27 Athens Greece Tel:         +30 210 6597221  Fax:        +30 210 6597545 www.bioacademy.gr


