### Accession
PXD011791

### Title
Amino acid priming of mTOR is essential for heart regeneration

### Description
For a short period of time in mammalian neonates, the mammalian heart can regenerate via cardiomyocyte proliferation. This regenerative capacity is largely absent in adults. In other organisms, including zebrafish, damaged hearts can regenerate throughout their lifespans. Many studies have been performed to understand the mechanisms of cardiomyocyte de-differentiation and proliferation during heart regeneration  however, the underlying reason why adult zebrafish and young mammalian cardiomyocytes are primed to enter cell cycle have not been identified. Here we show the primed state of a pro-regenerative cardiomyocyte is dictated by its amino acid profile and metabolic state. Adult zebrafish cardiomyocyte regeneration is a result of amino acid-primed mTOR activation. Zebrafish and neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes display elevated glutamine levels, predisposing them to amino acid-driven activation of mTORC1. Injury initiates Wnt/β-catenin signalling that instigates primed mTORC1 activation, Lin28 expression and metabolic remodeling necessary for zebrafish cardiomyocyte regeneration. These studies reveal a unique mTORC1 primed state in zebrafish and mammalian regeneration competent cardiomyocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were suspended in 1M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and heated to 50°C for 20min.  Denatured proteins were reduced with 2mM DTT, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted on Waters Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Peptides were separated using a heated 50°C 30cm C18 columns in a 180min gradient of 1% to 45% (vol/vol) acetonitrile with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid. Peptides were measured on a Thermo Scientific Lumos Orbitrap operated in data-dependent mode with the following settings: 60000 resolution, 400-1600 m/z full scan, Top Speed of 3 seconds, and a 1.8 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label free quantification of proteins was done with MaxQuant 1.5 using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) against the Danio rerio proteome dataset downloaded from Uniprot on July 1st, 2016. Peptides were searched using a 5ppm mass error and a match between run window of 2min. Proteins that were significantly regulated between conditions were identified in Perseus 1.4.1.3.

### Publication Abstract
Heart disease is the leading cause of death with no method to repair damaged myocardium due to the limited proliferative capacity of adult cardiomyocytes. Curiously, mouse neonates and zebrafish can regenerate their hearts via cardiomyocyte de-differentiation and proliferation. However, a molecular mechanism of why these cardiomyocytes can re-enter cell cycle is poorly understood. Here, we identify a unique metabolic state that primes adult zebrafish and neonatal mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes to proliferate. Zebrafish and neonatal mouse hearts display elevated glutamine levels, predisposing them to amino-acid-driven activation of TOR, and that TOR activation is required for zebrafish cardiomyocyte regeneration <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>. Through a multi-omics approach with cellular validation we identify metabolic and mitochondrial changes during the first week of regeneration. These data suggest that regeneration of zebrafish myocardium is driven by metabolic remodeling and reveals a unique metabolic regulator, TOR-primed state, in which zebrafish and mammalian cardiomyocytes are regeneration competent.

### Keywords
Heart regeneration, Mtor

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

### Submitter
Aaron Robitaille

### Lab Head
Dr Hannele Ruohola-Baker
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA


