### Accession
PXD030457

### Title
Proteomics of isolated sieve tubes from N.tabacum

### Description
Symplasmicly connected cells called sieve elements form a network of tubes in the phloem   of vascular plants. Sieve elements have essential functions as they provide routes for   photoassimilate distribution, the exchange of developmental signals, and the coordination of   defense responses. Nonetheless, they are the least understood main type of plant cells.   They are extremely sensitive, possess a reduced endomembrane system without Golgi   apparatus, and lack nuclei and translation machineries, so that transcriptomics and similar   techniques cannot be applied. Moreover, the analysis of phloem exudates as a proxy for   sieve element composition is marred by methodological problems. We developed a simple   protocol for the isolation of sieve elements from leaves and stems of Nicotiana tabacum at   sufficient amounts for large-scale proteome analysis. By quantifying the enrichment of   individual proteins in purified sieve element relative to bulk phloem preparations, proteins of   increased likelyhood to function specifically in sieve elements were identified. To evaluate   the validity of this approach, YFP-constructs of genes encoding three of the candidate   proteins were expressed in plants. Tagged proteins occurred exclusively in sieve elements.   Two of them, a putative cytochrome b561/ferric reductase and a reticulon-like protein,   appeared restricted to ER segments that were inaccessible to the luminal ER marker,   HDEL-GFP, suggesting a previously unknown differentiation of the endomembrane system   in sieve elements. Evidently, our list of promising candidate proteins provides a valuable exploratory tool for sieve element biology.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Material. Transgenic Nicotiana tabacum expressing GFP tagged to the sieve element   endoplasmic reticulum (SER) under the control of the Medicago truncatula SEO2 promoter   was available in our lab (11). Wild-type and pMtSEO2-ER-GFP transgenic N. tabacum var.   Petit Havana plants were maintained in a greenhouse at 25°C with a 16/8-h photoperiod.   Preparation of bulk phloem and purified sieve elements. To obtain phloem tissue from   young, rapidly growing stems, the cortex was peeled exposing phloem on the inner side of   the peel (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The phloem was scratched off with scalpels or razor blades   and sectioned into small fragments. Phloem from leaves was isolated from the mid rib.   When the midrib of a tobacco leaf is bent in the adaxial direction, the cortex cracks and can   be peeled off to expose the phloem on the vascular bundle (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The   phloem layer can then be scratched off. To isolate sieve elements from phloem tissues, samples were incubated overnight in   0.5% (w/v) cellulase Onozuka R-10 (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany), 0.05% (w/v) pectolyase   Y23 (Seishin Corp., Tokyo, Japan), 0.5% (w/v) macerozyme R10 (Serva, Heidelberg,   Germany), 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich, Damstadt, Germany), 1 mM   CaCl2, 10 mM HEPES/Tris (pH 5.6). The enzyme solution was adjusted to 800 mosmol kg-1   with D-sorbitol (Sigma-Aldrich, Damstadt, Germany). This treatment preserved sieve   element cell walls while the walls of all other cell types were digested. The resulting   protoplast suspension was filtered through a nylon mesh (50 µm) and washed with 800 mM   D-sorbitol and 1 mM CaCl2. The remaining samples containing complete sieve elements   was shock frozen in liquid nitrogen, freeze-dried and stored at room temperature.   Proteomics analysis by Mass Spectrometry. The freeze-dried samples were denatured at   95°C for 20 minutes in a buffer containing 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 40 mM DTT. After   samples had cooled to room temperature, 50 mM chloroacetamide were added for alkylation   before samples were centrifuged to remove cell debris. The protein concentration in the   supernatant was determined by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie staining. Up to 40 µg   protein were extracted from the gel and washed with precooled 80% acetone. The proteins   were dried and digested in 6 M urea and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) with 2 µg Lys-C protease at   37°C for three hours. The samples were digested further with 1 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH   8.0), and 2 µg trypsin overnight, and then were acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid to stop   the digestion reactions. The peptide mixtures were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)   multiplex kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA) for deep proteomic comparison.   Quantitative LC-MS/MS/MS-analysis (MS3) analysis was performed with a nano-flow RP-  HPLC combined with a Tribrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,   Waltham MA, USA); see SI Appendix, Table S9 for details.

### Data Protocol
The datasets obtained were   analyzed with PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo ON, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
Symplasmicly connected cells called sieve elements form a network of tubes in the phloem of vascular plants. Sieve elements have essential functions as they provide routes for photoassimilate distribution, the exchange of developmental signals, and the coordination of defense responses. Nonetheless, they are the least understood main type of plant cells. They are extremely sensitive, possess a reduced endomembrane system without Golgi apparatus, and lack nuclei and translation machineries, so that transcriptomics and similar techniques cannot be applied. Moreover, the analysis of phloem exudates as a proxy for sieve element composition is marred by methodological problems. We developed a simple protocol for the isolation of sieve elements from leaves and stems of <i>Nicotiana tabacum</i> at sufficient amounts for large-scale proteome analysis. By quantifying the enrichment of individual proteins in purified sieve element relative to bulk phloem preparations, proteins of increased likelyhood to function specifically in sieve elements were identified. To evaluate the validity of this approach, yellow fluorescent protein constructs of genes encoding three of the candidate proteins were expressed in plants. Tagged proteins occurred exclusively in sieve elements. Two of them, a putative cytochrome b561/ferric reductase and a reticulon-like protein, appeared restricted to segments of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that were inaccessible to green fluorescent protein dissolved in the ER lumen, suggesting a previously unknown differentiation of the endomembrane system in sieve elements. Evidently, our list of promising candidate proteins ( <b><i>SI Appendix</i>, Table S1</b>) provides a valuable exploratory tool for sieve element biology.

### Keywords
N.tabacum, Sieve tubes, Proteomics

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg
School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99154, USA

### Submitter
Joerg Hofmann

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Knoblauch
School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99154, USA


