### Accession
PXD021098

### Title
Fecal proteomics as a novel method to study mammalian behavior and physiology

### Description
Mammalian feces can be collected non-invasively during field research and provides valuable information on the ecology and evolution of the host individuals. Undigested food objects, genome/metagenome, steroid hormones, and stable isotopes obtained from fecal samples provide evidence on diet, host/symbiont genetics, and physiological status of the individuals. However, proteins in mammalian feces have hardly been studied, which hampers the molecular investigations into the behavior and physiology of the host individuals. Here, we apply mass spectrometry-based proteomics to fecal samples (n = 10) that were collected from infant, juvenile, and adult captive Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) to describe the proteomes of the host, food, and intestinal microbes. The results show that fecal proteomics is a useful method to investigate dietary changes along with breastfeeding and weaning, to reveal the organ/tissue and taxonomy of dietary items, and to estimate physiological status inside intestinal tracts. These types of insights are difficult or impossible to obtain through other molecular approaches. Most mammalian species are facing extinction risk and there is an urgent need to obtain knowledge on their ecology and evolution for better conservation strategy. The fecal proteomics framework we present here is easily applicable to wild settings and other mammalian species, and provides direct evidence of their behavior and physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Feces were disrupted in a guanidine hydrochloride solution and centrifuged to pellet insoluble materials. The supernatant was then ultra-centrifuged to pellet bacteria. The final supernatant samples, containing the soluble proteins, were then reduced and alkylated, and the protein solutions were then digested using trypsin overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were purified using Stage Tips with C18 membrane and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS), using an EASY-nLC 1200 connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
RAW data files generated by LC-MS/MS were searched against a database consisting of the rhesus macaque Uniprot proteome downloaded on 2019-06-28 and all available bacterial and relevant food (i.e., sweet potato, rice, soybean, maize, wheat, and peanuts) Swiss-Prot proteomes downloaded on 2019-06-20 from Uniprot, as well as a common laboratory contaminant database provided with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein groups with at least 2 different non-overlapping peptides were considered confidently identified, and MS/MS spectra were often manually examined for correct identifications. All protein hits that could be considered possible contamination products were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian faeces can be collected noninvasively during field research and provide valuable information on the ecology and evolution of the source individuals. Undigested food remains, genome/metagenome, steroid hormones, and stable isotopes obtained from faecal samples provide evidence on diet, host/symbiont genetics, and physiological status of the individuals. However, proteins in mammalian faeces have hardly been studied, which hinders the molecular investigations into the behaviour and physiology of the source individuals. Here, we apply mass spectrometry-based proteomics to faecal samples (n = 10), collected from infant, juvenile, and adult captive Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata), to describe the proteomes of the source individual, of the food it consumed, and its intestinal microbes. The results show that faecal proteomics is a useful method to: (i) investigate dietary changes along with breastfeeding and weaning, (ii) reveal the taxonomic and histological origin of the food items consumed, and (iii) estimate physiological status inside intestinal tracts. These types of insights are difficult or impossible to obtain through other molecular approaches. Most mammalian species are facing extinction risk and there is an urgent need to obtain knowledge on their ecology and evolution for better conservation strategy. The faecal proteomics framework we present here is easily applicable to wild settings and other mammalian species, and provides direct evidence of their behaviour and physiology.

### Keywords
Diet, Weaning, Lc-ms/ms, Feces, Japanese macaque, Breastfeeding

### Affiliations
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Takumi Tsutaya

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


