### Accession
PXD045036

### Title
Characterization of Tau95 led to the identification of a four-subunit TFIIIC complex in trypanosomatid parasites

### Description
RNA polymerase III (RNAP III) synthetizes small essential non-coding RNA molecules such as tRNAs and 5S rRNA. In yeast and vertebrates, RNAP III needs general transcription factors TFIIIA, TFIIIB and TFIIIC to initiate transcription. TFIIIC, composed of six subunits, binds to internal promoter elements in RNAP III-dependent genes. Limited information is available about RNAP III transcription in the trypanosomatid protozoa Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania major, which diverged early from the eukaryotic lineage. Analyses of the first draft of the trypanosomatid genome sequences failed to recognize orthologs of any of the TFIIIC subunits, suggesting that this transcription factor is absent in these parasites. However, a single putative TFIIIC subunit was recently annotated in the databases. Here we characterize this subunit in T. brucei and L. major and demonstrate that it corresponds to Tau95. In silico analyses showed that both proteins possess the typical Tau95 sequences: the DNA binding region and the dimerization domain. As anticipated for a transcription factor, Tau95 localized to the nucleus in insect forms of both parasites.  Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that Tau95 binds to tRNA and U2 snRNA genes in T. brucei. Remarkably, by performing tandem affinity purifications we identified orthologs of TFIIIC subunits Tau55, Tau131 and Tau138 in T. brucei and L. major. Thus, contrary to what was assumed, trypanosomatid parasites do possess a TFIIIC complex.  Other putative interacting partners of Tau95 were identified in T. brucei and L. major.

### Sample Protocol
To determine  the proteins that interact with TbTau95 and LmTau95, we performed tandem affinity purification assays, using mid-log phase parasites from both LmTau95-PTP and TbTau95-PTP cell lines (3 L at 3-4 × 107 cells/ml). The eluted proteins were concentrated with Amicon Ultracel 3K columns and by evaporation in a vacuum concentrator and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and SYPRO Ruby staining. Individual lanes from the gels were sliced into two pieces and proteins subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion prior to LC–MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was searched using SequestHT in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) simultaneously against two databases: a list of common laboratory contaminant proteins (Thermo scientific, 298 entries, 2015) and either Trypanosoma brucei (TriTrpyDB, release 52, containing 9788 entries, retrieved May 2021) or L major, Friedlin strain (TriTrypDB, release 52, containing 8424 entries, retrieved May 2021). Enzyme specificity for trypsin was set to semi-tryptic with up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
RNA polymerase III (RNAP III) synthetizes small essential non-coding RNA molecules such as tRNAs and 5S rRNA. In yeast and vertebrates, RNAP III needs general transcription factors TFIIIA, TFIIIB, and TFIIIC to initiate transcription. TFIIIC, composed of six subunits, binds to internal promoter elements in RNAP III-dependent genes. Limited information is available about RNAP III transcription in the trypanosomatid protozoa Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania major, which diverged early from the eukaryotic lineage. Analyses of the first published draft of the trypanosomatid genome sequences failed to recognize orthologs of any of the TFIIIC subunits, suggesting that this transcription factor is absent in these parasites. However, a putative TFIIIC subunit was recently annotated in the databases. Here we characterize this subunit in T. brucei and L. major and demonstrate that it corresponds to Tau95. In silico analyses showed that both proteins possess the typical Tau95 sequences: the DNA binding region and the dimerization domain. As anticipated for a transcription factor, Tau95 localized to the nucleus in insect forms of both parasites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that Tau95 binds to tRNA and U2 snRNA genes in T. brucei. Remarkably, by performing tandem affinity purifications we identified orthologs of TFIIIC subunits Tau55, Tau131, and Tau138 in T. brucei and L. major. Thus, contrary to what was assumed, trypanosomatid parasites do possess a TFIIIC complex. Other putative interacting partners of Tau95 were identified in T. brucei and L. major. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; A four-subunit TFIIIC complex is present in T. brucei and L. major &#x2022; TbTau95 associates with tRNA and U2 snRNA genes &#x2022; Putative interacting partners of Tau95 might include some RNAP II regulators.

### Keywords
Leishmania major; trypanosoma brucei; rnap iii transcription; tfiiic; tau95, Orbitrap lumos

### Affiliations
Unidad de Biomedicina Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Ebbing de Jong

### Lab Head
Dr Santiago Martinez-Calvillo
Unidad de Biomedicina Facultad de Estudios Superiores Iztacala Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México


