### Accession
PXD034644

### Title
N-acetylcysteine overcomes NF1-loss driven resistance to PI3K alpha inhibition in breast cancer.

### Description
Breast cancer is the second most common cancer type worldwide, representing 25% of all cancers in women. PIK3CA is one of the most frequently mutated genes in breast cancer and mutations result in constitutive activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway. More than 30 inhibitors against PI3K/mTOR are being tested in clinical trials, however, resistance mechanisms evolve frequently resulting in disease progression. The aim of our study was to investigate PIK3CA collaborative mutations that result in resistance to BYL719, a PI3Kα selective inhibitor. For this purpose, we used a genome-wide PiggyBac transposon mediated mutagenesis screen in a PIK3CAH1047R mutated murine tumor model. One of the tumor suppressor genes discovered was neurofibromin 1 (NF1). Using shRNA-mediated knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of NF1 in murine and human PIK3CAH1047R cell lines and a patient derived xenograft organoid model, we found that NF1 loss reduces sensitivity to PI3Kα inhibition. Additionally, we find that loss of NF1 correlates with enhanced glycolysis and lower levels of ROS. Unexpectedly, treatment with NAC sensitized NF1 KO cells to PI3K inhibition in vitro, and in vivo. Global phospho-proteomics indicated that the combination with NAC enhances the inhibitory effect of PI3K inhibition on mTOR signaling, which inhibits proliferation of NF1 KO tumor cells. This raises the interesting possibility to combine PI3K inhibition with NAC especially in NF1 loss tumors

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in buffer containing 2M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma), 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate , 5 mM TCEP and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma P5726&P0044) using strong ultra-sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium) followed by 10 min incubation at 95 °C. 200 µg of proteins were alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. After that samples were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final guanidine hydrochloride concentration of 0.5 M, proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsi) overnight at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform. The peptide sample flow-through obtained after IMAC enrichment was dried and 10 µg of peptides labeled with tandem mass isobaric tags (TMT 18-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were distributed across 2 TMT set and the 2 reference channels (containing mix of all samples) were included in each of the sets. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system Data acquisition for phosphorylated peptides: The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 250% and “Standard”, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s. Data acqusitiion for TMT labelled peptides: The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Throughout each acquisition, the FAIMS Pro interface switched between CVs of −40 V and −70 V with cycle times of 1.5 s and 1.5 s, respectively. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and a scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z, AGC target set to “Standard” and maximum injection time set to “Auto”. Precursors were filtered with precursor selection range set to 400–1600 m/z, monoisotopic peak determination set to “Peptide”, charge state set to 2 to 6, a dynamic exclusion of 45 s, a precursor fit of 50% in a window of 0.7 m/z and an intensity threshold of 5e3. Precursors selected for MS2 analysis were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z window and collected for a maximum injection time of 35 ms with AGC target set to “Standard”. Fragmentation was performed with a CID collision energy of 30% and MS2 spectra were acquired in the IT at scan rate “Turbo”. MS2 spectra were subjected to real time search using a human database (uniport) using the following settings: enzyme was set to “Trypsin”, TMTpro16plex (K and N-term) and Carbamidomethyl (C) were set as fixed modification, Oxidation (M) was set as variable modifications, maximum missed cleavages was set to 1 and maximum variable modifications to 2. Maximum search time was set to 100 ms, the scoring threshold was set to 1.4 XCorr, 0.1 dCn, 10 ppm precursor tolerance, charge state 2 and “TMT SPS MS3 Mode” was enabled. Subsequently, spectra were filtered with a precursor selection range filter of 400–1600 m/z, precursor ion exclusion set to 25 ppm low and 25 ppm high and isobaric tag loss exclusion set to “TMTpro”. MS/MS product ions of precursors identified via RTS were isolated for an MS3 scan using the quadrupole with a 2 m/z window and ions were collected for a maximum injection time of 200 ms with a normalized AGC target set to 200%. SPS was activated and the number of SPS precursors was set to 10. Isolated fragments were fragmented with normalized HCD collision energy set to 55% and MS3 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 and a scan range of 100 to 500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteome data analysis  The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a human protein database (Uniprot) using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2 to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification.   TMT data analysis  The acquired raw-files were analysed using the SpectroMine software (Biognosis AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). Spectra were searched against a human proteome database (Uniprot). Standard Pulsar search settings for TMT 18 pro (“TMTpro_Quantification”) were used. The raw reported intensities were exported. The different TMT experiments were combined using the pool channel based internal reference scaling (IRS) approach described previously (Plubell et.al. 2017). In brief, for each protein a geometric means of pool channels from all TMT sets were calculated. Subsequently, for each TMT set, a protein specific scaling factor was calculated as ratio of geometric mean to the reference channel intensity. The IRS corrected protein intensities were then used for differential analysis using SafeQuant R package v.2

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phospho proteomics, Pi3k alpha inhibition, Tmt, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facillity, Biozentrum, University of Basel 4056 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facillity, Biozentrum, University of Basel 4056 Basel, Switzerland


