### Accession
PXD001611

### Title
Defining a minimal cell: essentiality of small ORFs and ncRNAs in a genome-reduced bacterium

### Description
Identifying all essential genomic components is critical for the assembly of minimal artificial life. In the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae, we found, that small ORFs (smORFs; <100 residues), accounting for 10% of all ORFs, are the most frequently essential  genomic components (53%). Essentiality of smORFs may be explained by their function as members of protein and/or DNA/RNA complexes. In larger proteins, essentiality applied to individual domains and not entire proteins, a notion we could confirm by expression of truncated domains. The fraction of essential non-coding RNAs non-overlapping with essential genes is 5% higher than of non-transcribed regions (0.9%), pointing to the important functions of the former. The data highlights the minimal genome (33%, 269410 bp of M. pneumoniae genome), with an unexpected hidden layer of smORFs with essential functions.

### Sample Protocol
Each fraction (amounts ranging from 20 to 486 µg) was digested in solution with trypsin. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (ration protein:enzyme 10:1). Peptides generated in the digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 300µl of 0.1%FA. An aliquot of 2.5µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermofisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75μm x 150mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% ACN with 0.1% FA in 60 min at a flow of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer and the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and in all experiments full-MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution setting of 60,000. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.1 software. 20 µg of the total extract was also digested and desalted and 1 µg of the resulting peptides analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min). Protein identification and quantitation was performed by Proteome Discoverer software v.1.3 (ThermoFisher) using MASCOT v2.3.1 (Matrix Science) as search engine. Data were processed by a search against a database that contains all the putative M. pneumoniae proteins larger than 19 aa and including the most common contaminants (86933 sequences). Carbamidomethylation for cysteines, was set as fixed modification, and acetylation in protein N-terminal and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was 7 ppm in MS and 0.5 Da in MS/MS, and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides were filtered based on the FDR (False Discovery rate) lower than 5%. Proteins were quantified using the T3PQ approach (37) with an in-house R script that considered the average of the three most intense unique peptides without missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying all essential genomic components is critical for the assembly of minimal artificial life. In the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae, we found that small ORFs (smORFs; &lt; 100 residues), accounting for 10% of all ORFs, are the most frequently essential genomic components (53%), followed by conventional ORFs (49%). Essentiality of smORFs may be explained by their function as members of protein and/or DNA/RNA complexes. In larger proteins, essentiality applied to individual domains and not entire proteins, a notion we could confirm by expression of truncated domains. The fraction of essential non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) non-overlapping with essential genes is 5% higher than of non-transcribed regions (0.9%), pointing to the important functions of the former. We found that the minimal essential genome is comprised of 33% (269,410 bp) of the M. pneumoniae genome. Our data highlight an unexpected hidden layer of smORFs with essential functions, as well as non-coding regions, thus changing the focus when aiming to define the minimal essential genome.

### Keywords
Non-coding rnas, Minimal genome, Small proteins

### Affiliations
EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
CRG

### Submitter
Javier Delgado

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


