### Accession
PXD030479

### Title
venous hypertensive myelopathy LC-MS/MS

### Description
A major challenge in Spinal Dural Arteriovenous Fistula (SDAVF) was its timely diagnosis, but no specific predictive biomarkers were known. In the discovery cohort (case, n=8 vs. control, n=8), we used cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and paired plasma samples to identify differentially expressed proteins by label-free quantitative proteomics. Further bioinformatics enrichment analyses were performed to screen target proteins. Finally, it was validated by ELISA experiment in two of the new cohort (case, n=17 vs. control, n=9).

### Sample Protocol
5-10ml of Cerebrospinal fluid（CSF）was collected by lumbar puncture. 2ml of CSF sent to the hospital laboratory for routine examination including cell count and differential, total protein, and glucose. Meanwhile, paired 4ml blood was collected using Vacutainer CPT tubes (BD Biosciences) containing EDTA. Samples were transferred to the biobank of our hospital at 4℃ within 2 hours. Then, CSF and whole blood samples were centrifuged at 1500r/min and 3000r/min, respectively, for 10 min. The supernatant was collected in 0.5 mL aliquots in polypropylene tubes (Corning, 430659), and stored at –80°C. In the discovery cohort, every 8 samples were mixed in each group and aliquoted into 4 samples (see Figure 5). The mixed samples were lysed in the buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6). The protein concentration was determined by the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The proteins were incubated with 100mM DTT at 37℃ for 1 h. After incubated, the lysates were transferred to the centrifugal filter (Microcon YM-30, EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA), and replaced with 200ul UA (8M Urea, 100mM Tris.Cl pH8.5) twice. After the buffer was replaced, the proteins within UA were alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO) in the dark under room temperature for 15min. The UA buffer was subsequently replaced with 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO), and digested with the trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:50 (w: w)) at 37℃ overnight. The desaltation of resultant tryptic peptides was conducted by StageTips and stored at -20°C. The peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed by the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL Waltham, MA) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200. The samples were run with mobile phases containing buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The peptides were separated by a capillary analytic C18 column (length: 25cm, inner diameter: 150 μm, particles diameter: 1.9 μm) in a 180-min non-linear gradient at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. For each three-second cycle, the full MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5 × 105, and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, collision energy: 30%) was used to fragment these precursors. MS/MS scan was performed in the IonTrap (AGC = 3 × 104). MaxQuant (version 1.6) software was used for database search and label-free quantitative analysis. The Homo sapiens proteome sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot website (https://www.uniprot.org). The parameters of the database search were set as follows: Type: standard; Multiplicity: 1; The protease used for protein digestion: trypsin; Label-free quantification: LFQ; The minimum score for unmodified peptides: 15. All other parameters were default values.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis of this part was mainly run in R (version 3.6.3). We defined significant differential expressed proteins (DEPs) as FoldChange >1.5 (up- and down-regulated) and P < 0.05. The DEPs were visualized by volcano plot and Venn plot via ggplot2 package. The annotation and enrichment of GO term and KEGG pathway was achieved through clusterProfiler package and org.Hs.eg.db package.11 The protein-protein interactions (PPI) annotation of DEPs were obtained from the STRING database (Version 11.5, string-db.org). PPI subcluster and top-10 hubgene were extracted via MCODE and Cytohubba plugin of Cytoscape software(version 3.8.2). The information of the target proteins was got online from GeneCards (www.genecards.org) and Human Protein Atlas (http://www.proteinatlas.org)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sdavf, Venous hypertensive myelopathy, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
xuanwu hospital capital medical university
Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University

### Submitter
yinqing wang

### Lab Head
Dr China International Neuroscience Institute
Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University


