### Accession
PXD038475

### Title
Serum proteome profiling  across different stages of myxomatous mitral valve disease in domestic dogs

### Description
Development and progression of myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD) in domestic dogs is unpredictable and pathobiology still unclear. The American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (ACVIM) perceived that mayor improvement in management of diseased dogs would be timely diagnosis, especially detection of transition from MMVD stage B1 into B2. Thus, in this study we compared by tandem mass tag (TMT) protocol and mass spectrometry (MS) acquired quantitative proteome profiles of serum collected from healthy (control) (N=12) and dogs diagnosed with different stages of naturally occurring MMVD: B1 (N=13), B2 (N=12) and C (N=13). Prior to proteomic analysis dogs were distinguished into experimental categories based on echocardiography results. Serum biochemistry and concentrations of three cardiac biomarkers (galectin-3, suppression of tumorigenicity 2 and asymmetric dimethylarginine) were performed to obtain better characterization of healthy/control group and MMVD cases.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen serum samples were slowly thawed at RT. When completely thawed, total protein concentration in serum was determined by Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer protocol. For protein digestion workflow, in total 35 µg of serum proteins per sample and internal standard were brought to a final volume of 50 µl per sample by adding 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The internal standard sample was composed of a mixture of equal protein amounts pooled from all samples in presented experiment and was later used as a reference for TMT data normalization. Reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion and TMT labelling were performed as described previously (Kuleš et al., 2020). Finally, five TMT-labelled serum peptide samples (separately labelled with one of the TMT labels: m/z 127, 128, 129, 130 and 131) were pooled with the internal standard sample (labelled with TMT m/z 126) into a new tube to form one sixplex mixture. Altogether, 10 TMT sixplex mixtures were prepared. Subsequently, peptide aliquots were vacuum dried and prepared for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. High resolution nano-LC-MS/MS separation and detection of TMT-labelled serum peptides was performed on the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to the Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Prior to analysis, vacuum dried peptides were dissolved in a loading solvent solution (0.1% formic acid (VWR International, Darmstadt, Germany) in 2% acetonitrile (Honeywell, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA) diluted in ultrapure water (Supelco, Bellefonte, Pennsylvania, USA). Peptide trapping and desalting, nano-LC-MS/MS analysis and Top8 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in a positive ion mode were performed as reported earlier (Kuleš et al., 2020). Briefly, the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm × 5 mm) and the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 μm) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptide trapping was performed for 12 min at a flow rate of 15 μL/min. To separate peptides on analytical column, two mobile phases were used. These were mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile in ultrapure water). For successful separation, a linear chromatographic gradient was used. For this, we followed a gradient program previously reported by (Kuleš et al., 2020). The mass spectrometer operated in a full MS scan mode (m/z range from 350.0 to 1800.0). The resolution was 70,000 and injection time set to 120 ms. The AGC target was set to be 1×106, the ± 2.0 Da. Isolation window was used and dynamic exclusion adjusted to 30 s. HCD fragmentation was applied collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target: 2×105. Peptide precursor ions without assigned charge state and with charge state above +7 were not fragmented. Kuleš, J., Bilić, P., Horvatić, A., Kovačević, A., Guillemin, N., Ljubić, B. B., … Mrljak, V. (2020). Serum proteome profiling in canine chronic valve disease using a TMT-based quantitative proteomics approach. Journal of Proteomics, 223, 103825. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPROT.2020.103825

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS spectra were processed in the Proteome Discoverer (v.2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification and relative quantification were performed in the Proteome Discoverer software (v.2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) with implemented SEQUEST algorithm and database search against Canis lupus familiars. For the database search, reference proteome FASTA files were downloaded from Uniprot/SwissProt database in October 2021 (68378 sequences).c Following parameters were adjusted in Proteome Discoverer software: two trypsin missed cleavage sites were allowed, precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to be 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) was chosen as fixed peptide modification, while oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) as dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated with the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer. At least two unique peptides and 1% FDR were required for extraction of confidently identified proteins. To perform relative protein quantification, a correlation was made between relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from MS/MS spectra and peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard values were used to normalize relative quantification results between sixplexes, and total peptide amount was used for normalization within one sixplex.

### Publication Abstract
Canine myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD) is similar to Barlow's form of MMVD in humans. These valvulopathies are complex, with varying speeds of progression. We hypothesized that the relative abundances of serum proteins would help identify the consecutive MMVD stages and discover new disease pathways on a systemic level. To identify distinction-contributing protein panels for disease onset and progression, we compared the proteomic profiles of serum from healthy dogs and dogs with different stages of naturally occurring MMVD. Dogs were divided into experimental groups on the basis of the left-atrium-to-aorta ratio and normalized left ventricular internal dimension in diastole values. Serum was collected from healthy (N = 12) dogs, dogs diagnosed with MMVD in stages B1 (N = 13) and B2 (N = 12) (asymptomatic), and dogs diagnosed with MMVD in chronic stage C (N = 13) (symptomatic). Serum biochemistry and selected ELISAs (galectin-3, suppression of tumorigenicity, and asymmetric dimethylarginine) were performed. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics, and statistical and bioinformatics analysis were employed. Most of the 21 serum proteins with significantly different abundances between experimental groups (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, FDR &#x2c2; 0.05) were classified as matrix metalloproteinases, protease inhibitors, scaffold/adaptor proteins, complement components, anticoagulants, cytokine, and chaperone. LC-MS TMT proteomics results obtained for haptoglobin, clusterin, and peptidase D were further validated analytically. Canine MMVD stages, including, for the first time, asymptomatic B1 and B2 stages, were successfully distinguished in dogs with the disease and healthy dogs on the basis of the relative abundances of a panel of specific serum proteins. Most proteins with significantly different abundances were involved in immune and inflammatory pathways. Their role in structural remodeling and progression of canine MMVD must be further investigated. Further research is needed to confirm the resemblance/difference with human MMVD. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with the unique dataset identifier PXD038475.

### Keywords
Degenerative mitral valve disease, Dogs, Myxomatous mitral valve disease, Serum, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of University of Zagreb
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Dina Rešetar Maslov

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Vladimir Mrljak
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


