### Accession
PXD044528

### Title
Rab30 regulates lipid homeostasis in the hepatocyte during fasting

### Description
In order to facilitate inter-tissue communication and exchange of proteins, lipoproteins, and metabolites with the circulation, hepatocytes have an intricate and efficient intracellular trafficking system regulated by small Rab GTPases.  Rab30, a putative Golgi-localized Rab GTPase, is induced in the mouse liver by fasting and its expression is further amplified in liver-specific carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 knockout mice (Cpt2L-/-) that lack the ability to oxidize fatty acids in a Pparα-dependent manner.  Live-cell super-resolution imaging and biochemical in vivo proximity labeling demonstrated that Rab30-marked vesicles are highly dynamic and interact with proteins throughout the secretory pathway.  Rab30 whole-body, liver-specific, and Rab30;Cpt2 liver-specific double knockout (DKO) mice are viable and display intact Golgi ultrastructure. However, the loss of Rab30 in Rab30;Cpt2 DKO mice suppresses serum dyslipidemia observed in Cpt2L-/- single knockout mice.  Corresponding with decreased serum triglyceride and cholesterol levels, Rab30;Cpt2 DKO mice exhibit decreased circulating but not hepatic ApoA4 protein, indicative of a trafficking defect.  Together, these data suggest a role for Rab30 in the selective sorting of lipoproteins to influence hepatocyte and circulating triglyceride levels particularly during times of excessive lipid burden.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl at pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and 0.25% deoxycholate) with Roche PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Millepore Sigma, 4906837001) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Millipore Sigma, 11836153001) on ice. Proteins were clarified for 20mins at 12,000rpm and 4˚C and supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Total protein content was estimated by Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23227). Samples were submitted to the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility and were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, TCA/Acetone precipitated then digested overnight with Trypsin/LysC at 1:20 enzyme/protein by mass in 100mM TEAB.  Each sample was individually labeled according to manufacturer protocol then reaction was quenched with 8ul of 5% hydroxylamine.  The combined sample was then dried and reconstituted in 10mM TEAB and injected onto an Agilent LC with fraction collector and separated into 96 fractions over a 105 minute gradient.  Samples were then concatenated into 24 fractions and each run on a Lumos Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer with a 90-minute gradient.

### Data Protocol
Total proteome analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Scientific) and Mascot 2.8 using RefSeq version 204. p-values were calculated by ANOVA and Tukey’s honest significant difference test post-hoc for individual proteins with biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small gtpase, Triglycerides, Lipoprotein, Lipid metabolism, Ppara, Beta oxidation, Vesicle transport, Golgi apparatus

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Departments of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

### Submitter
Michael Wolfgang

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. Wolfgang
Departments of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA


