### Accession
PXD011075

### Title
Human tear fluid proteome dataset for usage as a spectral library and for protein modeling

### Description
This article provides a detailed dataset of human tear fluid proteins. Samples were fractionated by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel electrophoresis resulting in 48 fractions that were spiked with an indexed retention time (iRT) peptide standard. These data are based on a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometric approach and can be used for example as a spectral library for tear fluid proteome analysis by data-independent acquisition (DIA). Moreover, the provided data set can be used with optimized HPLC as well as mass spectrometric settings for proteins/peptides of interest. Besides these aspects, this dataset can serve as a protein overview for gene ontology enrichment analysis as well as for modeling and benchmarking of multiple signaling pathways associated with the ocular surface in healthy or disease stages.

### Sample Protocol
After tear fluid collection with a Schirmer Test strip and elution, protein concentration was determined by amino acid analysis. After that, an SDS gel (4-12% Bis-Tris) electrophoresis staining followed. Then, protein lanes were fractioned, digested with trypsin and peptides extracted. Samples were again measured via amino acid analysis. In total 48 fractions (12 per lane) were generated for nanoHPLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was not performed. Only RAW data are provided.

### Publication Abstract
This article provides a detailed dataset of human tear fluid proteins. Samples were fractionated by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel electrophoresis resulting in 48 fractions that were spiked with an indexed retention time (iRT) peptide standard. These data are based on a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometric approach and can be used for example as a spectral library for tear fluid proteome analysis by data-independent acquisition (DIA). Moreover, the provided data set can be used with optimized HPLC and mass spectrometric settings for proteins/peptides of interest. Besides these aspects, this dataset can serve as a protein overview for gene ontology enrichment analysis and for modeling and benchmarking of multiple signaling pathways associated with the ocular surface in healthy or disease stages. The mass spectrometry proteomics data from the described workflow have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011075.

### Keywords
Tear fluid, Dda, Spectral library, Protein modeling, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Annika Guntermann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany


