### Accession
PXD033424

### Title
Identification of dI-binding proteins

### Description
The dI-binding proteins were enriched and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were incubated with dI- or dA-bearing biotinylated DNA probe, enriched by streptavidine beads and then in-gel digested with trypsin, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed with Maxquant software (version 1.5.3.8) and searched against human International Protein Index database (IPI, version 3.68).

### Publication Abstract
The generation of deoxyinosine (dI) in DNA is one of the most important sources of genetic mutations, which may lead to cancer and other human diseases. A further understanding of the biological consequences of dI necessitates the identification and functional characterizations of dI-binding proteins. Herein, we employed a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to detect the cellular proteins that may sense the presence of dI in DNA. Our results demonstrated that human mitochondrial heat shock protein 60 (HSPD1) can interact with dI-bearing DNA. We further demonstrated the involvement of HSPD1 in the sodium nitrite-induced DNA damage response and in the modulation of dI levels <i>in vitro</i> and in human cells. Together, these findings revealed HSPD1 as a novel dI-binding protein that may play an important role in the mitochondrial DNA damage control in human cells.

### Keywords
Di-binding proteins, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Hunan University

### Submitter
Xiaoxia Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxia Dai
Hunan University


