### Accession
PXD028353

### Title
Development of Hypsizygus marmoreus

### Description
Hypsizygus marmoreus is one of the most popular industrialized cultivation mushrooms in East Asia, including China, Korea and Japan. It draws our attention due to its desirable, mildly sweet nutty flavor, unique texture and medicinal properties. As a result, the number of H. marmoreus cultivation factories increased gradually in different regions of the world, especially in China. H. marmoreus is the third wildly cultivated industrialized cultivated mushroom in China now. However, its development process is still not very clear. In this study, we use proteomics analysis to investigate the mechanism involved in development of Hypsizygus marmoreus.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 1 mL UA buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and HaltTM Protease inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher, Shanghai, China) were added into the centrifuge tube. Mycelia was broken using TissueLyser II (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) at 150 Hz for 60 seconds. The cell extract was treated by ultrasonication for 24 s (on for 6 s, off for 15 s). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The protein concentration was measured with Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, Shanghai, China). before adding DTT. Enzymolysis was performed with FASP methods according to the methods of Jacek R Wiśniewski. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed using an Nano-LC system coupled with Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (ThermalFisher). The MS instrument was operated in date-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap (120 K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 100,000. Different chromatographic gradient lengths from 60 to 240 min were tested for peptide separation. All gradient started at 5% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid) and went up to 32% (v/v) ACN (0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation were performed by Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.4, Matrix Science). The date were searched against the protein database of strain LY1. The analysis of each sample was repeated two times.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypsizygus marmoreus, Mushroom, Development, Proteome

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, School of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Xiuqing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Yu
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Mycology, College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, China


