### Accession
PXD033710

### Title
Proteogenomics and differential ion mobility enables the exploration of the mutational landscape in colon cancer cells

### Description
The sensitivity and depth of proteomic analyses is limited by isobaric ions and interferences that preclude the identification of low abundance peptides. Extensive sample fractionation is often required to extend proteome coverage when sample amount is not a limitation. Ion mobility devices provide a viable alternate approach to resolve confounding ions, improve peak capacity and mass spectrometry (MS) sensitivity. Here, we report the integration of differential ion mobility with segmented ion fractionation (SIFT) to enhance the comprehensiveness of proteomic analyses. The combination of differential ion mobility and SIFT, where narrow windows of ~ m/z 100 are acquired in turn, is found particularly advantageous in the analysis of protein digests, and typically provided 70% gain in identification compared to conventional single-shot LC-MS/MS. The application of this approach is further demonstrated for the analysis of tryptic digests from different colorectal cancer cell lines where the enhanced sensitivity enabled the identification of single amino acid variants that were correlated with the corresponding transcriptomic datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with cold Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) (Fisher Scientific, BP399-1) and pelleted by centrifugation (1000 rpm, 5min). Lysis buffer containing 8M Urea (Fisher Scientific, BP169), 50mM Tris (Thermofisher Scientific) pH 8.2 was added to the cell pellets. Cells were mechanically lysed with 2 x 10s sonication bursts. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10min, and protein concentration of clear lysate was determined by Bradford assay. Samples were diluted to 1M urea 50mM Tris and Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Corp.) (enzyme/protein ratio 1:100) digestion was performed for 3h at 37°C. Trypsin (Promega) digestion (enzyme/protein ratio 1:50) was performed overnight at 37°C. Samples were desalted with OASIS HLB columns (Waters) and dried in a speed-vac. Samples were reconstituted in Formic acid 4% (EMD Millipore Corporation). All analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480™ platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a home-made C18 column (Jupiter C18, Phenomenex, 3 μm, 300 Å, 150 μm × 25 cm) connected to a nanoflex electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C4 precolumn (Optimize Technologies) and eluted at 600 nL/min with a linear gradient of 5–38% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% FA) in 56 min, followed by 38%–100% B in 2 min and held at 100% B for 12 min.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched with PEAKS engine (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Version 10) against the Uniprot human database (Jan 2021). Additional searches were performed using PEAKS and SPIDER21 to identify potential amino acid variants. Maximal tolerances for precursor and fragments were 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Search parameters included trypsin with a maximum of three missed cleavages per peptide. A maximum of 3 variable modifications was allowed per peptide, and included oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), carbamidomethylation (C) and phosphorylation (STY). For SPIDER search, de novo score (%) threshold was set to 15, L equals I and Q equals K was allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide spectrum matches.

### Publication Abstract
The sensitivity and depth of proteomic analyses are limited by isobaric ions and interferences that preclude the identification of low abundance peptides. Extensive sample fractionation is often required to extend proteome coverage when sample amount is not a limitation. Ion mobility devices provide a viable alternate approach to resolve confounding ions and improve peak capacity and mass spectrometry (MS) sensitivity. Here, we report the integration of differential ion mobility with segmented ion fractionation (SIFT) to enhance the comprehensiveness of proteomic analyses. The combination of differential ion mobility and SIFT, where narrow windows of &#x223c;<i>m</i>/<i>z</i> 100 are acquired in turn, is found particularly advantageous in the analysis of protein digests and typically provided more than 60% gain in identification compared to conventional single-shot LC-MS/MS. The application of this approach is further demonstrated for the analysis of tryptic digests from different colorectal cancer cell lines where the enhanced sensitivity enabled the identification of single amino acid variants that were correlated with the corresponding transcriptomic data sets.

### Keywords
Single amino acid polymorphism, Colon cancer, Proteogenomics, Protein mutation, Single amino acid variant, Mass spectrometry, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility (faims), Gas-phase fractionation

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


