### Accession
PXD016041

### Title
selective protein O-glcNAcylation in cells by a proximity-directed O-GlcNAc transferase

### Description
O-Linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a monosaccharide that plays an essential role in cellular signaling throughout the nucleocytoplasmic proteome of eukaryotic cells.  Yet, the study of post-translational modifications like O-GlcNAc has been limited by the lack of strategies to induce O-GlcNAcylation of a target protein in cells.  Here, we report a generalizable genetic strategy to induce O-GlcNAc to specific target proteins in cells using a nanobody as a proximity-directing agent fused to O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT).  Fusion of a nanobody that recognizes GFP (nGFP) or a nanobody that recognizes the four-amino acid sequence EPEA (nEPEA) to OGT(4), a truncated form of OGT, yielded a nanobody-OGT(4) construct that selectively delivered O-GlcNAc to the target protein (e.g., JunB, cJun, Nup62) and reduced alteration of global O-GlcNAc levels in the cell.  Chemical proteomics confirmed the selective increase in O-GlcNAc to the target protein by nanobody-OGT(4).  Glycoproteomics on the target protein revealed similar glycosite selectivity between nanobody-OGT(4) or global elevation of O-GlcNAc.  Finally, we demonstrate the ability to selectively target endogenous ⍺-synuclein for glycosylation in HEK293T cells.  Thus, the use of nanobodies to redirect OGT substrate selection is a versatile strategy to induce glycosylation to desired target proteins in cells that will facilitate discovery of O-GlcNAc functions and provide a mechanism to engineer O-GlcNAc signaling.  The proximity-directed OGT approach for protein-selective O-GlcNAcylation is readily translated to additional protein targets and nanobodies, and may constitute a generalizable strategy to control post-translational modifications in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Desalted samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water (20 µL), and half of the sample (10 µL) was injected onto a C18 trap column (WATERS Cat # 186008821 nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 µm × 180 µm × 20 mm) and separated on an analytical column (WATERS Cat # 186008795 nanoEase MZ Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130 Å, 1.7 µm × 75 µm × 250 mm) with a Waters nanoAcquity system connected in line to a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 50 °C. Peptides were eluted using a multi-step gradient at a flow rate of 0.15 µL/min over 120 min (0−5 min, 2−5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in water; 5−95 min, 5−50%; 95−105 min, 50−98%; 105−115 min, 98%; 115–116 min, 98–2%; 116–120 min, 2%). The electrospray ionization voltage was set to 2 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 275 ˚C. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 s, exclusion list size of 400, and exclusion duration of 30 s. MS1 scans were performed over 400–2000 m/z at resolution 120,000 and the top twenty most intense ions (+2 to +6 charge states) were subjected to MS2 HCD fragmentation at 27%, for 75 ms, at resolution 50,000. Other relevant parameters of HCD include: isolation window (3 m/z), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True). If oxonium product ions (138.0545, 204.0867, 345.1400, 347.1530, 366.1396, 507.1930, or 509.2060 m/z) were observed in the HCD spectra, ETD (250 ms) with supplemental activation (35%) was performed in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. Other relevant parameters of ETHCD include: isolation window (3 m/z), use calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters (True), Orbitrap resolution (50k), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For quantitative proteomics, the data was searched against the human-specific SwissProt-reviewed database 2016 (20,152 proteins, downloaded on Aug. 19, 2016).  HCD spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5 were searched against a database containing the Swissprot 2016 annotated human proteome and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions with specific trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da), static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), and static TMT labeling (229.163 Da) at lysine residues and peptide N-termini.  High confidence assignments were filtered using Percolator (FDR = 1%). The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier and normalized such that the summed peptide intensity per channel was equal.  For all glycoproteomics data, the data was searched using Byonic v3.0.0 as a node in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 against the target protein sequence (Nup62, P37198; JunB, P17275), chymotrypsin, and the nEPEA(4) construct. Indexed databases for chymotryptic digests were created with full cleavage specificity. The database allowed for up to three missed cleavages with variable modifications (methionine oxidation, +15.9949 Da; carbamidomethylcysteine, +57.0215 Da; deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, +0.984016 Da; and others as described below). Precursor ion mass tolerances for spectra acquired using the Orbitrap were set to 10 ppm. Glycopeptide searches allowed for tagged HexNAc modifications (HexNAc +203.0794 on serine, threonine). Glycopeptide spectral assignments passing a FDR of 1% at the peptide spectrum match level based on a target decoy database were kept.  Singly modified glycopeptides assigned from EThCD spectra passing a 1% FDR and possessing a delta modification score of greater than or equal to ten from >2 PSMs were considered unambiguous glycosites.  All other glycopeptides passing a 1% FDR were considered ambiguous glycosites

### Publication Abstract
O-Linked <i>&#x3b2;-N</i>-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is a monosaccharide that plays an essential role in cellular signaling throughout the nucleocytoplasmic proteome of eukaryotic cells. Strategies for selectively increasing O-GlcNAc levels on a target protein in cells would accelerate studies of this essential modification. Here, we report a generalizable strategy for introducing O-GlcNAc into selected target proteins in cells using a nanobody as a proximity-directing agent fused to O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Fusion of a nanobody that recognizes GFP (nGFP) or a nanobody that recognizes the four-amino acid sequence EPEA (nEPEA) to OGT yielded nanobody-OGT constructs that selectively delivered O-GlcNAc to a series of tagged target proteins (e.g., JunB, cJun, and Nup62). Truncation of the tetratricopeptide repeat domain as in OGT(4) increased selectivity for the target protein through the nanobody by reducing global elevation of O-GlcNAc levels in the cell. Quantitative chemical proteomics confirmed the increase in O-GlcNAc to the target protein by nanobody-OGT(4). Glycoproteomics revealed that nanobody-OGT(4) or full-length OGT produced a similar glycosite profile on the target protein JunB and Nup62. Finally, we demonstrate the ability to selectively target endogenous &#x3b1;-synuclein for O-GlcNAcylation in HEK293T cells. These first proximity-directed OGT constructs provide a flexible strategy for targeting additional proteins and a template for further engineering of OGT and the O-GlcNAc proteome in the future. The use of a nanobody to redirect OGT substrate selection for glycosylation of desired proteins in cells may further constitute a generalizable strategy for controlling a broader array of post-translational modifications in cells.

### Keywords
Nanobody, Glycoproteomics, O-glcnac, Ogt

### Affiliations
Lab head
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Lab head


