### Accession
PXD007254

### Title
Protein Abundances can Distinguish Between Naturally-occurring and Laboratory Strains of Yersinia pestis, the Causative Agent of Plague

### Description
The rapid pace of bacterial evolution enables organisms to adapt to the laboratory environment with repeated passage and thus diverge from naturally-occurring environmental (“wild”) strains. Distinguishing wild and laboratory strains is clearly important for biodefense and bioforensics; however, DNA sequence data alone has thus far not provided a clear signature, perhaps due to lack of understanding of how diverse genome changes lead to convergent phenotypes, difficulty in detecting certain types of mutations, or perhaps because some adaptive modifications are epigenetic. Monitoring protein abundance, a molecular measure of phenotype, can overcome some of these difficulties. We have assembled a collection of Yersinia pestis proteomics datasets from our own published and unpublished work, and from a proteomics data archive, and demonstrated that protein abundance data can clearly distinguish laboratory-adapted from wild. We developed a lasso logistic regression classifier that uses binary (presence/absence) or quantitative protein abundance measures to predict whether a sample is laboratory-adapted or wild that proved to be ~98% accurate, as judged by replicated 10-fold cross-validation. Protein features selected by the classifier accord well with our previous study of laboratory adaptation in Y. pestis. The input data was derived from a variety of unrelated experiments and contained significant confounding variables. We show that the classifier is robust with respect to these variables. The methodology is able to discover signatures for laboratory facility and culture medium that are largely independent of the signature of laboratory adaptation. Going beyond our previous laboratory evolution study, this work suggests that proteomic differences between laboratory-adapted and wild Y. pestis are general, potentially pointing to a process that could apply to other species as well.  Additionally, we show that proteomics datasets (even archived data collected for different purposes) contain the information necessary to distinguish wild and laboratory samples. This work has clear applications in biomarker detection as well as biodefense.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed in multiple laboratories using multiple techniques/instruments over a number of years. See manuscript for full details. Briefly, all samples consisted of whole-cell digests using trypsin, and no datasets derived from fractionation prior to mass spec analysis were used.

### Data Protocol
The  set of 381 datasets originated from 137 samples produced for a wide range of experiments conducted over the course of several years. The full set of datasets was split into six different groups for practical reasons (i.e., computational run time and memory limits, and differences in sequence database and modifications); each group was analyzed by a separate MaxQuant session (version 1.5.1.2) to identify and quantify proteins present in each individual dataset. MaxQuant parameters were set to their default values, except re-quantify was set to true. Datasets in MaxQuant sessions 1 and 2 contained data from the KIMD27 strain and were searched against a Y. pestis KIM10+ database. Datasets in MaxQuant sessions 3, 4, 5, and 6 contained data from CO92, the wild isolates, and the serially-passaged strains and were searched against a Y. pestis CO92 database. All sessions were run with the following variable modifications: methionine oxidation and acetylation of the protein amino terminus. Sessions 2, 3, 4, and 5 were run with a fixed carbamidomethyl modification. Protein identifiers from the KIM10+ database and the CO92 database were mapped to each other using BLAST.

### Publication Abstract
The rapid pace of bacterial evolution enables organisms to adapt to the laboratory environment with repeated passage and thus diverge from naturally-occurring environmental ("wild") strains. Distinguishing wild and laboratory strains is clearly important for biodefense and bioforensics; however, DNA sequence data alone has thus far not provided a clear signature, perhaps due to lack of understanding of how diverse genome changes lead to convergent phenotypes, difficulty in detecting certain types of mutations, or perhaps because some adaptive modifications are epigenetic. Monitoring protein abundance, a molecular measure of phenotype, can overcome some of these difficulties. We have assembled a collection of Yersinia pestis proteomics datasets from our own published and unpublished work, and from a proteomics data archive, and demonstrated that protein abundance data can clearly distinguish laboratory-adapted from wild. We developed a lasso logistic regression classifier that uses binary (presence/absence) or quantitative protein abundance measures to predict whether a sample is laboratory-adapted or wild that proved to be ~98% accurate, as judged by replicated 10-fold cross-validation. Protein features selected by the classifier accord well with our previous study of laboratory adaptation in Y. pestis. The input data was derived from a variety of unrelated experiments and contained significant confounding variables. We show that the classifier is robust with respect to these variables. The methodology is able to discover signatures for laboratory facility and culture medium that are largely independent of the signature of laboratory adaptation. Going beyond our previous laboratory evolution study, this work suggests that proteomic differences between laboratory-adapted and wild Y. pestis are general, potentially pointing to a process that could apply to other species as well. Additionally, we show that proteomics datasets (even archived data collected for different purposes) contain the information necessary to distinguish wild and laboratory samples. This work has clear applications in biomarker detection as well as biodefense.

### Keywords
Machine learning, Laboratory adaptation, Evolution, Yersinia pestis

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Owen Leiser

### Lab Head
Dr Helen Kreuzer
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


