### Accession
PXD013642

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Rhizobium favelukesii LPU83 in response to acid stress.

### Description
Acid soils constitute a severe problem for leguminous crops mainly through a disturbance in rhizobia-legume interactions. Rhizobium favelukesii—an acid-tolerant rhizobium able to nodulate alfalfa—is highly competitive for nodule occupation under acid conditions, but inefficient in biologic nitrogen fixation. In this work, we obtained a general description of the acid-stress response of R. favelukesii LPU83 by means of proteomics by comparing the total proteome profiles in the presence or absence of acid stress by nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Thus, a total of 336 proteins were identified with a significant differential expression, 136 of which species were significantly overexpressed and 200 underexpressed in acidity. An in-silico functional characterization with those respective proteins revealed a complex and pleiotropic response by these rhizobia involving components of oxidative phosphorylation, glutamate metabolism, and peptidoglycan biosynthesis, among other pathways. Furthermore, a lower permeability was evidenced in the acid-stressed cells along with several overexpressed proteins related to γ-aminobutyric-acid metabolism, such as the gene product of livK, which was mutated. This mutant exhibited an acid-sensitive phenotype in agreement with the proteomics results. We conclude that both γ-aminobutyric-acid metabolism and a modified cellular envelope could be relevant to acid tolerance in R. favelukesii.

### Sample Protocol
Rhizobium favelukesii LPU83 was cultivated at pH 7 and pH 4.6 up to an O.D600nm of 0.5. A volume of 400 ml of the cultures was centrifuged at 11,000 x g for 30 min at 4 ºC and washed twice with low-salt washing buffer (3 mM KCl, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, 68 mM NaCl, 9 mM NaH2PO4; (28). The pellet was resuspended in approximately 10 ml of 10 mM Tris-Buffer pH 8.5 with the protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. The samples were transferred to 2-ml tubes with glass beads (a mixture of diameters 0.1 to 0.3 mm) and disrupted with a Precellys™ tissue homogenizer (2 cycles of 5,000 rpm for 20 seconds, Bertin Instruments). The samples were then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4 ºC and the supernatants transferred to new tubes for a subsequent 1-h incubation with DNase (RQ1 DNase, PROMEGA) and RNase A at 37 ºC. The samples were next ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 h at 4 ºC. For each cell culture two kinds of protein samples were obtained, a fraction enriched in membrane protein and another in cytosolic protein. The pellets containing the membrane proteins were resuspended in rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10% [v/v] isopropanol, 2% [v/v] Triton X100), while the cytosolic proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone overnight at –20 ºC and stored until processed. Finally, those cytosolic proteins were centrifuged at 10,000 x g at 4 ºC for 20 min, followed by a washing with 90% (v/v) acetone, and resuspended in rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea). The total protein content of the samples was determined by the Bradford assay with Coomassie brilliant blue (29). Two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis was performed as described (Draghi et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
For the proteomic fractions enriched in membrane proteins, two biological replicates, each consisting in 3 technical replicates, were analyzed for both acidic and neutral conditions. For the fractions enriched in cytosolic proteins, 3 biological replicates with a single technical replicate each were used. First, protein samples were reduced with dithiotreitol (10 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 ºC for 60 min and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were precipitated with 0.2 volumes of trichloroacetic acid at –20 ºC for 2 h and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min and the pellets washed three times with acetone at –20 ºC before storage in the cold. The pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, digested with trypsin (Promega V5111) and the peptides desalted with Zip-Tip™ C18 columns (Millipore). Finally, the protein samples were analyzed by nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (Thermo Scientific, model EASY-nLC 1000) with an EASY-Spray™ column (P/N ES803, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, model Q-Exactive). A volume of 2 µl was injected and the column flow rate set to 300 nl/min. The gradient used was from 95% solution A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid in water) and 5% solution B (0.1% [v/v] formic acid in acetonitrile) to 80% B in 185 min, 20–32% in 44 min, 32–95% in 1 min, and 95% B for 10 min. A voltage of 3.5 kV was used for electrospray ionization. Resolution of full MS was 70,000 and tandem MS-MS was 17,500. This analysis was performed by the Center of Chemical and Biological Studies by MALDI-TOF Spectrometry (Centro de Estudios Químico y Biológicos por Espectrometría MALDI-TOF [CEQUIBIEM], National University of Buenos Aires).  The Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant software (ver. 1.5.3.30), was used to process the mass spectra and to identify the peptides. Searches were performed throughout the Rhizobium favelukesii LPU83 protein-sequence database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000019443, UniProt). Peptide identification was made with a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% (30), and peptides were likewise assigned to proteins with a protein FDR of 1%. For the first search a precursor ion-mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used that allowed for m/z retention-time recalibration of precursor ions that were then subjected to a main search at a precursor ion-mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and a product ion-mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. The search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at trypsin/P on the sequence, and the oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification. Label-free quantitation was performed via the corresponding module found in MaxQuant [version 1.5.3.30] (31). All the biological replicates under each condition were included in the experimental design of label-free protein-level quantitation (LFQ) and normalization performed by means of unique and razor-peptide features corresponding to identifications filtered with respective FDRs of 0.01 and 0.05 for peptides and proteins, respectively. The statistical analysis and visualization were performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0, Max Planck Institute, Germany). The statistical significance of relative quantitative changes between the conditions of neutral and acid pH in replicate data was determined by the Student t test at a p value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Acid soils constitute a severe problem for leguminous crops mainly through a disturbance in rhizobium-legume interactions. <i>Rhizobium favelukesii</i>-an acid-tolerant rhizobium able to nodulate alfalfa-is highly competitive for nodule occupation under acid conditions but inefficient for biologic nitrogen fixation. In this work, we obtained a general description of the acid-stress response of <i>R. favelukesii</i> LPU83 by means of proteomics by comparing the total proteome profiles in the presence or absence of acid stress by nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Thus, a total of 336 proteins were identified with a significant differential expression, 136 of which species were significantly overexpressed and 200 underexpressed in acidity. An in silico functional characterization with those respective proteins revealed a complex and pleiotropic response by these rhizobia involving components of oxidative phosphorylation, glutamate metabolism, and peptidoglycan biosynthesis, among other pathways. Furthermore, a lower permeability was evidenced in the acid-stressed cells along with several overexpressed proteins related to &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid metabolism, such as the gene product of <i>livK</i>, which gene was mutated. This mutant exhibited an acid-sensitive phenotype in agreement with the proteomics results. We conclude that both the &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid metabolism and a modified cellular envelope could be relevant to acid tolerance in <i>R. favelukesii</i>.

### Keywords
Acid-stress rhizobia proteomics

### Affiliations
Instituto de Biotecnologia y Biologia Molecular (IBBM) -CCT La Plata CONICET- Fac. de Cs. Exactas, UNLP.
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular. Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata. CONICET.

### Submitter
Juliet Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Mariano Pistorio
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular. Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata. CONICET.


