### Accession
PXD026068

### Title
Nano LC-MS/MS DDA mass spectrometry profiling of I-Ab MHCII immunopeptidome eluted from B6 mice on normal and high fructose/high fat (HFHF) diet

### Description
In Dendritic cells (DC), the MHC II eluted immunopeptidome reflects the antigenic composition of the microenvironment. Proteins are transported and processed into peptides in endosomal MHC II compartments through autophagy or phagocytosis; extracellular peptides can also directly bind MHC II proteins at the cell surface. Altogether, these mechanisms allow DC to sample both the intra and extracellular environment. With an increase in mass spectrometry sensitivity and accuracy, we can now finally tackle important questions on the nature and plasticity of the MHC-II immunopeptidome in health and disease. Presented epitopes, neoepitopes, and PTM-modified epitopes can be quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed to provide a comprehensive picture of DC role in immunosurveillance. To determine whether the redox metabolic conditions induce an altered spectrum of presented peptides, we eluted immunoaffinity-purified I-Ab from conventional dendritic cells isolated from B6 mice on normal or high fat/high fructose (HFHF) diet and analyzed MHC-II-associated peptides by nano LC-MS/MS using data-dependent (DDA) acquisition approaches. Our results show that the environment-driven lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity induced an MHC-class-II immunopeptidome enriched in peptides derived from proteins involved in cellular metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, and responses to redox mediated cellular stress. The quantitative analysis of the I-Ab-eluted immunopeptidomes pinpoint important differences in peptide presentation and epitope selection in mice subjected to a diet rich in saturated fat and carbohydrates, which in turn, could be responsible for inducing a low-grade chronic inflammation in several organs including nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse Dendritic Cells:  Mice on HF/HF and normal diet (ND) controls were injected subcutaneously with 40x106 B16-FLt3-L-producing melanoma cells to in vivo expand the number of DCs in secondary lymphatic organs. Twelve to 14 days after injection spleens and lymph nodes (cervical, axillary, inguinal and mesenteric) were harvested and DCs were purified by density-gradient centrifugation using 30% Bovine Albumin solution (Sigma-Aldrich).  Briefly, 3 ml of sterile BSA 30% was mixed 1:1 (v/v) with RPMI1640 complete media on top of which an extra layer of 3 mL sterile BSA (30%) was added to finalize the gradient premixing solution in a centrifuge polypropylene tube that fits inside the Beckman SW Ti41 rotor.  On the top of the premix gradient BSA 1-2 ml of cell suspension was added and the mixture was centrifuged at 9200xg, 1 hour at 4oC using the Optima XPN-100k UltraCentrifuge (Bekman Coulter).  The white ring of cells isolated after centrifugation which routinely contains 70 to 80% CD11c+ DCs was collected and washed three times with PBS before counting.  Between 2–5 × 108 murine DCs cells were obtained from each spleen and further processed for proteomics or immunopeptidomes analyses. MHC II (I-Ab) complexes from DCs of control and HFHF diet were isolated using immunoaffinity chromatography. Bound complexes were acid-eluted, and MHC-peptide concentration measured by ELISA. Peptides were eluted using 30% acetonitrile in 0.1%TFA. Desalted peptides were injected onto a EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm x 75 μm column (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 180 min gradient of 5-30% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at a constant 50 ˚C during all experiments.  Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 400 -1500 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 x 105 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 of greater than 5 x 103 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole at 1.6 Th. HCD fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the ion trap. The AGC target for MS/MS was set to 1 x 104 and the maximum injection time limited to 35 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s with a 10-ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned with protein ID using Peaks X/X+/XPro software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the Swiss-Prot FASTA database (https://www.uniprot.org), using Mus musculus as specie corresponding to the processed antigens (17,073 entries, reviewed Swiss-Prot, January 2021).  The following settings are applied for peptide search: “no enzyme”, parent mass tolerance of 12 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) are set as variable modifications at the first round of search.   The estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) using decoy-fusion algorithm was enabled during the PEAKS DB search in PEAKS.  Data were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS X/X+/XPro and protein identifications were further accepted if they could be identified with a confidence score (-10lgP)>20 for peptides and (-10lgP)>20 for proteins (corresponding to p<0.01); a minimum of 1 peptide per protein after data were filtered for less than 1.0-2.0% FDR for peptides and less than 1.5 % FDR for proteins identifications.  In addition, selected peptides epitopes with 10< (-10lgP) <20 were included in the data set after manual inspection of their MS/MS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
A diet rich in saturated fat and carbohydrates causes low-grade chronic inflammation in several organs, including the liver, ultimately driving nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In this setting, environment-driven lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity induce liver damage, which promotes dendritic cell activation and generates a major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) immunopeptidome enriched with peptides derived from proteins involved in cellular metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, and the stress responses. Here, we demonstrated that lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity, as driven by a high-fat and high-fructose (HFHF) diet, promoted MHC-II presentation of nested T and B cell epitopes from protein disulfide isomerase family A member 3 (PDIA3), which is involved in immunogenic cell death. Increased MHC-II presentation of PDIA3 peptides was associated with antigen-specific proliferation of hepatic CD4<sup>+</sup> immune infiltrates and isotype switch of anti-PDIA3 antibodies from IgM to IgG3, indicative of cellular and humoral PDIA3 autoreactivity. Passive transfer of PDIA3-specific T cells or PDIA3-specific antibodies also exacerbated hepatocyte death, as determined by increased hepatic transaminases detected in the sera of mice subjected to an HFHF but not control diet. Increased humoral responses to PDIA3 were also observed in patients with chronic inflammatory liver conditions, including autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and type 2 diabetes. Together, our data indicated that metabolic insults caused by an HFHF diet elicited liver damage and promoted pathogenic immune autoreactivity driven by T and B cell PDIA3 epitopes.

### Keywords
Mouse i-ab immunopeptidome; dda nanolc-ms/ms; orbitrap fusion tribrid mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Weill Cornell Medicine
Department: Radiation Oncology; Weill Cornell Medicine: Englander Institute of Precision Medicine; USA.

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio; Cristina C Clement
Department: Radiation Oncology; Weill Cornell Medicine: Englander Institute of Precision Medicine; USA.


