### Accession
PXD025756

### Title
Proteomic profiling of primary CLL using mass-spectrometry

### Description
In this project, we profiled the proteome of 46 diverse CLL samples with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS), in order to undertand the protein-level pathway changes that are related to CLL proliferative drive (CLL-PD)

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized cell pellets were resuspended in 20 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate and lysed, aided by sonication with a VialTweeter (Hielscher). Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then diluted and treated with 50 U Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) per 1 mio cells for 30 min at 37 °C. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by the addition of tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37 °C for 30 min with shaking. Alkylation of free thiol groups was performed by the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37 °C. After adjusting to 2% formic acid, samples were desalted with SEP PAK VAC C18 50mg columns (Waters). Cleaned peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 13.5 μL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with the addition of iRT peptides [Escher et al., 2012] (Biognosys) for the following MS analysis. Peptide concentration was determined using the quantitative fluorimetric peptide assay (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters) chromatography system. Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 200 ng of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 ̊A, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100 ̊A, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 22% B in 112 min, 32% B in 8 min and 95% B in 5 min. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) or data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Fragmentation was accomplished by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy setting of 30% (DDA) or 28% (DIA). The resolution of the Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and 54 ms (DDA) or 100 ms and 50 ms (DIA), respectively. The mass range monitored in MS1 was 350-1500 m/z and in MS2 200-1800 m/z for DIA and the auto m/z normal scan range mode for DDA. Advanced Peak Determination (APD) was activated. Data was acquired with Tune Plus version 2.1.

### Data Protocol
The DDA files were imported into Spectronaut v.13.4 [Bruderer et al., 2015] (Biognosys) to create a hybrid library which was subsequently used to search the DIA data against the Swissprot reviewed subset of the human UniProt database (version 2019-07-09, 20913 entries) with decoy sequences generated by sequence reversal. The Spectronaut report was exported and further processed in R (version 3.6.0). Processing of raw protein abundance data and quality control was done with the R/Bioconductor package DEP [Zhang et al., 2018]. One outlier was excluded from downstream analysis due to a singularly large proportion of missing values. Proteins were selected for further analysis if they showed fewer than 50% missing values across all remaining 49 samples, which resulted in a set of 4316 proteins. The protein abundance data were background corrected, scaled and transformed using the variance stabilizing transformation approach of [Huber et al., 2002] [Karp et al., 2010].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Dia-ms, Lumos

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Junyan Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Zenz
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


