### Accession
PXD019525

### Title
Monitoring Casbene Synthase in Jatropha curcas Tissues Using Targeted Proteomics

### Description
Casbene synthase is responsible for the first commited step in the biosynthesis of phorbol esters (PE) in the Euphorbiaceae. PE are abundant in the seeds of the biofuel crop Jatropha curcas and its toxicity precludes the use of the protein-rich cake obtained after oil extraction as an animal feed and  the toxicity of the fumes derived from burning PE containing biofuel  is also a matter of concern. This toxicity is a major hindrance to exploit the potential of this crop as a source of raw material for the production of biodiesel. For this reason, current research on J. curcas is mainly focused in the understanding of the biosynthesis and site of synthesis of PE, as an avenue for the development of biotechnological of genotypes unable to synthesize PE in its seeds. Here, we present the results of targeted proteome assays (SRM and PRM) to monitor and quantify casbene synthase in leaves, endosperma and roots of two J. curcas of contrasting levels of PE. The assays were based in the use of synthetic isotopic labeled peptides derived from 12 gene models of casbene synthase from the J. curcas genome and results showed the presence of casbene synthase encoded in seven of the 12 gene models. Several specific transitions were identified and which can be used to monitor several casbene synthase proteins by any one of the two targeted proteomics assays and/or to validate the results of transcription-based experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and sample preparation: Voucher specimens of genotypes with high levels of phorbol esters and low levels of phorbol esters in the seeds are deposited at the Herbarium Prisco Bezerra, Federal University of Ceará, under numbers EAC62156 and EAC62157.  Phorbol ester extraction and content analysis: The mature seed kernel from the two genotypes of J. curcas was isolated, lyophilized, macerated and stored at -20ºC. After kernel preparation, 1.5 mL of n-heptane/isopropanol solution (3:2) was added to 200 mg of this material, and the suspension was stirred for 1h. The mixture was centrifuged (10000 g, 3 min) and the supernatant was separated. Two more extractions were performed with 1.5 mL of n-heptane/isopropanol solution (3:2) and 1.5 mL of isopropanol. The supernatants were combined and dried in a thermostatic bath with nitrogen flow. The extract was dissolved in 600 μL of n-heptane, in which another 600 μL of acetonitrile was added. This mixture was stirred briefly and centrifuged (10000 g, 2 min). The n-heptane phase was discarded, and the acetonitrile phase was dried. The sample was dissolved in 200 μL of acetonitrile. After PE extraction, 10 uL of the sample was injected in Syncronis C18 analytical column (Thermo Scientific; 50 x 2.1 mm; particle size 1.7 mm) and analyzed using a UFLC Shimadzu. The temperature was kept at 30ºC and the flow was 0.3 mL.min-1. The elution was performed with a linear gradient of H2O, 0.1% TFA (phase A) and ACN, 0.1% TFA (phase B). The elution steps consisted of 80 to 90% of phase B for the first 10 min, followed by a step of 90 to 100% of phase B for 6 min and isocratic low with 100% of phase B for the last 6 min. The data were acquired in a range of 210-400nm. The detection of phorbol esters was performed at 280 nm. Protein extraction: The tissue sample powder was mixed with polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) and pyridine buffer (50mM pyridine, 10 mM Thiourea, 1% SDS, pH 5,0) in a proportion of 1:2:40 (w/w/v) and stirred for at least 4 hours at 4ºC. The mixture was centrifuged (10000 rpm, 4ºC), the supernatant was separated and the proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA/acetone overnight. The pellet was washed with cold acetone and then dried at room temperature. Sample digestion: Proteins were solubilized with 7M urea/2M thiourea/5mM TEAB solution. A total of 80 µg of proteins were digested. Proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 1 hour at 30ºC and alkylated with 40mM IAA, in the dark, for 30 min at room temperature. The mixture was diluted 10x with 50 mM TEAB. The trypsin reaction was carried out for 18 hours at 35ºC (1:50 w/w). Peptides were desalted using C18 Reverse Phase Chromatography Micro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus). Targeted proteomics methods: Casbene synthase gene models were gathered from the Jatropha Genome Database (JAT_r4.5 version: https://www.kazusa.or.jp/Jatropha/). Isotopically labeled synthetic peptides (ILSP) corresponding to the target peptides were purchased from JPT Technologies (https://www.jpt.com). For the SRM strategy, the ILSP were optimized through direct infusion on TSQ Quantiva Triple Quadrupole (Thermo Scientific). Three transitions were selected for each target peptide, cycle and dwell time were optimized to have at least eight acquisitions for each target peptide and more than 10 ms for each transition analysis. For the PRM strategy, the ILSP mixture was analyzed on an EASY1000-nanoLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the nESI- Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer, to find out the ideal CE and injection time.  Mass spectrometer analysis: The SRM and PRM CS analyses used an EASYII-nano LC coupled to the nESI-TSQ Quantiva and in the nESI-Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), respectively.  Two µg of tryptic peptides from each sample, spiked with the ILSP mixture, were loaded into a trap column C18 Acclaim PepMap 75µm x 2 cm (Thermo Scientific) and fractioned in a C18 column PicoChip 75µm x 105mm (New Objective). In both methods, sample elution was performed using a gradient of 5 to 45% phase B (95% acetonitrile/0,1% formic acid) for 40 min, 45 to 95% for 10 min, 95% of phase B was maintained for 12 min, 95% to 5% in 3 min and 5% for the last 8 min.  The running time was 73 min for each sample and the flow applied was 250 nL/min.  SRM parameters were: positive acquisition mode, the first and third quadrupoles were set up with a resolution of 0.7 (FWHM), precursor ions fragmentation carried out with Argon gas with a CID gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr. Regarding the ion source parameters, the spray voltage and the ion transfer tube temperature used was 2,6kV and 280ºC, respectively, and the sweep gas was set up as 0. PRM parameters were: positive acquisition mode, 17,500 (at m/z 200) orbitrap resolution, 5E5 AGC target, 2 m/z isolation window and 0.5 m/z  offset. The ion source parameters as spray voltage, capillary temperature, and S-lens were set up as 2760 V, 250ºC and 70, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of SRM and PRM results were performed with Xcalibur v.2.2 and Skyline v. 19.1.193 software. Transitions relative intensities were evaluated by the rdotp values provided by the software Skyline v. 4.2. In the case of PRM results, rdotp determination was performed using the five most intense transitions. Only transitions without signal interference were considered for the determination of rdotp. The relative intensity of the positive control transitions was evaluated by the dotp parameter. The relative quantification of target peptides in samples of the contrasting genotypes was determined using the ratio between the chromatographic area of the most intense transition without signal interference from endogenous peptide and ILPS in each genotype. and calculating the ratio between HPE and LPE. The abundance of gene models identified by the presence of more than one peptide were inferred by the sum of the ratio between endogenous peptide and ILPS. For the statistical analysis, we used t student test on GraphPad Prism 6 software, considering statistically different the results with p-value <0,05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phorbol esters, Proteotypic peptide, Biofuel crops, Targeted proteomics, Parallel reaction monitoring, Selected reaction monitoring, Mass spectrometry, Secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil  Proteomics Unit, Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fábio César Sousa Nogueira
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil  Proteomics Unit, Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


