### Accession
PXD009063

### Title
Multi-OMICS data of a Hyper IgD Syndrome family

### Description
The aim of this study was to understand why two siblings carrying both the same homozygous causal mutation for the auto-inflammatory disease hyper IgD show opposite phenotypes, i.e. the first being asymptomatic, the second presenting all classical characteristics of the disease. As compared to studies of a single omics type, the multi-omics approach becomes a method of choice to resolve complex traits.  Here we combined exome, proteome and transcriptome analysis in the two siblings and identified a single gene - STAT1 - harboring a rare missense variant and showing mRNA and protein abundances significantly more important in the symptomatic than the asymptomatic sister. This mutation was shown to be a gain of function mutation involved in an increased activation of the JAK/STAT pathway which is known to play a critical role in inflammatory diseases and for which specific bio-therapies exist.  Pathway analysis based on information from differentially expressed transcripts and proteins confirmed the central role of STAT1 in the proposed regulatory network leading to an increased inflammatory phenotype in the symptomatic sibling. In addition, we provide a proteogenomics analysis pipeline that takes advantage of subject-specific genomic and transcriptomic information to improve protein identifications. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the power of a multi-omics approach to uncover potentially clinically actionable targets for a personalized therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 1 x 106 cells after 6 h of culture with and without LPS activation. Experiments were performed in triplicate for each condition. 100 µg proteins from each sample were separated on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel. Gel bands were systematically cut and proteins were in-gel trypsin digested. Differential analysis using a spectral counting approach was conducted on a NanoAcquity LC-system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a maXis 4G QToF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Additional experiments to improve proteome depth and sequence coverage in order to identify individual specific variants were conducted on a NanoAcquity LC-system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, USA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was searched using a local Mascot server (Matrix Science, London, UK) against personalized databases for each subject containing all human entries extracted from the UniProtKB-SwissProt reference database (40,654 target entries with isoforms) and specific exome-derived variants (Personalized Database 1 for S1: 45,834 target entries, Personalized Database 1 for S2: 45,883 target entries). Identification validation and spectral counting were performed with Scaffold software (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, USA). Relative protein quantification and testing for differential protein expression were performed using the beta-binomial test implemented in R(37). The acceptance criteria for statistically different protein abundance changes between two conditions were: a minimum of 4 summed spectral-counts for the three replicates in at least one of the conditions to be compared, a p-value lower than 0.05 and a fold change higher than 1,5 (except when the summed spectral-count equals 0 in one of the conditions to be compared).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics analysis - differential analysis - hyper igd syndrome - single amino acid variant characterization

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France
CNRS University of Strasbourg

### Submitter
Carapito Christine

### Lab Head
Dr Christine CARAPITO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France


