### Accession
PXD013436

### Title
Label-Free Quantiative Analysis of Sepioloidea lineolata

### Description
Sepioloidea lineolata, the striped pyjama squid (family Sepidariidae), is a small species of benthic squid distributed along the Southern Indo-Pacfic coast of Australia. All Sepiadariid squids are known to secrete large volumes of viscous slime when stressed. The proteome of the slime, dorsal and ventral mantle muscle, the dorsal and ventral mantle epithelium and ventral mantle glands was analysed by combining label-free quantitative analysis using high resolution mass spectrometry data with an S. lineolata transcriptome assembled from give tissues including slime. A total of 28 highly positively differentially expressed proteins were identified within the slime and were predominately comprised of a host of enzymes including peptidases and protease inhibitors. Seven of these proteins contained predicted signal peptides, indicating classical secretion, with four proteins having no identifiable domains or similarity to any known proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was dried using a SpeedVac Concentrator and Savant Refrigerated Vapor trap (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) for 15 minutes at room temperature. Samples were resuspended in 7M Urea, 3M Tris pH=8.3. 1 μL of TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, 200 mM solution in water) then incubated overnight at 21°C. Iodoacetamide (4 μL of 1 M IAA in water) was added the following day and incubated in the dark at 21°C for 20 min. 500 μL of 50 mM Tris pH 8.3 in water and 1 μg of trypsin was then added to samples and incubated for a further 6h at 37°C.  Another 1 μg trypsin was added to samples for double digestion and incubated overnight at 37°C. The digested samples were purified for mass spectrometry analysis using the C18 stage tips procedure. For all samples, peptides reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, were loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 μL/min for 6 min before switching the precolumn in line with the analytical column (Easy-Spray 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a linear acetonitrile gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), starting from 5% to 60% buffer B over 90 min. The LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  The threshold for triggering MS2 was at a minimum AGC target set at 3.0 103, with the normalised collision energy at 28eV. Charge state screening parameters included the exclusion of single, unassigned, or 6 and higher charge states. The mass spectrometry (MS) instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. The 20 most abundant precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350−1,500, R = 120,000) were isolated with a 1.4 m/z mass window for further high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis with a resolution of 15,000. Spectra were acquired under automatic gain control (AGC) for survey spectra (AGC: 3×106) and MS/MS spectra (AGC: 2×105). In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analysed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5,0.30)18 with label-free quantitation (LFQ) turned on, and the protein database mentioned above for peptide and protein identification. The database consisting of 31,895 So. lineolata amino acid sequences used for all MaxQuant analyses. MaxQuant uses the Andromeda search engine internally to match MS/MS Spectra to peptides19. Settings used were; Parent mass tolerance: 10ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 20 ppm; Allowed missed cleavages: 2; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl C; Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, acetylation at the protein N-terminus. Protein groups were retained at 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Cephalopods are known to produce an extensive range of secretions including ink, mucus, and venom. Sepiadariidae, a family of small, benthic bobtail squids, are notable for the high volume of viscous slime they emit when stressed. One species, <i>Sepioloidea lineolata</i> (striped pyjama squid), is covered with glands along the perimeter of the ventral mantle, and these structures are hypothesized to be the source of its slime. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we analyzed five tissue types (dorsal and ventral mantle muscle, dorsal and ventral epithelium, and ventral mantle glands) and the slime from four individuals. In doing so, we were able to determine the relationship between the slime and the tissues as well as highlight proteins that were specifically identified within the slime and ventral mantle glands. A total of 28 proteins were identified to be highly enriched in slime, and these were composed of peptidases and protease inhibitors. Seven of these proteins contained predicted signal peptides, indicating classical secretion, with four proteins having no identifiable domains or similarity to any known proteins. The ventral mantle glands also appear to be the tissue with the closest overall proteomic composition to the slime; therefore, it is likely that the slime originates, at least in part, from these glands.

### Keywords
Squid, Secretion, : slime, Gland, Label-free quantitation, Cephalopod, Differential expression

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Associate Professor Jan Strugnell Director, Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, and Marine Biology and Aquaculture College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 4811 QLD, Australia 

### Submitter
Nikeisha Caruana

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Jan Strugnell
Associate Professor Jan Strugnell Director, Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, and Marine Biology and Aquaculture College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 4811 QLD, Australia 


