### Accession
PXD033473

### Title
Allergen Shedding in Human Milk from Mothers of Preterm Infants: Proteomic and Peptidomic Feasibility and Pilot Analysis

### Description
There is little information regarding the allergen content of milk feeds in the preterm population. Previous studies have evaluated specific proteins/peptides via ELISA, but no studies have performed a broad analysis of the allergenic peptide content and protease activity of milk feeds in this population. Preterm infants spend a critical window of time for immune development in the Newborn Intensive Care Unit (NICU), and may receive fortified donor milk, maternal milk or formula feeds via nasogastric tube or bottle instead of fresh breastmilk via breastfeeding.

### Sample Protocol
Methods: To evaluate feasibility, we initially performed mass spectrometry on four human milk samples (two term and two preterm) from the Mommy’s Milk Human Milk Biorepository (HMB) which included maternal surveys of diet and environmental exposures. We analyzed the results against the University of Nebraska FASTA database and UniProt for a total of 2211 protein sequences. We then further analyzed 5 samples from the Microbiome, Atopy and Prematurity (MAP) pilot study along with formula and human milk fortifier controls and performed not only mass spectrometry, but also peptidomic and protease activity analysis.  Proteomic analysis was done on total protein of milk samples and also on large protein depleted fraction of milk samples.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantification was carried out using Peaks Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics solutions Inc.) Analysis was performed in two separate runs – the first included the samples from the breast milk repository, and the second included the samples from the MAP study, formula, and fortifier. Database searches were carried out against a reference database that included FASTA protein sequences of known protein allergens from the University of Nebraska (2209 protein entries-  http://www.allergenonline.org/ (used version 19, published 02/10/19)  ) that was combined with human proteome UniProt sequences using Peaks 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions) search engine . This database included known allergenic peptides and all predicted human proteome. The hits were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) before being considered for further analysis. All positive peptide sequence results were verified by blasting original sequences against UniProt and NCBI  (https://www.uniprot.org/blast/)t o confirm accuracy. Results where at least one of the two of the databases did not have > 70% identity to the labeled species-specific protein were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
<b><i>Rationale:</i></b> There is little information regarding the allergen content of milk feeds in the preterm population. Previous studies have not performed a broad analysis of the allergenic peptide content and protease activity of milk feeds in this population. <b><i>Methods:</i></b> To evaluate feasibility, we initially performed mass spectrometry on 4 human milk (HM) samples (2 term and 2 preterm) from the Mommy's Milk Human Milk Biorepository (HMB) and analyzed the results against the University of Nebraska FASTA database and UniProt for a total of 2,211 protein sequences. We then further analyzed five samples from the Microbiome, Atopy, and Prematurity (MAP) study including peptidomic and protease activity analysis. <b><i>Results:</i></b> Each HMB sample had between 806 and 1,007 proteins, with 37-44 nonhuman proteins/sample encompassing 26 plant and animal species. In the preterm MAP samples, 784 digested nonhuman proteins were identified, 30 were nonbovine in origin. Proteins from 23 different species including aeroallergens, food, and contact allergens were identified. Protease activity was highest in HM samples without human milk fortifier and lowest in preterm formula. <b><i>Conclusions:</i></b> These findings represent the first preterm milk feed mass spectrometry and protease analysis with identification of known allergenic proteins to food, contact, and aeroallergens. These results raise questions of whether the composition of milk feeds in the neonatal intensive care unit impact the development of atopic disease in the preterm population and whether the complex interaction between allergens, proteases, and other HM components can serve to induce sensitization or tolerance to allergens in infants. Clinical Trial Registration Number: NCT04835935.

### Keywords
Human, Native paptides, Allergen, Milk

### Affiliations
UC San Diego: University of California San Diego
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Sydney Leibel
UC San Diego: University of California San Diego


