### Accession
PXD012585

### Title
Comparative proteomics and biochemical analysis of venom of thirteen Bothrops moojeni specimens reveal several individual variations

### Description
Snake venoms are complex protein mixtures with different biological activities that can act in both their preys and human victims. Many of these proteins play a role in prey capture and in the digestive process of these animals. It is known that some snakes are resistant to the toxicity of their own venom by mechanisms not yet fully elucidated. However, it was observed in the Laboratory of Herpetology of Instituto Butantan that some Bothrops moojeni individuals injured by the same snake species showed mortalities caused by envenoming effects. This study analyzed the biochemical composition of 13 venom and plasma samples from Bothrops moojeni specimens to assess differences in their protein composition. Application of  sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) showed distinct venom protein profiles, but very homogeneous plasma profiles. Western Blotting (WB) was performed with plasma samples, which were submitted to incubation with the respective venom. Some individuals showed an immunorecognized band zone around  25 kDa, indicating interaction between the same individual plasma and venom proteins. Crossed-WB assay using non-self-plasma and venom showed that this variability is due to venom protein composition instead of plasma composition. These venoms presented higher caseinolytic, collagenolytic and coagulant activities than the venoms without these regions recognized by WB. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that these individuals present, in addition to higher protein concentrations, other exclusive proteins in their composition. When these samples were tested in vivo, the results also showed higher lethality in these venoms, but lower hemorrhagic activity than in the venoms without these regions recognized by WB. In conclusion, some Bothrops moojeni specimens differ in venom composition, which may have implications in envenomation. Moreover, the high individual venom variability found in this species demonstrates the importance to work with individual analysis in studies involving intraspecific venom variability and venom evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Venom protein samples of 1 mg were dissolved in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by addition of 25 L of 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters), and incubation at 80 ºC for 15 min. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60 ºC for 30 min and then alkylated in the dark with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested using trypsin (Promega) at a 1:400 (wt:wt) enzyme:protein ratio at 37 ºC overnight. Digestion was stopped by addition of 10 L of 5% trifluoroacetic acid and incubation at 37 ºC for 90 min. Samples were filtrated through 0.22 µm Millex-GV filters (EMD Millipore) into glass vials. The final protein concentration was approximately 2 g/L. Mass spectrometry experiments of venom digests were performed on a Synapt G2 HDMS (Waters) mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Approximately 5 µg of each peptide mixture was loaded online for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 µL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 µm particles, 180 µm x 20 mm length; Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7 µm particles, 75 x 150 mm; Waters) in 90 min at 325 nL/min. Data were acquired in the data-independent mode HDMSE with ion mobility separation in the m/z range of 50-2000 and resolution mode. Collision energies were alternated between 4 eV and a ramp of 22-55 eV for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.0 s. The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.1 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 35 V. For lock mass correction, a [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled every 60 s. Venom samples were analyzed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed in ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 (Waters) platform using a low energy threshold of 750 counts and an elevated energy threshold of 50 counts. Database searches were performed against Bothrops sequences from UniprotKB/Swissprot (www.uniprot.org; 9485 sequences). The following search parameters were used: automatic tolerances for precursor and fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, glutamine and asparagine deamidation as variable modifications, and trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Protein identifications were considered with a minimum of one fragment ion per peptide, five fragment ions per protein, two peptides per protein, and a false discovery identification rate set to 1%, estimated by simultaneous search against a reversed database [45]. Label-free quantification was performed in ISOQuant [46] considering the averaged intensities of the three most intense peptides of each identified protein [47]. Significance of the differentially abundant proteins between the groups (with fold change ≥1.5 or ≤0.67) was determined using unpaired Student’s t-test considering p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are complex protein mixtures with different biological activities that can act in both their preys and human victims. Many of these proteins play a role in prey capture and in the digestive process of these animals. It is known that some snakes are resistant to the toxicity of their own venom by mechanisms not yet fully elucidated. However, it was observed in the Laboratory of Herpetology of Instituto Butantan that some Bothrops moojeni individuals injured by the same snake species showed mortalities caused by envenoming effects. This study analyzed the biochemical composition of 13 venom and plasma samples from Bothrops moojeni specimens to assess differences in their protein composition. Application of sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) showed distinct venom protein profiles, but very homogeneous plasma profiles. Western Blotting (WB) was performed with plasma samples, which were submitted to incubation with the respective venom. Some individuals showed an immunorecognized band zone around 25 kDa, indicating interaction between the same individual plasma and venom proteins. Crossed-WB assay using non-self-plasma and venom showed that this variability is due to venom protein composition instead of plasma composition. These venoms presented higher caseinolytic, collagenolytic and coagulant activities than the venoms without these regions recognized by WB. Mass spectrometry analyses performed on two individuals revealed that these individuals present, in addition to higher protein concentrations, other exclusive proteins in their composition. When these same two samples were tested in vivo, the results also showed higher lethality in these venoms, but lower hemorrhagic activity than in the venoms without these regions recognized by WB. In conclusion, some Bothrops moojeni specimens differ in venom composition, which may have implications in envenomation. Moreover, the high individual venom variability found in this species demonstrates the importance to work with individual analyses in studies involving intraspecific venom variability and venom evolution.

### Keywords
Bothrops moojeni; snake venom; envenomation; intraspecific venom variability; snake plasma

### Affiliations
Escola Paulista de Medicina/UNIFESP
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Escola Paulista de Medicina/UNIFESP


