### Accession
PXD030494

### Title
Baseline Proteomics Characterisation of Biomanufacturing Organism Halomonas Bluephagenesis

### Description
Biomanufacturing remains financially uncompetitive with the lower cost but higher carbon  emitting hydrocarbon based chemical industry. Novel chassis organisms may enable cost reductions with respect to traditional chassis such as E. coli and so open an economic rout to low emission biomanufacturing. Extremophile bacteria exemplify that potential. Salt tolerant halomonas species thrive in conditions inimical to other organisms. Their adoption  would eliminate the cost of sterilising equipment. Novel chassis are inevitably poorly understood in comparison to established organisms. Rapid characterisation and community data sharing will facilitate organisms’ adoption for biomanufacturing. This paper describes baseline proteomics data set for Halomonas bluephagenesis TD01 under active development for biomanufactoring. The data record comprises a newly sequenced genome for the organism; evidence for expression of 1150 proteins (30% of the proteome) including baseline quantification of 1050 proteins (27% of the proteome) and a spectral library enabling re-use for targeted proteomics assays. Protein data is annotated with KEGG Orthology enabling rapid matching of quantitative data to pathways of interest to biomanufacturing.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial  whole cell lysate samples were digested using the S-trap protocol   following reduction and alkylation. Peptides were fractionated by offline high pH fractionation. Pooled samples were spiked with iRT standards.

### Data Protocol
Data  was acquired by MSe on a Waters Xevo LC-MS system.  The subsequent analysis pipeline was scripted and is provided  with the data deposition. In brief  data was processed through the waters tools Apex3d and peptid3d to produce spectra. These spectra were searched against FASTA database included decoy and contaminate sequences using both Waters iadb program and X!tandem. The results from X!Tandem were further processed through the trans-proteomics pipeline to produce  spectral libraries. The results from Waters IADB also provided TOP3 quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biotechnology, Halomonas, Spectral library, Biomanufacturing

### Affiliations
Future Biomanufacturing Research Hub University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Matthew Russell

### Lab Head
Dr Nigel Scrutton
Future Biomanufacturing Research Hub University of Manchester


