### Accession
PXD003632

### Title
Proteomic characterization of microdissected epithelium, tumor cells, and stroma from breast tissues

### Description
Tissue of the breast is heterogeneous, consisting of a variety of cell types and connective tissue. This heterogeneity is also present in breast tumors and will complicate proteomic analysis, as it is not always clear whether a signal originates from the stromal environment, from normal epithelial or tumor cells. Here we microdissected a variety of cell types and stroma from benign and malignant breast tissues. We compared proteomic differences between these tissues, both from cells of epithelial origin and the stromal environment. Differences in protein abundances corresponded with several hallmarks of cancer, including loss of cell adhesion, transformation to a migratory phenotype, and enhanced energy metabolism. Furthermore, despite enriching for (tumor) epithelial cells, many changes to the extracellular matrix were detected in microdissected cells of epithelial origin. The stromal compartment was heterogeneous and richer in the number of fibroblast and immune cells in malignant sections, compared to benign tissue sections. Although this heterogeneity complicated detection of differentially abundant proteins, several markers were exclusively detected in stroma. However, as heterogeneity in the stroma is more difficult to be reduced through microdissection, comparative analysis was most informative in microdissected cells of epithelial origin, and provided a relatively complete picture of malignant transformations.

### Sample Protocol
Cryosectioning and laser capture microdissection Tumor tissues were mounted on a tissue holder with assistance of TissueTek O.C.T. but avoiding fully embedding the tissue. Three to five 8 μm sections were cut and melted at once on a PEN slide that was treated with UV-light for 30 minutes. Sections were allowed to dry outside the cryostat for 30 seconds, after which the sections were fixed for one minute in ice-cold 70% (v/v) ethanol/Milli-Q water. Slides were then further dehydrated by rinsing in 100% ethanol, and allowed to dry at room temperature. Subsequently, slides were stored at -80°C in separate slide containers wrapped in aluminum foil.  Prior to staining and laser capture microdissection, tissue slides were allowed to defrost at room temperature in the slide container for five minutes. Sections were then rehydrated in tap water for 15 seconds, stained in hematoxylin for 30 seconds, blued in tap water for 15 seconds and then dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol/Milli-Q (v/v): 15 seconds 50%, 70%, and 95%, 2x 30 seconds 100%. Sections were allowed to dry for five minutes and were then dissected within 1.5 hours. Laser capture microdissection and pressure catapulting (LMPC) was performed directly after staining. Tumor epithelial cells were collected using a P.A.L.M. LMPC device, type P-MB (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, GmbH, Munich, Germany). From each slide an area of ~500,000 µm2 that corresponds to ~4,000 cells (area x slide thickness / 1000 µm3 cell volume) was collected in P.A.L.M. opaque adhesive caps. Collected cells were lysed in 20 µl of 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and stored in 0.5 ml Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes at –80°C until further processing.   Protein digestion Collected samples were randomized prior to processing. Samples were allowed to defrost on ice. Cells were then lysed by sonication in a cup horn sonicating (water) bath, using an Ultrasonic Disruptor Sonifier II (Model W-250/W-450, Bransons Utrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) for 1 minute at 70% amplitude. Proteins were denatured at 99°C for five minutes, reduced by incubating with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 minutes, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Subsequently, 1 μg trypsin was added (approximately 1:50 ratio protease:protein) and samples were incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. After digestion, RapiGest SF was degraded by acidifying to 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubating for 30 minutes at 37oC. Samples were stored at -80°C until further processing.   LC-MS Measurements were performed with a nano liquid chromatography (LC) system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled online to a hybrid linear ion trap/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap-XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 μm ID × 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States) and washed and desalted for 10 minutes using 0.1% TFA (in water) as loading solvent, as previously reported. Then the trap column was switched online with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 500 mm, 3 μm particle and 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, United States), and peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient: starting with 100% solvent A, then from 0% to 25% solvent B in 120 minutes and from 25% to 50% solvent B in a further 60 minutes, where solvent A consisted of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC water. Column flow rate was set to 250 nL/min. For electro-spray ionization (ESI), metal-coated nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA, United States) were used and a spray voltage of 1.6 kV was applied. For MS detection, a data-dependent acquisition method was used. A high-resolution survey scan from 400 – 1,800 Th. was detected in the Orbitrap (target of automatic gain control = 10^6, maximum injection time = 1000ms, resolution = 30,000 at 400 Th, lock mass set to 445.120025 Th. (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6)). Based on this full scan the five most intensive ions were consecutively isolated (AGC target set to 10^4 ions, maximum injection time = 400ms), fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID, applying 35% normalized collision energy), and detected in the ion trap. Precursor masses within a tolerance range of ±5 ppm that were selected for MS/MS once, were excluded for MS/MS fragmentation for three minutes or until the precursor intensity fell below a S/N of 1.5 for more than 10 scans (early expiration). Orbitrap full scan spectra and ion trap MS/MS fragmentation spectra were acquired partially simultaneously.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) with the MaxLFQ algorithm. Data was searched using the Andromeda search engine against a concatenated target-decoy database (UniProt-Swiss-Prot 2014-4 homo sapiens canonical reference proteome). The cleavage rule was set to trypsin (no P-rule), and an initial precursor mass window of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Dalton was used. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) based on decoy counting. Alignment of peptides, for which fragmentation data were not obtained in each individual run, was enabled through the “match between run” option and the minimum number of peptides per protein required for quantitation was set to 2 (LFQ minimum ratio count).

### Publication Abstract
Both healthy and cancerous breast tissue is heterogeneous, which is a bottleneck for proteomics-based biomarker analysis, as it obscures the cellular origin of a measured protein. We therefore aimed at obtaining a protein-level interpretation of malignant transformation through global proteome analysis of a variety of laser capture microdissected cells originating from benign and malignant breast tissues. We compared proteomic differences between these tissues, both from cells of epithelial origin and the stromal environment, and performed string analysis. Differences in protein abundances corresponded with several hallmarks of cancer, including loss of cell adhesion, transformation to a migratory phenotype, and enhanced energy metabolism. Furthermore, despite enriching for (tumor) epithelial cells, many changes to the extracellular matrix were detected in microdissected cells of epithelial origin. The stromal compartment was heterogeneous and richer in the number of fibroblast and immune cells in malignant sections, compared to benign tissue sections. Furthermore, stroma could be clearly divided into reactive and nonreactive based on extracellular matrix disassembly proteins. We conclude that proteomics analysis of both microdissected epithelium and stroma gives an additional layer of information and more detailed insight into malignant transformation.

### Keywords
Microdissection, Tumor microenvironment, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Erasmus MC, Department of Medical Oncology, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rene Braakman

### Lab Head
Dr John W. M. Martens
Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands


