### Accession
PXD009201

### Title
A systemic view of active site specificity profiling of the snake venom metalloprotease HF3 using Proteomic Identification of Cleavage Sites and N-terminomics TAILS

### Description
Snake venom metalloproteinases play important roles in the pathological effects of Viperidae venoms including severe local tissue damage, hemorrhage and coagulopathy. Hemorrhagic Factor 3 (HF3), a metalloproteinase isolated from Bothrops jararaca venom, induces severe local hemorrhage. Previous proteomic studies have shown that HF3 targets important ECM components, including collagens and proteoglycans, and plasma proteins. However, the full substrate repertoire of this metalloproteinase is unknown. Using Proteomic Identification of Cleavage Sites (PICS), a tryptic library derived from THP-1 monocytic cells was used as substrate for identifying protease cleavage sites and sequence preferences in peptides. 1,252 cleavage sites were detected and revealed a clear preference for Leu at P1′ position. A Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) analysis of the incubation of HF3 with mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) secretome resulted in the identification of more than 3,600 cleavage sites in proteins, and confirmed the predominance of Leu at P1′ position. Various substrates were detected including ECM and focal adhesion proteins, and the cysteine proteinase inhibitor, cystatin-C. Interestingly, 597 peptides matched to annotated cleavage sites in the TopFIND database, suggesting that these cleavages might have been generated by other proteases activated upon incubation with HF3, including caspases -3 and -7, cathepsins D and E, granzyme B, and MMPs 2 and 9. Taken together, these results greatly expand the known substrate degradome of HF3, and reveals potential new targets which may serve as basis to better elucidate the complex pathophysiology of snake envenomation.

### Sample Protocol
HF3 Hemorrhagic Factor 3 (HF3) was purified to homogeneity from crude B. jararaca venom as described before (Oliveira et al., 2009).  PICS peptide library preparation PICS peptide library was prepared as described elsewhere; (Schilling et al., 2011). Briefly, the library was generated by digestion of lysates of human monocytic cell line THP-1 with the endoprotease trypsin (Promega), followed by inactivation of the protease. Free sulfhydryls were protected with iodoacetamide, and primary amines (N-terminal -amines and lysine -amines) were protected by reductive dimethylation. The peptide library was purified and stored at -80 °C until use.  Cell culture and secretome harvesting  Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts (MEF) used in this study were described previously (Dean and Overall, 2007). A MEF secretome preparation was obtained as described (Kleifeld et al., 2011). Briefly, subconfluent cell cultures were washed four-times with warm buffered phosphate-saline (without Ca2+ and Mg2+) and, after culturing the cells in T175 cm2 flasks for 48 h under phenol red-free, FBS-free Dulbecco’s Modified Essential Medium (DMEM), the conditioned media was harvested and centrifuged (600 x g, 10 min, 4 ºC) for removing any dead cell. Protease inhibitors were added (1mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA, 1 M pepstatin A, 5 mM E-64 and 10 M leupeptin, final concentrations). The secretomes were filtered (0.22 m; Millipore, USA) and concentrated at 4°C by ultrafiltration using 5-kDa-cutoff membranes (Amicon-Ultra15, Millipore), followed by several volume washes with 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8). Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and the protein content was adjusted to 2 mg/mL with 1 M HEPES (pH 8). Secretomes were independently obtained from two biological replicates of MEF cultures.  Proteome preparation Fifty hundred micrograms of MEF secretome proteins were incubated for 12 h with 5 g of HF3 or 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7; control sample). A solution of 8 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to the incubation sample to a final concentration of 4 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM. The mixture was incubated at 65 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. N-termini were differentially labeled via stable-isotope reductive dimethylation, as previously described (Kleifeld et al., 2011) with either light or heavy formaldehyde solutions, as follows: control (light) vs. HF3-treated sample (heavy). Secretome samples from each experimental condition were incubated overnight at 37 °C with sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of formaldehyde 12CH2O (light) or 13CD2O (heavy) to a final concentration of 40 mM, resulting in mass differences of +28.0313 Da and +34.0689 Da for the light and heavy-labeled samples, respectively. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8; to a final concentration of 100 mM) to each sample and the mixture was incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. Samples were then combined at a 1:1 ratio. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellet was washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with 100 mM NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by the addition of HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final concentration of 25 mM in 1000 L of reaction solution. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. N-terminal peptides were enriched using a dendritic polyglycerol aldehyde polymer (Flintbox, http://www.flintbox.com/public/project/1948). N-termini peptides were desalted using OMIX C18 tips (Agilent) according to manufacture’s protocol followed by fractionation using C18-SCX-C18 stage tips (Ishihama et al., 2006).

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Prime-side cleavage peptide products derived from the incubation with HF3 were desalted with Sep-Pak Vac C18 1cc (Waters), vaccum dried and resuspended in 10 L of 1% acetic acid, 5% acetonitrile. Fractions of C18-SCX-C18 stage tips (N-terminal peptides obtained by TAILS protocol) were also vaccum dried and resuspended in 10 L of 1% acetic acid, 5% acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were injected into a trap column (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm) packed with AQUA C18, 5 m beads (Phenomenex), and then separated on a 20-cm long, 50 m inner diameter fused silica emitter packed with 1.9 μm-diameter Reprosil-Pur C-18-AQ beads (Dr Maisch). The analytical column temperature was set to 60°C. Nanoflow liquid chromatography was performed on a Proxeon Easy nanoLC HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% acetic acid) and eluted with a 120 min gradient from 0 to 90% B (80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1800 followed by MS/MS acquisition using collision induced dissociation of the five most intense ions from the MS scan. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 60,000 resolution (at 400 m/z) whereas the MS/MS scans were acquired in the linear ion trap. A dynamic peak exclusion was applied to avoid the same m/z of being selected for the next 180 seconds.  Proteomics data processing  For PICS analysis, LTQ-Orbitrap XL raw data were converted to mzXML or MGF formats using the MS convert tool (ProteoWizard version 3.0.3535, http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/) for database searching with X!Tandem (Jackhammer release 2013.06.15.1; The Global Proteome Machine Organization) through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline platform (Keller et al., 2005) or Mascot (Matrix Science, UK) search engines, respectively. The resulting peak lists were searched against the Uniprot/SwissProt database restricted to the taxa Homo sapiens (release 07_2017) with a decoy database appended in which all entries had their sequences reverse-oriented. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Semi-specific enzyme specificity was selected (i.e. semi-Arg-C), with up to 2 missed cleavages. Thioacylation of peptide N-terminus (+87.9982 Da), iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine (+57.0214 Da) and dimethylation of the lysine -amino group (+28.0313 Da) were selected as static modifications whereas oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) was selected as variable modification. Peptide identifications from both search engines were combined and further analyzed with the iProphet tool (Shteynberg et al., 2011) with a 1% of False Discovery Rate (FDR) at the peptide level. PICS specificity profile analysis was carried out using WebPICS, a web-based platform, freely available, as previously described. (Schilling et al., 2011). Heat maps were created in R (www.R-project.org).  For the analysis of TAILS data, LTQ-Orbitrap XL raw data were converted to mzML for database searching with X!Tandem and Comet (Eng et al., 2013)( release 2014.02 rev. 2) through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline platform. The resulting peak lists were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt database restricted to the taxa ‘Rodentia’ (release 07_2017) with a decoy database appended in which all entries had their sequences reverse-oriented. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Semi-specific enzyme specificity was selected (i.e. semi-Arg-C), with up to 2 missed cleavages. The mass difference between light and heavy dimethyl labels (6.0376 Da) in lysine and peptide N-termini was used as a variable modification, whereas the light modification (+28.0313) in lysine and peptide N-termini was used as a static modification. Acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.0105), cyclization of peptide N-termini from N-terminal glutamate or glutamine residues (Glu > pyroGlu, - 18.0105 Da; or Gln > pyroGlu, -17.0265 Da), deamidation of asparagine or glutamine (+0.9840) and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. Peptide quantitation of the experimental conditions (control and HF3-treated) was carried out using the XPRESS module, available in TPP platform (Han et al., 2001). Peptide identifications from both search engines were combined and further analyzed with iProphet tool (Shteynberg et al., 2013) with a 1% of False Discovery Rate (FDR) at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Snakebite is a major medical concern in many parts of the world with metalloproteases playing important roles in the pathological effects of Viperidae venoms, including local tissue damage, hemorrhage, and coagulopathy. Hemorrhagic Factor 3 (HF3), a metalloprotease from <i>Bothrops jararaca</i> venom, induces local hemorrhage and targets extracellular matrix (ECM) components, including collagens and proteoglycans, and plasma proteins. However, the full substrate repertoire of this metalloprotease is unknown. We report positional proteomic studies identifying &gt;2000 N-termini, including&#xa0;neo-N-termini of HF3 cleavage sites in mouse embryonic fibroblast secretome proteins. Terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) analysis identified a preference for Leu at the P1' position among candidate HF3 substrates including proteins of the ECM and focal adhesions and the cysteine protease inhibitor cystatin-C. Interestingly, 190 unique peptides matched to annotated cleavage sites in the TopFIND N-termini database, suggesting that these cleavages occurred at a site prone to cleavage or might have been generated by other proteases activated upon incubation with HF3, including caspases-3 and -7, cathepsins D and E, granzyme B, and MMPs 2 and 9. Using Proteomic identification of cleavage site specificity (PICS), a tryptic library derived from THP-1 monocytic cells was used as HF3 substrates for identifying protease cleavage sites and sequence preferences in peptides. A total of 799 unique cleavage sites were detected and, in accordance with TAILS analysis using native secreted protein substrates of MEF cells, revealed a clear preference for Leu at P1'. Taken together, these results greatly expand the known substrate degradome of HF3 and reveal potential new targets, which may serve as a basis to better elucidate the complex pathophysiology of snake envenomation.

### Keywords
Snake venom metalloprotease, Snake venom, Hf3, Degradomics, N-terminome, Tails

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Instituto Butantan,Av. Vital Brasil 1500, 05503-000, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr Solange M.T Serrano
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Instituto Butantan,Av. Vital Brasil 1500, 05503-000, São Paulo, Brazil.


