### Accession
PXD028781

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii MOB1 interactome

### Description
MOB1 is a conserved protein that regulates cellular proliferation versus apoptosis, centrosome duplication and cellular differentiation in multicellular eukaryotes and also cytokinesis and division axis orientation in unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes. Toxoplasma gondii, an obligate intracellular parasite of veterinary and medical importance, presents one MOB1 protein. T. gondii interconverts between several cellular stages during its life cycle, namely between fast replicating tachyzoite and slow replicating bradyzoite stages during its asexual cycle, a key ability for its success as a parasite. Bradyzoites produce tissue cysts, establishing a chronic infection that enables recrudescence. Conversion is dependent on cell cycle regulation and involves cell differentiation and regulation of replication. This led us to select MOB1 as a strong candidate to be involved in the Toxoplasma replication process. To elucidate how MOB1 acts in T. gondii, we employed a proximity biotinylation method and identified the MOB1 interactome. Toxoplasma gondii RH tachyzoites were transfected with BirA containing plasmid vectors for random integration and two strains were isolated. The control strain expresses a FLAG-BirA recombinant protein while the test strain expresses a FLAG-BirA-MOB1 recombinant protein. Biotinylated proteins were purified using streptavidin-agarose beads. The purified proteins were trypsinized and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly egressed 2x107 FLAG-BirA or FLAG-BirA-MOB1 tachyzoites were inoculated onto HFF confluent cells in T-75 flasks in DMEM GlutaMAX™ 1% FBS (20 T-75 flasks per T. gondii strain, per experiment).  Following 14 hours of host cell infection, biotin was added to a final concentration of 150 µM and incubated for 56 hours. At this point, tachyzoites had fully lysed the host cell monolayer and the culture medium was harvested to recover the parasites. The medium was centrifuged at 800 g for ten minutes (RT). The resulting pellets were washed twice with PBS and centrifuged at 800 g for 10 minutes (RT) to obtain medium free parasite pellets. The pellets weighing around 200 mg were lysed in 3 ml of sucrose based lysis buffer (described in 2.6), to a ratio of approximately 1:15 (w/v) and 5% of the volume was reserved for protein electrophoresis. Following SDS-PAGE and protein transfer, membranes were incubated with blocking solution [PBS 2.5% (w/v) BSA (NZYTech, Lisbon, Portugal), 0.4% (v/v) Triton X-100] overnight at 4 ºC. After blocking, membranes were probed with Streptavidin-HRP (Invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States), diluted in blocking solution (1:50.000), during one hour with orbital shaking at room temperature, followed by three wash steps with PBS 10 minutes. HRP was detected with Amersham ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions, in the imager ChemiDoc XRS+ (Bio-Rad, California, United States). About 24 mg of soluble protein (3 ml) were incubated with 275 µl of pre-washed beads agarose-streptavidin beads (equivalent to 550 µl of resin) overnight at room temperature (approximately 16 ºC) in 50 ml centrifuge tubes using an orbital shaker (GyroTwister; Labnet, Edison, NJ, United States) at 45 rpm. Following binding, beads were washed twice with 4 ml of lysis buffer followed by centrifugation at 2000 g for 5 minutes. Next, the beads were washed three times with 15 ml of PBS and centrifuged at 3220 g for 5 minutes. 10% of the beads volume was separated for assay analysis. After the final centrifugation step, the PBS was removed using a needle and syringe before storage at -35 ºC. The frozen agarose beads were sent for mass-spectrometry analysis to be performed by the i3S Proteomics Scientific Platform (Porto, Portugal). Each sample was reduced and alkylated and processed for proteomics analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described in PMID30464214. Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC (2 µg) overnight at 37 ºC at 1000 rpm. Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS. This equipment is composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µl/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States) at 250 nl/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5 % B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, United States) and searched against the ToxoDB-46_TgondiiME49 database. The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.  Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high.  The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05, decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performing at the consensus step with the following parameters: Peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, pairwise protein ratio calculation, hypothesis test was based on t-test (background based). The analysis is the result of three independent experiments. Samples FLAG-BirA-MOB1 are identified as A and samples FLAG-BirA are identified as B.

### Publication Abstract
Monopolar spindle One Binder1 (MOB1) proteins are conserved components of the tumor-suppressing Hippo pathway, regulating cellular processes such as cytokinesis. Apicomplexan parasites present a life cycle that relies on the parasites' ability to differentiate between stages and regulate their proliferation; thus, Hippo signaling pathways could play an important role in the regulation of the apicomplexan life cycle. Here, we report the identification of one MOB1 protein in the apicomplexan <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i>. To characterize the function of MOB1, we generated gain-of-function transgenic lines with a ligand-controlled destabilization domain, and loss-of-function clonal lines obtained through CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Contrary to what has been characterized in other eukaryotes, MOB1 is not essential for cytokinesis in <i>T. gondii</i>. However, this picture is complex since we found MOB1 localized between the newly individualized daughter nuclei at the end of mitosis. Moreover, we detected a significant delay in the replication of overexpressing tachyzoites, contrasting with increased replication rates in knockout tachyzoites. Finally, using the proximity-biotinylation method, BioID, we identified novel members of the MOB1 interactome, a probable consequence of the observed lack of conservation of some key amino acid residues. Altogether, the results point to a complex evolutionary history of MOB1 roles in apicomplexans, sharing properties with other eukaryotes but also with divergent features, possibly associated with their complex life cycle.

### Keywords
Bioid, Proximity biotinylation, Toxoplasma gondii, Hippo pathway, Nanolc-ms/ms, Mob1, Mitotic exit network

### Affiliations
CIISA - Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
FMV-UL, FMV-ULHT

### Submitter
Inês Delgado

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Leitão
CIISA - Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal


