### Accession
PXD001087

### Title
Breast Cancer

### Description
Endocrine resistance in breast cancer is a major clinical problem with poorly understood mechanisms. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics of a clinically-relevant tamoxifen-resistant cell line model identified increased levels of minichromosome maintenance proteins (MCM), including MCM3, as central in cell cycle and DNA replication protein-protein interaction networks associated with tamoxifen resistance. Lowering MCM3 protein expression in tamoxifen-resistant cells restored tamoxifen sensitivity and altered phosphorylation of several cell cycle regulators, such as p53(Ser315, 33), CHK1(Ser317) and cdc25b(Ser323), suggesting that MCM3 activation of important cell cycle-associated proteins overcomes tamoxifen’s anti-proliferative effects. High MCM3 expression in primary tumor tissue from two independent cohorts of ER+ breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen mono-therapy was an independent prognostic marker significantly associated with a shorter recurrence-free survival.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins associated with tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer, the proteomes of the isogenic breast cancer cell line model consisting of the tamoxifen-sensitive cell line MCF-7/S0.5 and the tamoxifen-resistant cell line TAMR-1 were compared using SILAC-labeling and quantitative LC-MS/MS. MCF-7/S0.5 and TAMR-1 cells were harvested with trypsin and mixed 1:1. Cells were lysed in ice-cold hypotonic buffer (1M HEPES (pH 7.9), 1M MgCl2, 2.5M KCL, 1M DTT) supplied with Mini EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor (04396159001, Roche,) for 5 min. Cells analyzed by mass spectrometry were homogenized by 20 strokes with a tight pestle using a pre-chilled Dounce homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1000rpm for 5 min. at 4oC to pellet nuclei and other fragments and the supernatant was retained as the cytoplasmic fraction. The  digested fractions were desalted using SepPak C18 purification cartridges (Waters) and each was subsequently separated into 12 fractions by IEF using the Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent, G3100). MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Agilent 1100 nanoflow HPLC system (Agilent) using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.0.13.13. Carbamidomethylation of Cystein was chosen as fixed modification, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus, oxidation of Methionine, Glutamine-to-pyroGlutamate conversion, Glutamate-to-pyroGlutamate conversion and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine, were chosen as variable modifications. The processed MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated target-decoy database of forward and reverse sequences from the IPI database (152616 sequences, FASTA file created 20080506). For the search, Trypsin/P+DP (allows tryptic cleavage C-terminal to Lysine and Arginine unless Proline is C-terminal of these amino acids, and allows gas-phase-induced autocleavage between Aspartate and Proline) was chosen for the in silico protein digestion, allowing 3 miscleavages. The mass tolerance for the MS spectra acquired in the Orbitrap was set to 7 ppm, whereas the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for the CID MS/MS spectra from the LTQ.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor-positive (ER<sup>+</sup>) breast cancer is a major clinical problem with poorly understood mechanisms. There is an unmet need for prognostic and predictive biomarkers to allow appropriate therapeutic targeting. We evaluated the mechanism by which minichromosome maintenance protein 3 (MCM3) influences endocrine resistance and its predictive/prognostic potential in ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer. We discovered that ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer cells survive tamoxifen and letrozole treatments through upregulation of minichromosome maintenance proteins (MCMs), including MCM3, which are key molecules in the cell cycle and DNA replication. Lowering MCM3 expression in endocrine-resistant cells restored drug sensitivity and altered phosphorylation of cell cycle regulators, including p53(Ser<sup>315,33</sup>), CHK1(Ser<sup>317</sup>), and cdc25b(Ser<sup>323</sup>), suggesting that the interaction of MCM3 with cell cycle proteins is an important mechanism of overcoming replicative stress and anti-proliferative effects of endocrine treatments. Interestingly, the MCM3 levels did not affect the efficacy of growth inhibitory by CDK4/6 inhibitors. Evaluation of MCM3 levels in primary tumors from four independent cohorts of breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen mono-therapy or no adjuvant treatment, including the Stockholm tamoxifen (STO-3) trial, showed MCM3 to be an independent prognostic marker adding information beyond Ki67. In addition, MCM3 was shown to be a predictive marker of response to endocrine treatment. Our study reveals a coordinated signaling network centered around MCM3 that limits response to endocrine therapy in ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer and identifies MCM3 as a clinically useful prognostic and predictive biomarker that allows personalized treatment of ER<sup>+</sup> breast cancer patients.

### Keywords
Minichromosome maintenance proteins (mcm), Tamoxifen resistance, Cell cycle, Dna replication, Estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, Ndrg1

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jens Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik J. Ditzel
Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark


