### Accession
PXD003759

### Title
Proteomic comparison of Chlamydomonas wildtype and calredoxin knock-down mutants via 14N/15N metabolic labeling

### Description
Calcium (Ca2+) and redox signaling play important roles in acclimation processes from archaea to eukaryotic organisms. Herein we characterized a unique protein from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that has the competence to integrate Ca2+- and redox-related signaling. This protein, designated as calredoxin (CRX), combines four Ca2+-binding EF-hands and a thioredoxin (TRX) domain. A crystal structure of CRX, at 1.6 Å resolution, revealed an unusual calmodulin-fold of the Ca2+-binding EF-hands, which is functionally linked via an inter-domain communication path with the enzymatically active TRX domain. CRX is chloroplast-localized and interacted with a chloroplast 2-Cys-peroxiredoxin (PRX1). Ca2+-binding to CRX is critical for its TRX activity and for efficient binding and reduction of PRX1. Thereby, CRX represents a new class of Ca2+-dependent "sensor-responder" proteins. Genetically engineered Chlamydomonas strains with strongly diminished amounts of CRX revealed altered photosynthetic electron transfer and were affected in oxidative stress response underpinning a function of CRX in stress acclimation.

### Sample Protocol
Isotopic labeling Isotopic 14N and 15N labeling was performed with two biological replicates for the WT and the Calredoxin-deficient IMcrx strain. Cells grown for 6 hours under photoheterotrophic (TAP) low light (LL, 30 µEm-2s-1) conditions were compared with cells grown for 6 hours under photoautotrophic (HSM) and high light (HL, 180 µEm-2s-1) conditions. For quantitative MS analysis, 14N-/15N-labeled WT and 15N-/14N-labeled IMcrx were mixed based on equal protein amount (total protein amount 100 µg). Eight different conditions were examined as followed: (1) 14N-labeled WT TAP LL vs 15N-labeled IM TAP LL, (2) 15N-labeled WT TAP LL vs 14N-labeled IM TAP LL, (3) 14N-labeled WT HSM HL vs 15N-labeled IM HSM HL, (4) 15N-labeled WT HSM HL vs 14N-labeled IM HSM HL, (5) 14N-labeled WT TAP LL vs 15N-labeled WT HSM HL, (6) 14N-labeled IM TAP LL vs 15N-labeled IM HSM HL, (7) 14N-labeled WT TAP LL vs 15N-labeled IM HSM HL and (8) 14N-labeled IM TAP LL vs 15N-labeled WT HSM HL. Proteins were tryptically digested overnight on centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (cut-off: 30 kDa) according to the FASP method45 with an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100.   LC-MS/MS analyses of WT and Calredoxin-deficient IMcrx strain Liquid chromatography and MS parameters were essentially the same as described in Pride Project PXD003049 with the following modifications:  Peptide chromatography was carried out on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 capillary column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The following gradient was applied: 2.5-35% B over 195 min, 35-60% B over 40 min, 60-99% B over 5 min, 99% B for 15 min.  MS data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent Top20 method (MS1: scan range m/z 375–1600, AGC target value 1e6, maximum injection time 30 ms. MS2 parameters: see above). The precursor isolation window was 1.5 m/z. Full scan resolution was set to 70,000 (FWHM). Some samples were additionally analyzed with an MS1 resolution of 140,000 (FWHM).

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptide spectrum matches and statistical evaluation MS2 Spectra were analyzed using Ursgal72. Post processing was performed using percolator (v. 2.08)73 and PSMs were filtered by 5% posterior error probability (PEP). Complete analysis pipeline was executed using the Python framework Ursgal (v 0.3.3) 72 using default profile ‘QExactive+’. Additionally, Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was included as post translational modification search parameter. Details on parameters can be inspected in the Ursgal log JSONs that have been uploaded with the raw result files. In total, 3,234,459 and 2,687,720 peptide spectrum matches for PEPs ≤ 5% and ≤ 1%, respectively, were observed. This translates to 42,815 and 35,926 distinct peptides for PEPs ≤ 5% and ≤ 1%, respectively. Detailed listing of all identified peptides can be found in Supplementary Table 5.  Metabolically labeled peptide quantification All peptides (PEP ≤ 5%) were subjected to quantification using pyQms31,74 using default parameters. In order to quantify peptides irrespectively of their identification in a given LC-MS/MS run, retention time alignment was performed as described before31,74 All quantifications were grouped and processed using piqDB, an internal database structure based on Python, mongoDB and Hadoop. In total all quantifications resulted in 1,462,589 matched isotope pattern chromatograms (MICs) containing at least one isotope pattern match with a mScore ≥ 0.7. However, in order to include a MIC further into the quantitative analysis a total of 8 quantifications (MS1 hits) were required with a mScore ≥ 0.7. Finally, protein quantifications were based on peptide identification with a PEP threshold ≤ 5% but with a more stringent quantification mScore threshold of 0.8 (for at least one match within the MIC). All circle plots, showing raw quantification results for all peptide (incl. charge) in all conditions were plotted using piqDB. Detailed listing of all quantified  peptides can be found in Supplementary Table 6.  Unsupervised clustering  In total 1,289 proteins were quantified in all 6 conditions and those were subjected to unsupervised clustering using pyGCluster46. All possible combinations between the distance matrices 'Euclidean' and 'Correlation' and the linkages 'complete', 'average', 'weighted', centroid', 'median' and 'ward' were clustered during each of the 250,000 iterations. Finally, all agglomerative hierarchical cluster results were combined using pyGCluster's meta clustering approach resulting in 146 frequent (obCoFreq ≥ 0.1%) clusters forming 5 communities (see Supplementary Fig. 7), namely community 21, 92, 99, 113 and 139.

### Publication Abstract
Calcium (Ca(2+)) and redox signalling play important roles in acclimation processes from archaea to eukaryotic organisms. Herein we characterized a unique protein from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii that has the competence to integrate Ca(2+)- and redox-related signalling. This protein, designated as calredoxin (CRX), combines four Ca(2+)-binding EF-hands and a thioredoxin (TRX) domain. A crystal structure of CRX, at 1.6&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, revealed an unusual calmodulin-fold of the Ca(2+)-binding EF-hands, which is functionally linked via an inter-domain communication path with the enzymatically active TRX domain. CRX is chloroplast-localized and interacted with a chloroplast 2-Cys peroxiredoxin (PRX1). Ca(2+)-binding to CRX is critical for its TRX activity and for efficient binding and reduction of PRX1. Thereby, CRX represents a new class of Ca(2+)-dependent 'sensor-responder' proteins. Genetically engineered Chlamydomonas strains with strongly diminished amounts of CRX revealed altered photosynthetic electron transfer and were affected in oxidative stress response underpinning a function of CRX in stress acclimation.

### Keywords
Calredoxin, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
WWU Muenster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology
IBBP Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Muenster, Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology


