### Accession
PXD014590

### Title
Investigation of phycobilisome degradation using top down proteomics in Synechococcus elongatus UTEX 2973

### Description
Top down mass spectrometry analysis of Synechococcus elongatus UTEX2973 cyanobacteria under nitrogen starvation over time course of 4 hours. A number of phycobiliproteins covalently linked to phycocyanobilin pigments were detected as intact forms. Some of them showed partial degradation of the protein backbones or the pigment structures. NblA, a small protein that is believed to play a key role in phycobilisome degradation was shown to be highly correlated to nitrogen starvation based on its remarkable change of protein abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using bead beating. Soluble proteins were extracted and desalted with molecular weight cut-off filter and subjected to top down analysis without enzymatic digestion. Sampling time 0 h: sample ID 1 to 3; time 0.5 h: sample ID 5 to 7; time 1.5 h: sample ID 9 to 11; time 2 h: sample ID 13 to 15; time 4 h: sample ID 17 to 19). 10mM sodium nitrate was added at the 4th hour and sampling was continued for another 4 hours to monitor the resynthesis phase (time 0.5 h: sample ID 21 to 23; time 1.5 h: sample ID 25 to 27; time 2 h: sample ID 29 to 31; time 4 h: sample ID 33 to 35).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSAlign and MSPathFinder(Informed Proteomics package) using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline. The search results were further analyzed as described in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Phycobilisomes (PBSs) are large (3-5 megadalton) pigment-protein complexes in cyanobacteria that associate with thylakoid membranes and harvest light primarily for photosystem II. PBSs consist of highly ordered assemblies of pigmented phycobiliproteins (PBPs) and linker proteins that can account for up to half of the soluble protein in cells. Cyanobacteria adjust to changing environmental conditions by modulating PBS size and number. In response to nutrient depletion such as nitrogen (N) deprivation, PBSs are degraded in an extensive, tightly controlled, and reversible process. In <i>Synechococcus elongatus</i> UTEX 2973, a fast-growing cyanobacterium with a doubling time of two hours, the process of PBS degradation is very rapid, with 80% of PBSs per cell degraded in six hours under optimal light and CO<sub>2</sub> conditions. Proteomic analysis during PBS degradation and re-synthesis revealed multiple proteoforms of PBPs with partially degraded phycocyanobilin (PCB) pigments. NblA, a small proteolysis adaptor essential for PBS degradation, was characterized and validated with targeted mass spectrometry. NblA levels rose from essentially 0 to 25,000 copies per cell within 30 min of N depletion, and correlated with the rate of decrease in phycocyanin (PC). Implications of this correlation on the overall mechanism of PBS degradation during N deprivation are discussed.

### Keywords
Phycobilisomes, Top down proteomics, Protein degradation, Light harvesting complexes, Photosynthesis, Nitrogen starvation

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Himadri B Pakrasi
Washington University in St. Louis


