### Accession
PXD022965

### Title
Metabolome and proteome analyses of glycerol overproducing E. coli unravel transcriptional misregulation of glycolysis and guide optimization strategies

### Description
Feedback-regulation of gene expression in synthetic metabolic pathways can improve production titers and yields. However, the dynamic nature of metabolism makes it difficult to engineer such regulation on a rational basis. Here, we expressed enzymes in a synthetic glycerol production pathway with static or feedback-regulated promoters, and explored the consequences for E. coli metabolism. Expressing the synthetic glycerol pathway with static promoters caused a strong growth burden, resulting in low biomass-levels and low glycerol titers. We show that the growth burden is due to a regulatory interaction between fructose-1,6-bisphoshate (FBP) and the transcription factor Cra, which switches between glycolysis and gluconeogenesis in E. coli. This regulation activated gluconeogenesis at higher induction of the glycerol pathway, because FBP levels were low. Feedback-regulated promoters, in contrast, stabilized FBP levels and enabled robust expression of the synthetic glycerol pathway. We show the broad utility of this approach by engineering different feedback-regulated promoters (pBAD, pTet, pConstitutive) and by applying one of them to carotenoid production in E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivations were performed as described above. Culture aliquots were transferred into 2 mL reaction tubes and washed two times with PBS buffer (0.14 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1.5 mM KH2PO4 and 8 mM Na2HPO4). After washing, cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 % sodium laroyl sarcosinate. Cells were again incubated for 15 min with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 95°C followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25 °C. We used SP3 bead method43,44 for a large number of samples. Fixed protein amount of 50 µg measured by BCA assay (23225, Thermo Fischer) were mixed with 4 µL SP3 beads stock (0.4 μl μL-1 stock) in 96-well high-volume v-bottom plate (710879, Biozym Scientific GmbH). To initiate protein binding to the beads, 75 μL of 100% ethanol were added to the protein extract and inbucated with the SP3 beads for 5 min at room temperature. Tubes were placed in a magnetic rack for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the beads were rinsed two times with 200 µL of 70% ethanol and then 180 µL of 100% ethanol on a magnetic rack. For elution tubes were removed from the magnetic rack, and the beads were reconstituted in 28 µl 10% acetonitrile/10 mM NH4HCO3 with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) incubated overnight at 30 °C at 1000 rpm. After incubation, the tubes were sonicated for 30 s and placed on a magnetic rack, and the supernatant containing tryptic peptides was recovered and transferred to new tubes. Recovered peptides were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a 1.5% final concentration. Peptides were then purified through C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1 % TFA for analysis of peptides. Analysis of peptides was performed by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) as previously described30,45. Briefly, peptides were separated by a reverse-phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed with 2.4 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by gradient model which is from 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 84 min. The data acquisition was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) of the data acquired from mass spectrometry was processed with Progenesis QIP (Waters), and MS/MS search was performed in MASCOT (v2.5, Matrix Science). The following search parameters were used: full tryptic search with two missed cleavage sites, 10 ppm MS1 and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance. Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modification. Progenesis outputs were further processed with SafeQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E.coli

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


