### Accession
PXD034396

### Title
Evaluation of the potential risk of Easy-nLC 1200 in phosphoproteomics

### Description
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a major tool for large scale qualitative and/or quantitative analysis of protein phosphorylation in cells or tissues. Performance of LC is pivotal for the success of phosphoprotemics in both sensitivity and reproducibility. Here we report that the widely used Easy-nLC 1200 has poor performance in analyzing phosphopeptides, particularly in terms of sensitivity and reproducibility, whereas its predecessor, Easy-nLC 1000 has much better performance.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM high glucose with Glutamax (Hyclone, 31966–021) with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, 15140-122) at 37 °C in incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were harvested at approximately 90% confluency by washing twice with PBS and then adding 4% SDC lysis buffer and lysate was boiled for 10 min at 100 °C. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225). Protein were digested with 1:50 w/w trypsin (Enzyme & Spectrum) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides for total peptide sample were desalted on in-house C18 stagetip and then freeze-dried with a SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed in the MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.3.4). UniProt human proteome database containing 20,244 entries was used for database search. Variable modifications were set as oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues for phosphoproteomics. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as the fixed modification. The maximal number of miscleavages was set at 2 and the minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. The false discovery rates (FDR) for both peptide and protein identifications were set at 1%. Other parameters were set up using the default values.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is a major tool for the large-scale qualitative and/or quantitative analysis of protein phosphorylation in cells or tissues. The performance of LC is pivotal for the success of phosphoproteomics in both sensitivity and reproducibility. Here, we report that the widely used Easy-nLC 1200 has poor performance in analyzing phosphopeptides, particularly in terms of sensitivity and reproducibility, whereas its predecessor, Easy-nLC 1000, has a much better performance. Therefore, we suggest that Easy-nLC 1200 is not appropriate for LC-MS-based proteomics analysis for samples with a limited amount, particularly phosphopeptides from plants.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Phosphorylation, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics andDevelopmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology

### Submitter
Yuanya Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics andDevelopmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


