### Accession
PXD030183

### Title
A Bifunctional SPD-0090 contributes virulence of Streptococcus pneumoniae by affecting iron transport and galactose metabolism

### Description
Streptococcus pneumoniae (S.pneumoniae) is a Gram-positive bacterial pathogen that colonizes on the mucosal surfaces of the host's nasopharynx and upper respiratory tract and results in pneumonia. In order to survive and infect the host, S.pneumoniae must have obtain essential nutrients, such as transition metal ions . Our previous study had shown that the mRNA and protein levels of SPD-0090 are significantly upregulated in the ΔpiuA/ΔpiaA/ΔpitA triple mutant (three major iron transports), but its detailed biological function is unknown. In this study, we found that the knockout spd-0090 gene induced a delayed growth in the medium with different sugar sources. F urther iTRAQ quantitative proteomics studies revealed that SPD-0090 affects galactose metabolism and iron ion transport system. Then RT-qPCR and intracellular galactose content assays showed that SPD-0090 affects galactose uptake, leads to reduced galactose utilization. In addition, in vitro biochemical assays showed that SPD-0090 is a hemin transporter and affects iron uptake. Notably the knockout of spd-0090 resulted in an enhanced infection ability of S.pneumonaie to Our study reveals that the dual function of SPD-0090 plays an important role in the virulence of S.pneumoniae.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from D39 and D39Δspd0090 in the exponential growth phase when they were cultured in THY medium. 500μg of total protein was taken from each sample and digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37℃ for 18 hours and lyophilized. Then, an iTRAQ Reagent multiplex kit (AB Sciex, USA) was used to label peptide samples according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The two groups of samples were labeled separately at room temperature for 1 hours and then the labeled samples were mixed in equal proportions and lyophilized. The labeled samples were grouped using High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, WuFeng, China), referring to the previous description for the specific experimental steps(Zheng, Y.-D.;  Pan, Y.;  He, K.;  Li, N.;  Yang, D.;  Du, G.-F.;  Ge, R.;  He, Q.-Y.;  Sun, X.; Cristea Ileana, M., SPD_1495 Contributes to Capsular Polysaccharide Synthesis and Virulence in Streptococcus pneumoniae. mSystems 5 (1), e00025-20.). Then the samples were desalted according to the instructions for the MonoTip C18(SHIMADZU, Japan) desalting column. Desalted peptides were resuspended with buffer A (5% acetonitrile,0.1% formic acid) and detected using an ABSCIEX Triple-TOF5600 mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX, USA).

### Data Protocol
Then, the raw data obtained were identified and quantified by Proteome Discoverer   software 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and searched using the S.pneumoniae D39 database. The specific parameters were as follows: Sample Type, iTRAQ 8plex (peptide labeled); Digestion, Trypsin; instrument, Triple-TOF 5600; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); search effort, thorough; and detected protein threshold [unused ProtScore (Conf)]>1.30 (95.0%). In this study, the cutoff threshold for upregulation and downregulation of the differentially expressed proteins(DEPs) were defined using the population statistics applied to the biological replicates reported by Gan et al(Gan, C. S.;  Chong, P. K.;  Pham, T. K.; Wright, P. C., Technical, Experimental, and Biological Variations in Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ). Journal of Proteome Research 2007, 6 (2), 821-827.).The finalized cutoffs for upregulation (1.4) and downregulation(0.71) of proteins were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virulence, Spd-0090, Iron transport protein, Galactose metabolism, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
13797062336
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
cao linlin

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


