### Accession
PXD009706

### Title
Fingermark Proteomics -  Proteomics as a new tool to study fingermark ageing in forensics

### Description
Fingermarks are frequently encountered at crime scenes and on related items, and naturally protected against fast degradation due to the abundance of recalcitrant substances, such as fatty acids and constituents of sebum. While representing a major and valuable source for donor identification through latent fingerprint analysis, fingermarks are also rich in molecules that can be used to acquire toxicological and biological donor profiling information. In addition, exogenous compounds in fingermarks have shown applicability for crime reconstruction and to assess offender and victim activities before, during and after a criminal act. A major limitation in these respects is the lack of temporal information, which makes it difficult to establish forensic timelines. To address this issue, we developed a fingermark sampling and protein extraction protocol easily adaptable to forensic settings. A bottom-up proteomics approach was then applied to confidently identify protein traces and assess the fingermark proteome dynamic changes at different stages of ageing. This approach was also applied to contaminated fingermarks to examine fingermark ageing in light of realistic forensic scenarios and detect donor contact with bodily fluids. These data represent HR-MS recordings from fingermarks deposited on glass substrate. Fingermarks originated from both female and male donors and from all five digits, and were aged for up to 16 days. Contamination sources included urine, saliva and vaginal fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Fingermarks were collected by firmly pressing the tip of each finger (all 5 digits) onto a glass slide for 5 seconds. Sampling of the slides was performed using polyester swabs moistened with 50 ?l extraction fluid containing 50% ACN in water (v/v). After removing the swabhandles using scissors, swabheads were placed in protein low-binding Eppendorf tubes and 200 ?l of extraction fluid was added to each tube. Fingermark proteins were extracted from the swabheads by pulsed vortexing (10 mins) followed by sonication (10 min). The swabheads were then centrifuged for 10 min (11,300 x g) using spinbaskets. For each sample, the liquid permeate was dried under a N2 flow.  Dried fingermark proteins were dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate by pulsed vortexing (10 min) and sonication (10 min). Then the proteins were incubated at 95 0C for 5 min with DTT . After cooling the samples to RT, IAA was added to each sample and incubated in the dark at RT for 20 min. Proteins were digested o/n at 37 0C with trypsin. The peptide solutions were purified and concentrated using solid-phase extraction (SPE, C18). The eluted peptides were dried under a N2 flow.  All samples were analysed by reversed-phase C18 liquid chromatography tandem MS (LC-MS/MS). For LC, a binary solvent system was used consisting of mobile phases A (ACN containing 0.1% FA in water, v/v) and B (water containing 0.1% FA, v/v). Each run lasted 65 min and was composed of the following gradient: 5% A (isocratic, 0 – 5 min), 5 – 40% A (linear, 5 – 60 min), 40 – 95% A (linear, 60 – 63 min), 95% A (isocratic, 63 – 65 min). The flow rate was set to 0.3 ml/min. The mass spectrometer was operated at 2 GHz in extended dynamic range mode (low mass range; m/z 1700). Data dependent acquisition in positive ion mode was applied for MS analysis and was set to automatically select max. 3 precursor ions with intensities above 4500 counts for each cycle.

### Data Protocol
Multi-pass database searches were performed using X!Tandem (Vengeance, v2015.12.15.2), MSGF+ (v2017.01.13) and Andromeda (v1.5.6.0) algorithms. General settings included: proteolytic enzyme: trypsin, precursor mass tolerance: 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 40 ppm, max. Missed cleavages: 2, charge range: 2-4, variable modification: Oxidation (M), fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation. All peaklists were searched against a target/decoy protein database containing all reviewed human Uniprot protein sequences. A focussed fingermark database was then constructed and used for LFQ in the MaxQuant toolbox.

### Publication Abstract
Fingermarks are trace evidence of great forensic importance, and their omnipresence makes them pivotal in crime investigation. Police and law enforcement authorities have exploited fingermarks primarily for personal identification, but crucial knowledge on when fingermarks were deposited is often lacking, thereby hindering crime reconstruction. Biomolecular constituents of fingermark residue, such as amino acids, lipids and proteins, may provide excellent means for fingermark age determination, however robust methodologies or detailed knowledge on molecular mechanisms in time are currently not available. Here, we address fingermark age assessment by: (i) drafting a first protein map of fingermark residue, (ii) differential studies of fresh and aged fingermarks and (iii), to mimic real-world scenarios, estimating the effects of donor contact with bodily fluids on the identification of potential age biomarkers. Using a high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach, we drafted a characteristic fingermark proteome, of which five proteins were identified as promising candidates for fingermark age estimation. This study additionally demonstrates successful identification of both endogenous and contaminant proteins from donors that have been in contact with various bodily fluids. In summary, we introduce state-of-the-art proteomics as a sensitive tool to monitor fingermark aging on the protein level with sufficient selectivity to differentiate potential age markers from body fluid contaminants.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Fingermarks

### Affiliations
Netherlands Forensic Institute

### Submitter
Stijn Oonk

### Lab Head
Dr Stijn Oonk
Netherlands Forensic Institute


