### Accession
PXD029703

### Title
Qualitative and quantitative top-down proteomics of human colorectal cancer cell lines identified 23000 proteoforms and revealed drastic proteoform-level differences between metastatic and non-metastatic cancer cells

### Description
Understanding cancer metastasis at the proteoform level is crucial for discovering new protein biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and drug development. Proteins are the primary effectors of function in biology and proteoforms from the same gene can have drastically different biological functions. Here, we present the first qualitative and quantitative top-down proteomics (TDP) study of a pair of isogenic human metastatic and non-metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines (SW480 and SW620). This study pursues a global view of human CRC proteome before and after metastasis in a proteoform-specific manner. We identified 23,319 proteoforms of 2,297 genes from the CRC cell lines using capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry (CZE-MS/MS), representing nearly one order of magnitude improvement in the number of proteoform identifications from human cell lines compared to literature data. We identified 111 proteoforms containing single amino acid variants (SAAVs) using a proteogenomic approach and revealed drastic differences between the metastatic and non-metastatic cell lines regarding SAAVs profiles. Quantitative TDP analysis unveiled statistically significant differences in proteoform abundance between the SW480 and SW620 cell lines on a proteome scale for the first time. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) disclosed that many differentially expressed genes at the proteoform level had diversified functions and were closely related to cancer. Our study represents a milestone in TDP towards the definition of human proteome in a proteoform-specific manner, which will transform basic and translational biomedical research.

### Sample Protocol
SW480 and SW620 cells were both purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and were cultured in RPMI 1640 cell culture medium (Life Technologies Corporation, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific, Gaithersburg, MD) and 2mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). The cells were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 and were passaged every 3-4 days. Both cell lines were last verified by Short Tandem Repeat (STR) sequencing in 2016 and were used within two months after resuscitation from frozen aliquots at -80°C.         Upon growing to confluency, cells were harvested and cleansed of remaining cell culture medium via subsequent washing with HPLC grade water (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) and centrifugation for 5-minute intervals at 15000 × g until supernatant was clear. Proteins were then extracted using mammalian cell lysis buffer according to the literature.1 Cell lysis buffer consisted of 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.2), 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 75 mM sodium chloride, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and one protease inhibitor cocktail. The reagents for cell lysis buffer were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet was purchased from Roche. Lysis buffer was added to the harvested cells which then underwent sonication on ice three times for 1-minute intervals at 15% amplitude. The resulting extracted proteins were then clarified of cellular debris by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Proteins were quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL) and then stored at -80°C until preparation for MS analysis. SW480 and SW620 proteins were denatured at 37 °C for 30 minutes, reduced at 37 °C for 30 minutes using DTT, and then alkylated at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes using IAA. The excess IAA were quenched by adding DTT and reacting for 5 min at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files generated from the CZE-MS/MS runs were analyzed with the TopPIC Suite (version 1.4.0) pipeline.7,8 The RAW files were converted into mzML files with msconvert.9 Then spectral deconvolution was performed with TopFD (version 1.4.0), which converts precursor and fragment isotope clusters into neutral monoisotopic masses and finds proteoform features by combining precursor isotope clusters with similar monoisotopic masses and close migration times in MS1 scans. The resulting mass spectra with monoisotopic neutral masses were stored in msalign files and the proteoform feature information was stored in text files. The human proteome database was downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640, 20350 entries, version October 23, 2019, only reviewed protein sequences were included) and concatenated with a random decoy database of the same size. Each msalign file was searched against the concatenated targe-decoy database using TopPIC (version 1.4.0). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and the maximum number of unexpected modifications was 1. The precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were 15 ppm. The maximum mass shift of unknown modifications was 500 Da. TopPIC reported a list of target and decoy proteoform-spectrum-matches (PrSMs) for each msalign file.  Merging proteoform identifications The proteoforms identified from all msalign files were merged and filtered with a proteoform-level FDR. First, the target and decoy PrSMs reported from all the msalign files were combined and filtered with a 5% spectrum-level FDR. 10 The PrSMs were then clustered by grouping PrSMs into the same cluster if they were from the same protein and their precursor mass differences were not large than 2.2 Da. The PrSM with the best E-value was selected for each cluster and its proteoform was reported as the representative one for the cluster. The representative target and decoy proteoforms were finally filtered with a 1% proteoform-level FDR.    Proteoform quantification There were 18 MS raw files from triplicate CZE-MS/MS analyses of the 6 SEC fractions for the SW480 or SW620 sample in experiment 4. The TopPIC suite pipeline reported a list of targe and decoy PrSM identifications for each raw file. Using the methods in the previous section, the PrSM identifications of the 36 MS raw files were merged and a list of proteoform identifications with a 1% proteoform-level FDR were reported. The abundance of a proteoform was computed as the sum of the proteoform abundances in the six SEC fractions, which were reported by TopFD. Proteoform identifications and their abundances were reported for each replicate using this method. Finally, TopDiff (version 1.4.0), a tool in TopPIC Suite, was used to match proteoform identifications across the three SW480 replicates and three SW620 replicates.  The quantitative results were further analyzed using Perseus software.11 The intensities of each proteoform in triplicate CZE-MS/MS runs of SW480 and SW620 were normalized to the intensity of corresponding proteoform from the first run of SW480, converting proteoform intensity to proteoform ratio. Then, proteoform ratios of each run were divided by the corresponding median to make sure the ratios center at 1. After log2 transformation of all the data, the significantly differentially expressed proteoforms were determined by performing t-test analysis (FDR threshold: 0.05, S0: 1). The volcano plot [-log(p-value) vs. log2(fold change)] was generated in Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding cancer metastasis at the proteoform level is crucial for discovering previously unknown protein biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and drug development. We present the first top-down proteomics (TDP) study of a pair of isogenic human nonmetastatic and metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines (SW480 and SW620). We identified 23,622 proteoforms of 2332 proteins from the two cell lines, representing nearly fivefold improvement in the number of proteoform identifications (IDs) compared to previous TDP datasets of human cancer cells. We revealed substantial differences between the SW480 and SW620 cell lines regarding proteoform and single amino acid variant (SAAV) profiles. Quantitative TDP unveiled differentially expressed proteoforms between the two cell lines, and the corresponding genes had diversified functions and were closely related to cancer. Our study represents a pivotal advance in TDP toward the characterization of human proteome in a proteoform-specific manner, which will transform basic and translational biomedical research.

### Keywords
Proteoform, Cancer metastasis, Colorectal cancer, Top-down proteomics

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


