### Accession
PXD021678

### Title
Gene- and species-specific Hox mRNA translation by ribosome expansion segments

### Description
Ribosomes have been suggested to directly control gene regulation, however regulatory roles for ribosomal RNA (rRNA) remain largely unexplored. Expansion segments (ESs) consist of multitudes of tentacle-like rRNA structures extending from the core ribosome in eukaryotes. ESs are remarkably variable in sequence and size across eukaryotic evolution with a largely unknown function. In characterizing ribosome binding to a regulatory element within a Homeobox (Hox) 5’ UTR, we unexpectedly identify a modular stem-loop within this element that binds to a single ES, ES9S. Here, we described the raw data of the relative quantification proteomic analysis using tandem mass tag mass spectrometry of the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes enriched from affinity pulldown of the 4xS1m-aptamer fusion constructs with the lysate components of C3H/10T1/2 cells and mouse embryo.  4xS1m pulldown is performed by combining mouse Hoxa9 mRNA elements (P3 and P4) with C3H/10T1/2 cell lysates, and by combining a9 IRES180 and an unrelated viral IRES with E11.5 FVB mouse embryo lysates. The aptamer alone served as a negative control. RNPs in the eluate were released by RNAse A treatment and were subjected to TMT 6plex labelling.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular extracts were prepared from 20 confluent 15-cm dishes of untransfected C3H/10T1/2 cells. A total of 1.5 g cells was collected, washed once in PBS, divided into ~300 mg portions and aliquoted in 2 ml safe-lock tubes (Eppendorf). Lysates of FVB stage E11.5 mouse embryos were used as input to recapitulate the cellular environment of Hox gene expression. FVB E11.5 mouse embryos were harvested in 1xPBS as described in the mouse section and individually added to 2 ml safe-lock tubes. The cell and embryo pellets were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, homogenized by cryomilling after addition of a 2.5 mm steel bead using a tissue lyser (QIAgen TissueLyser II) at 25 Hz for 30 seconds 3–6 times, or until the tissue was powderized, and the powder was either processed directly or stored at -80°C. For the embryo experiments, two embryos per samples were used. The frozen homogenate of one aliquot (~300 mg) was solubilized by the addition of 100 µl ice-cold RNP lysis buffer per sample and allowed to thaw for 5 min at room temperature or until thawed. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 17.000 x g at 4°C, resulting in a supernatant of ~500 µl. The protein concentration in the extract was determined by Nanodrop to be ~25-70 mg/ml. Next, the extract (~500 µl) was pre-cleared by addition of 25 µl of a 50% slurry of Avidin Agarose (Thermo Pierce) beads, 100 µl of a 50% slurry of SA Sepharose beads, and 5 µL RNasin (Promega), and tumbling for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were collected and discarded, and the pre-cleared lysate was supplemented with 2 µl of RNasin Plus (Promega), added onto the freshly prepared, RNA-coupled SA Sepharose matrix as described in the paper, and incubated at 4°C for 2-3 hours under rotation to form RNP complexes. Beads were rinsed once and washed 3 times for 2-5 min with 1 ml SA-RNP wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, and 1 tablet/50 ml Complete Protease Inhibitors, EDTA-free (Roche)). After the last wash of 6 washes, beads were transferred to a fresh tube and RNA-bound proteins were eluted by addition of 5 µg RNase A (Invitrogen, AM2271, 1µg/µL) in 100 µl Low Salt Buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 30 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, 1 tablet/10 ml Mini Complete Protease Inhibitors, EDTA-free (Roche)) and rotation for 15 min at 4°C. The RNase A eluate was recovered and 10 µl of the eluate was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and WB. TMT labelling has been performed similar to in (Shi et al., 2017). In brief, proteins in RNase A elutions after 4xS1m pulldown were denatured with 5 mM DTT and 2 M urea for 1 hour at 65°C, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, V5111) with a ratio of 1:50 w/w (trypsin:protein) at 37°C water bath for 16 hours. Digested peptides were desalted using the OMIX C18 pipette tips column (Agilent, A57003100) following the manufacturer’s manual. Each sample was labeled with a distinct TMT label (TMTsixplex, Thermo Scientific, 90066) following the manufacturer’s manual, mixed equally and desalted again through the OMIX C18 pipette tips column. The solution was then dried with a Speed Vac. Peptides were resuspended with 10 µL 0.1% formic acid and subjected to ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC)-tandem mass spectrometery (MS/MS) analysis using ACQUITY UPLC M-class system (Waters) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). More precisely, for each TMT sample, 3 µl was loaded on a Self-Pack PicoFrit column (New Objective) with a 360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter, and a tip size of 15 µm packed to approximately 22 cm with HALO Peptide ES-C18 Bulk Packing 2.7 µm beads (MAC-MOD Analytical). UPLC solvent A was 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/100% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 30 minutes at 1% B at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Peptides were eluted at the same flow rate using a linear gradient from 5% B to 40% B for 180 minutes, followed by a linear ramp to 100% B for 10 minutes, followed by constant flow at 100% B for 10 minutes. Then, there was a ramp down to 1% B over 1 minute, followed by constant flow at 1% B for 9 minutes. The Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in the data-dependent mode using Xcalibur v3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to acquire higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans (R = 15,000) after each MS1 scan (R = 60,000) on the top 15 most abundant ions in the Orbitrap. HCD parameters were set to an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, normalized collision energy of 40%, and an activation time of 0.1 milliseconds. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at repeat count 1 with a 30 second repeat duration, exclusion list size of 500, exclusion duration of 60 seconds, and a +/- 10 ppm exclusion mass width. Charge state rejection was enabled for charge states that were unassigned or 1.

### Data Protocol
The results were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) employing the Mascot search engine (Perkins et al., 1999), searching against Mus musculus SwissProt database with the following parameters: 1 maximum missed trypsin enzyme cleavage site, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, with deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) dynamic modifications, and TMT6plex (N-term and K) and carbamidomethyl (C) static modifications. Identified peptides were subsequently filtered for 1% FDR. Relative abundance of each protein was calculated by their levels in the individual samples compared to the 4xS1m control.  Protein abundance ratios were then log2 transformed, averaged between replicates, and median normalized, to represent detected and enriched proteins. Subsequently, proteins were categorized into curated gene sets corresponding to core components of the translational process: ribosomal subunits and translation factors. Statistical significance between distributions of log2 ratios of each gene set was calculated with the Brunner-Munzel test. Standard linear regression was performed between samples, and on certain gene sets, to determine the Pearson correlation coefficient.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes have been suggested to directly control gene regulation, but regulatory roles for ribosomal RNA (rRNA) remain largely unexplored. Expansion segments (ESs) consist of multitudes of tentacle-like rRNA structures extending from the core ribosome in eukaryotes. ESs are remarkably variable in sequence and size across eukaryotic evolution with largely unknown functions. In characterizing ribosome binding to a regulatory element within a Homeobox (Hox) 5' UTR, we identify a modular stem-loop within this element that binds to a single ES, ES9S. Engineering chimeric, "humanized" yeast ribosomes for ES9S reveals that an evolutionary change in the sequence of ES9S endows species-specific binding of Hoxa9 mRNA to the ribosome. Genome editing to site-specifically disrupt the Hoxa9-ES9S interaction demonstrates the functional importance for such selective mRNA-rRNA binding in translation control. Together, these studies unravel unexpected gene regulation directly mediated by rRNA and how ribosome evolution drives translation of critical developmental regulators.

### Keywords
Internal ribosome entry site, Hoxa9, Ribosome, C3h/10t1/2, Lc msms, 4xs1m aptamer, Mrna translation, Affinity purification, Stem-loop, Mouse fvb embryo e11.5, Hox cluster, Ribosomal rna, Internal initiation, 6plex tmt, Rna structure, Rna-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Graduate student
Department of Genetics, Stanford University

### Submitter
Teodorus Theo Susanto

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Barna
Department of Genetics, Stanford University


