### Accession
PXD013818

### Title
Apostichopus japonicus circumoral nerve ring LC-MS/MS

### Description
The objective of this study was to perform a detailed analysis of neuropeptides in A. japonicus by sequencing the transcriptome of neural tissue (circumoral nerve ring; CNR) and combining analysis of these sequence data with mass spectroscopic analysis of CNR extracts so that the structure of mature neuropeptides could be determined. Collectively, these data provide an important molecular basis for investigation of the physiological roles of neuropeptides in A. japonicus and other sea cucumber species.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples of CNR tissue (~100 mg each) were ground into powder under liquid nitrogen and homogenized using a Polytron in 1ml lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 2mM EDTA, with 1% protease inhibitor Cocktail Set Ⅲ added (Calbiochem, Germany). Crude extracts were then sonicated mildly three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo Scientz Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China), and then centrifuged for 10 min (20,000g, 4ºC). Supernatants containing soluble proteins were collected and a 10 kDa NMWCO ultrafiltration membrane (Merck Millipore, Amicon Ultra-0.5, ultracel-10k, Germany) was used to separate peptides and proteins (5000 g, 4ºC, 45 min). Peptide concentration was quantified using a BCA kit (Beyotime, China) and then 5 µg of peptide solution was acidified to pH 2.0-3.0 with 10% TFA and centrifuged for 10 min (20,000g, 4ºC). The supernatant was then desalted using a C18 membrane and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS.  Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A), directly loaded onto a reverse-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 µm i.d.) with a linear gradient from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 24 min, 25 to 36% solvent B for 8 min, then climbing to 80% in 4 min, and holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization (NSI) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive™ Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was set up from 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using normalized collision energy (NCE) setting at 28, ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (v.1.5.2.8) against an A. japonicus transcriptome sequence database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Search parameters were set as follows: no enzyme was used, and variable modifications included methionine oxidation, conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, deamidation of asparagine and C-terminal amidation.

### Publication Abstract
The sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus is a foodstuff with very high economic value in China, Japan and other countries in south-east Asia. It is at the heart of a multibillion-dollar industry and to meet demand for this product, aquaculture methods and facilities have been established. However, there are challenges associated with optimization of reproduction, feeding and growth in non-natural environments. Therefore, we need to learn more about the biology of A. japonicus, including processes such as aestivation, evisceration, regeneration and albinism. One of the major classes of molecules that regulate physiology and behaviour in animals are neuropeptides, and a few bioactive peptides have already been identified in A. japonicus. To facilitate more comprehensive investigations of neuropeptide function in A. japonicus, here we have analysed genomic and transcriptomic sequence data and proteomic data to identify neuropeptide precursors and neuropeptides in this species. We identified 44 transcripts encoding neuropeptide precursors or putative neuropeptide precursors, and in some instances neuropeptides derived from these precursors were confirmed by mass spectrometry. Furthermore, analysis of genomic sequence data enabled identification of the location of neuropeptide precursor genes on genomic scaffolds and linkage groups (chromosomes) and determination of gene structure. Many of the precursors identified contain homologs of neuropeptides that have been identified in other bilaterian animals. Precursors of neuropeptides that have thus far only been identified in echinoderms were identified, including L- and F-type SALMFamides, AN peptides and others. Precursors of several peptides that act as modulators of neuromuscular activity in A. japonicus were also identified. The discovery of a large repertoire of neuropeptide precursors and neuropeptides provides a basis for experimental studies that investigate the physiological roles of neuropeptide signaling systems in A. japonicus. Looking ahead, some of these neuropeptides may have effects that could be harnessed to enable improvements in the aquaculture of this economically important species.

### Keywords
Circumoral nerve ring, Apostichopus japonicus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, PR China
ocean university of China

### Submitter
Yingqiu Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Muyan
The Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, PR China


