### Accession
PXD041495

### Title
Direct and indirect consequences of PAB1 deletion in the regulation of translation initiation, translation termination, and mRNA decay

### Description
Cytoplasmic poly(A)-binding protein (PABPC, yeast Pab1) is involved in various stages of mRNA post-transcriptional control, including translation initiation, translation termination, and mRNA decay regulation. Due to the multi-functional properties of PABPC, attempts to define a specific role for PABPC in vivo by deleting, depleting, overexpressing, or mutating the protein has led to conflicting models of PABPC's function. To specifically assess direct and indirect consequences of deleting PABPC, we generated and analyzed RNA-Seq, ribosome profiling, and mass spectrometry data from yeast cells lacking Pab1.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration in cell lysates were determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay according to manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of cell lysates containing 50 µg total protein were snap frozen, lyophilized in a SpeedVac, then reduced, alkylated, and digested following the S-Trap digestion protocol (ProtiFi). In brief, lyophilized lysates were first resuspended in 23 µl Lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)). Resuspended protein extracts were reduced by adding 1 µl 200mM TCEP and incubating at 55 C for 1 hour, then alkylated by adding 1 µl 375mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubating at room temperature for 30 minutes, protected from light. To further denature and trap proteins, samples were mixed with 2.5 µl of 27.5% phosphoric acid (H2PO4 in water) and 165 µl of binding/wash buffer (100mM TEAB in 90% methanol). The mixtures were applied to S-Trap columns and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 seconds. Columns were washed 5 times, each by 150 µl of binding/wash buffer and centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 seconds. To digest proteins, 25 µl of digestion buffer containing 1 µg trypsin (5 µl of 0.2 µg/µl trypsin in 50mM TEAB + 20 µl 50mM TEAB) was added to each column and samples were incubated at 37 C overnight. Digested peptides were collected by 3 subsequent centrifugations at 4,000 rpm for 1 min following the addition of these elution buffers for each collection: 1) 40 µl 50mM TEAB in water, 2) 40 µl 0.2% formic acid in water, and 3) 40 µl 50% acetonitrile in water. All flowthroughs from the same sample were pooled, lyophilized in a SpeedVac, and stored at -80 C.  Samples were labeled using a TMT10plex labeling kit (Thermo Scientific). Lyophilized, digested peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 100mM TEAB and incubated with 10 µl of TMT10plex reagent (equilibrated to room temperature and resuspended in acetonitrile) at room temperature for 1 hour. Reactions were quenched with 5 µl of 5% hydroxylamine at room temperature for 15 minutes. Equal amounts (55 µl) of each sample were pooled together; 50 µl of the pooled reaction was saved for direct shotgun analysis and the rest for high-pH fractionation. For the latter, pooled samples were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 300 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water, and fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific), collecting 1 flowthrough fraction, 1 wash fraction, and 6 step-gradient fractions. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Dried peptides were resuspended in 18 µl of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water, vortexed for 2 minutes, and centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 16 minutes. For mass spectrometry, 3.8 µl of the resuspended peptides were injected into the Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were trapped for 4 minutes at a flow rate of 4.0 µl/min onto a 100 µm I.D. fused-silica precolumn (Kasil frit) packed with 2 cm of 5 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch), and eluted and separated in 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by an in-house made 75 µm I.D fused silica analytical column (gravity-pulled tip) packed with 25 cm of 3 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ  (Dr. Maisch). Mobile phases were A (water (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and B (acetonitrile (0.1% (v/v) formic acid). The biphasic elution program was as follows: 0-100 min (10-35% B); 100-120 min (35-65% B); 120-121 min (65-95% B); 121-126 min (95% B); 126-127 min (95-5% B); 145 min (STOP). The MS data acquisition was performed in positive electrospray ionization mode (ESI+), within the mass range of 375-1500 Da with the Orbitrap resolution of 120,000 (m/z 200) and a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds. Data dependent acquisition (ddMS2) was carried out with a 1.2 Da isolation window, a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 200), maximum injection time of 110 milliseconds, and the customed AGC target with a 38% of HCD collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.1.21, Thermo Scientific) and searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces Cerevisiae database (downloaded 06/28/2021) using Mascot Server (version 2.8, Matrix Science). Search parameters included full trypsin, with variable modifications of oxidized methionine, pyroglutamic acid (from Q), and N terminal acetylation. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT10plex on peptide N-terminus and lysine side chain. Assignments were made using a 10ppm mass tolerance for the precursor and 0.05 Da mass tolerance for the fragments. Peptide and protein validation and annotation was done in Scaffold (version 5, Proteome Software, Inc.) using Peptide Prophet (Keller et al. 2002) and Protein Prophet (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003) algorithms. Peptides were filtered at a 1% FDR, while protein identification threshold was set to greater than 99% probability and with a minimum of two identified peptides per protein. Protein clustering analysis was applied to increase the probability of protein identification for proteins that share peptides (e.g. paralogs). Quantitative analyses, including TMT label-based quantification, median normalization of log2 intensity values, and log2 fold change calculation were carried out in Scaffold Q+S. Data acquired from flowthrough and wash fractions were used to determine the success of high-pH fractionation. Further analysis was based on data acquired from 6 step-gradient fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Pab1, Poly(a)-binding protein, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School
Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA USA

### Submitter
Kotchaphorn Mangkalaphiban

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Jacobson
Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA USA


