### Accession
PXD034245

### Title
Subzero hydrogen-deuterium exchange CE-MS

### Description
We have performed in solution hydrogen exchange (HDX) on peptide standards and bovine hemoglobin with subsequent quenching, pepsin digestion, and cold capillary electrophoretic separation coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) detection for the benchmarking of a lab built HDX-MS platform. Though neutral coated capillaries that eliminate electroosmotic flow provide fast separations with peak capaci-ties surpassing 200, uncoated capillaries with high electroosmotic flow achieve half as much peak ca-pacity with even faster separations but 30% higher deuterium retention for angiotensin II peptide standard.  The data obtained from two different separation conditions on peptic digests of bovine he-moglobin shows strong agreement for relative deuterium uptake between methods and provides data amenable to software such as MS-Studio.  Processed data from denatured hemoglobin vs the longest time point in this study (50,000s) also shows agreement with subunit interaction sites determined by crystallographic methods.

### Sample Protocol
Stock solutions of 120 mg/ml intact bovine hemoglobin (Hb) were prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in H2O, pH 6.79.  A 13.75 µL aliquot was diluted 20-fold in either 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in H2O, pH 6.79 (undeuterated control), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in D2O, pH(read) 6.27, or 6 M urea in D2O, pH(read) 3.04 (fully deuterated control) The peptide standards were incubated overnight and quenched by 20-fold dilution into ice cold 0.24% formic acid in 1:4 ACN:H2O which lowered the solution pH(read) to 2.85.  The intact Hb was exposed to the deuterated buffer for five different time points (5, 50, 500, 5000, and 50,000s) with temperature maintained at 22 °C in a thermomixer compact (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for the three longest time points and the deuteration reaction quenched by 20-fold dilution of an aliquot of the labeled protein into ice cold 3.5 mg/mL pepsin with 1% formic acid in H2O, which lowered the solution pH(read) to 2.31.  A pulse label control was prepared by incubating an aliquot of the stock Hb standard for 50,000s in the thermomixer and then performing a 5s label as described above. The protein/pepsin mixture was vortexed for ~5s and an aliquot was placed into a PCR tube containing ice cold ACN such that the final concentration ACN was 25% (v/v). The PCR tube was removed from ice and placed into a lab designed, in house machined acrylic sample pod featuring an o ring for a gas tight seal, and connected to house nitrogen.  The assembled sample pod was connected to the sep-aration capillary inlet by passing the separation capillary inlet through a P-720 MicroTight union assembly with F-180 tubing sleeve through a single F-120 ferrule (IDEX at the inlet side and and injected at 5 psi for 3s.  A 16 mm length of 2 mm OD, 1 mm ID PEEK tubing (6330N11, McMas-ter-Carr, Elmhurst, Illinois) was secured with epoxy (Art. 36-2421, Biltema, Gothenburg, Swe-den) to the junction of the tubing sleeve and the F-120 ferrule to provide a gas tight fitting to the acrylic sample and BGE pod by the use of a 2 mm push-in fitting (QSM-M5-2, Festo, Esslingen, Germany).  After injection, the sample pod was removed and replaced with another acrylic pod containing BGE in a stainless-steel vial connect-ed to both house N2 and the HVPS.  A plug of BGE (20 psi, 3s) was injected into the capillary to push the sample plug into the thermostatted re-gion of the capillary. After the plug injection the HVPS was ramped and acquisition was started.

### Data Protocol
Peptic peptides were sequenced with PLGS 3.0.3 (Waters Corporation, Manchester, United Kingdom), setting enzyme to “non-specific”. CE-MS data obtained with UDMSE was searched against a database consisting of UNIPROT peptide sequence entries for HBA_BOVIN, HBB_BOVIN, and PEPA_PIG. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange was assessed with MS-Studio.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, fast liquid chromatographic separations at low temperatures are exclusively used for the separation of peptides generated in hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) workflows. However, it has been suggested that capillary electrophoresis may be a better option for use with HDX. We performed in solution HDX on peptides and bovine hemoglobin (Hb) followed by quenching, pepsin digestion, and cold capillary electrophoretic separation coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) detection for benchmarking a laboratory-built HDX-MS platform. We found that capillaries with a neutral coating to eliminate electroosmotic flow and adsorptive processes provided fast separations with upper limit peak capacities surpassing 170. In contrast, uncoated capillaries achieved 30% higher deuterium retention for an angiotensin II peptide standard owing to faster separations but with only half the peak capacity of coated capillaries. Data obtained using two different separation conditions on peptic digests of Hb showed strong agreement of the relative deuterium uptake between methods. Processed data for denatured versus native Hb after deuterium labeling for the longest timepoint in this study (50,000 s) also showed agreement with subunit interaction sites determined by crystallographic methods. All proteomic data are available under DOI: 10.6019/PXD034245.

### Keywords
Hemoglobin, Hdx, Ce-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Erik Jansson

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Jansson
Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University


