### Accession
PXD033891

### Title
Multi-omic profiling reveals an RNA processing rheostat that predisposes to prostate cancer

### Description
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men. GWAS studies have identified variants associated with prostate cancer susceptibility, however, mechanistic and functional validation of these mutations are lacking. Mitochondrial energy metabolism plays an important role in the onset and development of cancer. A missense variant was identified in the ELAC2 gene, which encodes a dually localized nuclear and mitochondrial RNA processing enzyme, with predicted impact on metabolism and tumorigenesis. We used CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to introduce this variant into the mouse Elac2 gene as well as to generate a prostate-specific gene knockout of Elac2. The mutations caused enlargement and inflammation in the prostate and nodule formation. Multi-omic profiling revealed defects in RNA and energy metabolism that activated proinflammatory and tumorigenic pathways as a consequence of impaired processing of mitochondrial and nuclear encoded non-coding RNAs and reduced protein synthesis. The Elac2 variant or knockout mice on the background of the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model show that Elac2 mutation with a secondary genetic insult exacerbated the onset and progression of prostate cancer and led to metastasis. Our systems biology analyses reveal a miRNA-mediated molecular mechanism by which specific non-coding RNAs elicit metabolic changes that drive prostate tumorigenesis and metastasis. We conclude that the ELAC2 variant is a predisposing factor for prostate cancer and provide a detailed molecular mechanism and physiologically relevant models of this cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue homogenates were lysed in 10% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 200 µg of protein was dissolved in 50 µl cell lysis buffer (0.13 M Tris HCl, 6 M guanidinium chloride) and digested using S-trap Micro Spin columns (ProtiFi) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated at 70˚C for 60 min. Proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were acidified with 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid and diluted with 165 µl of binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final Tris). Samples were added to the S-Trap Micro Spin columns by centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 s then subsequently washed three times by successively loading 150 µl of binding buffer and centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 s. Digestion was achieved by adding 1 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 25 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight 37˚C. Peptides were eluted by successively adding 40 µl of 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, 40 µl of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and 40 µl of 75% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid with a 30 s centrifugation step at  4,000 g between the addition of each elution buffer. The eluants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µl of buffer A (0.1% formic acid).  Samples were analysed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC and a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Briefly, samples were injected on a reverse-phase PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at a flowrate of 15 µl/minute. After 3.0 minutes, the trap column was switched in-line with a Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 resolving column (1.7µm, 130 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 100 mm) and the peptides were eluted at a flowrate of 3 µl/minute using buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) as the mobile phases. The gradient consisted of: 8-10% B for 0 to 6 min, 10-24% B from 6 to 43 min, 24%-40% B from 43-51 min, 40-95% B from 51-57 min, followed by a wash, a return of 8% buffer B and equilibration prior to the next injection. The mass spectra were obtained in DIA mode with an MS1 resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control target at 3 × 106, maximum injection time at 200 ms and scan range from 400-1100 m/z. DIA spectra were recorded at resolution 30,000 and an automatic gain control target at 2 × 105. The 70 isolation windows were 10 m/z each from mass 405-1095.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Spectronaut (Bruderer et al., 2015) version 15 (15.2.210819.50606) using direct DIA analysis and default settings. Briefly, spectra were searched against the Mus musculus proteome database from UniProt (UP000000589) with carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-offs at the peptide spectral match, peptide and protein group levels. Quantitation was performed at the MS2 level with Q-value data filtering and cross run normalization with Q-complete row selection.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy and the third leading cause of cancer deaths. GWAS have identified variants associated with prostate cancer susceptibility; however, mechanistic and functional validation of these mutations is lacking. We used CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to introduce a missense variant identified in the ELAC2 gene, which encodes a dually localised nuclear and mitochondrial RNA processing enzyme, into the mouse Elac2 gene as well as to generate a prostate-specific knockout of Elac2. These mutations caused enlargement and inflammation of the prostate and nodule formation. The Elac2 variant or knockout mice on the background of the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) model show that Elac2 mutation with a secondary genetic insult exacerbated the onset and progression of prostate cancer. Multiomic profiling revealed defects in energy metabolism that activated proinflammatory and tumorigenic pathways as a consequence of impaired noncoding RNA processing and reduced protein synthesis. Our physiologically relevant models show that the ELAC2 variant is a predisposing factor for prostate cancer and identify changes that underlie the pathogenesis of this cancer.

### Keywords
['Mitochondria', 'Rna processing', 'Gene expression', 'Dia', 'Prostate cancer susceptibility']

### Affiliations
['Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia', 'University of Queensland']

### Submitter
['Timothy McCubbin']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia', 'email': 'aleksandra.filipovska@uwa.edu.au', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Aleksandra Filipovska', 'id': '2397113'}]

