### Accession
PXD045025

### Title
Identification of a cryptic MHC-E epitope from influenza virus

### Description
B6-CIITA-E cell line (C57Bl/6 fibroblasts expressing MHC-II molecules I-Ab and I-Ed) was infected with Influenza A virus (A/Puerto Rico/8/1934, PR8) or left uninfected (control), and the MHC-class II-associated peptidome analysed via immunopeptidomics.

### Sample Protocol
200x106 B6-CIITA-Ed cells were either mock infected or PR8-infected in suspension in 0.1% BSA/PBS for 1 hr and incubated at 37 °C, 6% CO2 for ~18 hr. Cells were harvested with PBS containing 2 mM EDTA. Cell lysis and immunoprecipitation of peptide/MHC-II complexes were carried out largely as previously described55, and all chemicals used after cell harvest were analytical grade or equivalent when available. Following lysis, all steps were conducted in Protein LoBind tubes from Eppendorf or glass Econo-Columns (Bio-Rad 7371012). Briefly, anti-MHC-II antibody (clone M5/114.5, BioXCell) was cross-linked to Protein G Sepharose beads (GE 17061801). Lysates and beads were co-incubated and rotated overnight at 4 °C. After washing, peptide/MHC-II complexes were eluted in 10% acetic acid, and the collected material was lyophilized. After immunoprecipitation, purified peptide/MHC complexes were dissolved in 120 µl loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 1% acetonitrile (ACN) in water). Using an Ultimate 300 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher), samples were loaded onto a 4.6 x 50-mm ProSwift RP-1S (Thermo Fisher) monolith column, and peptides were eluted by applying a 10 min linear gradient from 3% to 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Fractions were collected in 1-minute intervals. Alternate fractions (odd and even) were combined in two final fractions, dried, resuspended in 20 ul of loading buffer, and analyzed by LC-MS2. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS2 using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System supplemented with a PepMap C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher) directly interphased with an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A 60 min linear gradient from 3% to 25% ACN in 5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min was applied for peptide elution. Peptide ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using an Easy-Spray Source at 2000 V. Detection was performed with a resolution of 120,000 for full MS (300-1500 m/z scan range), and precursors were selected using TopSpeed ion selection within a 2 second cycle time, and a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 amu for fragmentation. For MS2 acquisition, the resolution was set at 30,000 and high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) energy was set at 28 for peptides with 2 to 4 charges and 32 for peptides that were singly charged.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS2 datasets were analyzed using PEAKS v10.6 with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da; digestion: none; fixed modifications: none. The search database included the full reference sequences of the pDZ PR8 gene segments translated in all six reading frames (positive and negative sense), irrespective of start and stop codons, concatenated with the canonical PR8 viral proteome, and the reviewed mouse entries in Uniprot (Swissprot version 17 July 2019). For immunopeptidomics data, a threshold of -10lgP=20 was applied across all datasets, resulting in an estimate false discovery rate of ~1%.

### Publication Abstract
The extent to which unconventional forms of antigen presentation drive T cell immunity is unknown. By convention, CD8 T cells recognize viral peptides, or epitopes, in association with classical major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I, or MHC-Ia, but immune surveillance can, in some cases, be directed against peptides presented by nonclassical MHC-Ib, in particular the MHC-E proteins (Qa-1 in mice and HLA-E in humans); however, the overall importance of nonclassical responses in antiviral immunity remains unclear. Similarly uncertain is the importance of 'cryptic' viral epitopes, defined as those undetectable by conventional mapping techniques. Here we used an immunopeptidomic approach to search for unconventional epitopes that drive T cell responses in mice infected with influenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934. We identified a nine amino acid epitope, termed M-SL9, that drives a co-immunodominant, cytolytic CD8 T cell response that is unconventional in two major ways: first, it is presented by Qa-1, and second, it has a cryptic origin, mapping to an unannotated alternative reading frame product of the influenza matrix gene segment. Presentation and immunogenicity of M-SL9 are dependent on the second AUG codon of the positive sense matrix RNA segment, suggesting translation initiation by leaky ribosomal scanning. During influenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 infection, M-SL9-specific T cells exhibit a low level of egress from the lungs and strong differentiation into tissue-resident memory cells. Importantly, we show that M-SL9/Qa-1-specific T cells can be strongly induced by messenger RNA vaccination and that they can mediate antigen-specific cytolysis in vivo. Our results demonstrate that noncanonical translation products can account for an important fraction of the T cell repertoire and add to a growing body of evidence that MHC-E-restricted T cells could have substantial therapeutic value.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Mhc, Influenza a virus, Viral infection

### Affiliations
University of Oxford University of Utrecht
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford University of Utrecht


