### Accession
PXD012586

### Title
Temporal changes in the wheat leaf apoplastic proteome infected by an incompatible or compatible race of leaf rust (Puccinia triticina)

### Description
Wheat leaf rust caused by the pathogenic fungus Puccinia triticina, is a serious threat to bread wheat and durum production in many areas of the world.  This plant-pathogen interaction has been studied extensively at the molecular genetics level, however proteomics data are still relatively scarce.  The present study investigated temporal changes in the abundance of the apoplastic fluid proteome of wheat leaves infected with either virulent or avirulent races of P. triticina, using a label-free LC-MS-based approach.  In general, there was very little difference between inoculated and control apoplastic proteomes as a result of either race of pathogen, until haustoria had become well established in the incompatible interaction, although the resistant host responds to pathogen challenge sooner than the susceptible.  In the earlier samplings (up to 72 h after inoculation), there were 46 host proteins with significantly changing abundance, however pathogen proteins were detected only rarely and not reproducibly.  This is consistent with the hemi-biotrophic life-style of P. triticina; the pathogen infection is characterized by an early phase of a symbiosis-like relationship, followed by a later stage of pathogenesis, with tissue damage and parasitism.  The majority of the host proteins with altered abundance up to 72 h post-inoculation were pathogen-response-related, including peroxidases, chitinases, β-1-3-endo-glucanases and PR-proteins.  Five days after inoculation with the incompatible race it was possible to detect 150 PT proteins and 117 host proteins which had significantly increased in abundance as well as 33 host proteins which had significantly decreased in abundance and which represent potential targets of pathogen effectors. The pathogen-expressed proteins – seen most abundantly in the incompatible interaction – were mostly uncharacterized proteins, however many of their functions could be inferred through homology-matching with pBLAST.  Pathogen proteins also included several candidate effector proteins, some novel and some which have been reported previously from the purified haustoria proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars ‘Thatcher’ (RL6101) and near-isogenic ‘ThatcherLr1’ which bears the Lr1 leaf rust resistance gene were inoculated with urediniospores of P. triticina Race-1 (virulence phenotype BBBD) at the one-leaf stage, 8 days after emergence.   Spores were mixed with light mineral oil and sprayed onto the leaves using an air powered sprayer.  After 30 min plants were transferred to a dew chamber and kept in the dark with near 100% relative humidity for 24 h, , after which plants were moved to a growth cabinet and grown until harvest, using a 16-hour day-length at 20˚C.  The inoculated leaves were harvested after 24 h, 2 d, 3 d and 5 d, with a few plants left to grow so that symptoms could be evaluated for each experiment. The apoplastic fluid and proteins are collected from harvested leaves (4.5g) centrifuged at at 1000 g for 10 min at 4˚C.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were queried against the genomic sequences of P. triticina (24,519 sequences) and of T. aestivum (145,587 sequences) downloaded from UniProt in August 2017. Simultaneous protein identification and label-free quantification  (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant. The search parameters were mostly left at default settings. The results generated from MaxQuant were further analayzed using Perseus. A two-sample Student’s t-test between oil- and rust-inoculated genotypes were performed for statistical analysis using Perseus.  A volcano plot was generated with a setting of S0 = 1.5 and FDR = 0.05 to determine which proteins were significantly enriched in any experimental group.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat leaf rust caused by the pathogenic fungus, <i>Puccinia triticina</i>, is a serious threat to bread wheat and durum production in many areas of the world. This plant-pathogen interaction has been studied extensively at the molecular genetics level however, proteomics data are still relatively scarce. The present study investigated temporal changes in the abundance of the apoplastic fluid proteome of resistant and susceptible wheat leaves infected with <i>P. triticina</i> race-1, using a label-free LC-MS-based approach. In general, there was very little difference between inoculated and control apoplastic proteomes in either host, until haustoria had become well established in the susceptible host, although the resistant host responds to pathogen challenge sooner. In the earlier samplings (up to 72 h after inoculation) there were just 46 host proteins with significantly changing abundance, and pathogen proteins were detected only rarely and not reproducibly. This is consistent with the biotrophic lifestyle of <i>P. triticina</i>, where the invading pathogen initially causes little tissue damage or host cell death, which occur only later during the infection cycle. The majority of the host proteins with altered abundance up to 72 h post-inoculation were pathogen-response-related, including peroxidases, chitinases, &#x3b2;-1-3-endo-glucanases, and other PR proteins. Five days after inoculation with the susceptible apoplasm it was possible to detect 150 <i>P. triticina</i> proteins and 117 host proteins which had significantly increased in abundance as well as 33 host proteins which had significantly decreased in abundance. The latter represents potential targets of pathogen effectors and included enzymes which could damage the invader. The pathogen-expressed proteins-seen most abundantly in the incompatible interaction-were mostly uncharacterized proteins however, many of their functions could be inferred through homology-matching with pBLAST. Pathogen proteins also included several candidate effector proteins, some novel, and some which have been reported previously. All MS data have been deposited in the PRIDE archive (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) under Project PXD012586.

### Keywords
Apoplastic fluid, Yellow rust, Proteomics, Effector proteins, Leaf rust

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics
Agriculture and Agrifood Canada Morden Research and Development Centre

### Submitter
Christof Rampitsch

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Rampitsch
Agriculture and Agrifood Canada Morden Research and Development Centre


