### Accession
PXD007517

### Title
Xylem sap shotgun proteomics from Fe- and Mn-deficient and Mn-toxic tomato plants

### Description
The aim of this work was to study the effects of Fe and Mn deficiencies and Mn toxicity on the protein profile of the xylem sap of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), with the aim of elucidating plant response mechanisms to these nutritional stresses. Tomato was chosen as a model plant because the tomato genome has been published and this plant species has adequate root pressure and turgid stems that permit xylem sap sampling in sufficient amounts by de-topping. The high-throughput shotgun analysis has permitted to identify and quantitate a large number of low abundance proteins in the tomato xylem sap.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the collected fluid were precipitated immediately by adding five volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol, containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol. The pellet was solubilized in a sample rehydration buffer containing 8 M urea, 2% (w/v) CHAPS, 50 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF and 0.2% (v/v) IPG buffer pH 3-10 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). Protein concentration in the samples was quantified immediately with the Bradford method using BSA as standard. 5 µg of total proteins were subjected to 1-DE to remove non-protein compounds. Proteins were in gel digested with trypsin, and peptides were subsequently extracted. Peptide solutions were concentrated in a trap column (Lcolumn Micro 0.3 x 5 mm; CERI, Japan) using an ADVANCE UHPLC system (Michrom Bioresources, Aubum, CA, U.S.A.). Elution was carried out with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN and concentrated peptides were separated in a Magic C18 AQ nano column (0.1 x 150 mm; Michrom Bioresources) using a linear gradient of ACN (from 5 to 45%) and a flow rate of 500 nL min-1. Peptide ionization was carried out with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV using an ADVANCE spray source (Michrom Bioresources). Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) equipped with Xcalibur software (v. 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using the full peptide list with the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, U.K.) and NCBI 20141009 database (50,750,890 sequences; 18,190,226,827 residues). Search parameters were: peptide mass tolerance ± 5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ± 0.6 Da, one allowed missed cleavage, allowed fixed modification carbamidomethylation (Cys), and variable modification oxidation (Met) and peptide charges were set to +1, +2 and +3. Positive protein identification was assigned with at least two unique top-ranking peptides with scores above the threshold level (p ≤ 0.05). Protein information was exported from Mascot .xml format and imported to Progenesis software (v. 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.), which then associate peptide and protein information.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this work was to study the effects of Fe and Mn deficiencies on the xylem sap proteome of tomato using a shotgun proteomic approach, with the final goal of elucidating plant response mechanisms to these stresses. This approach yielded 643 proteins reliably identified and quantified with 70% of them predicted as secretory. Iron and Mn deficiencies caused statistically significant and biologically relevant abundance changes in 119 and 118 xylem sap proteins, respectively. In both deficiencies, metabolic pathways most affected were protein metabolism, stress/oxidoreductases and cell wall modifications. First, results suggest that Fe deficiency elicited more stress responses than Mn deficiency, based on the changes in oxidative and proteolytic enzymes. Second, both nutrient deficiencies affect the secondary cell wall metabolism, with changes in Fe deficiency occurring via peroxidase activity, and in Mn deficiency involving peroxidase, Cu-oxidase and fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins. Third, the primary cell wall metabolism was affected by both nutrient deficiencies, with changes following opposite directions as judged from the abundances of several glycoside-hydrolases with endo-glycolytic activities and pectin esterases. Fourth, signaling pathways via xylem involving CLE and/or lipids as well as changes in phosphorylation and N-glycosylation also play a role in the responses to these stresses. Biological significance In spite of being essential for the delivery of nutrients to the shoots, our knowledge of xylem responses to nutrient deficiencies is very limited. The present work applies a shotgun proteomic approach to unravel the effects of Fe and Mn deficiencies on the xylem sap proteome. Overall, Fe deficiency seems to elicit more stress in the xylem sap proteome than Mn deficiency, based on the changes measured in proteolytic and oxido-reductase proteins, whereas both nutrients exert modifications in the composition of the primary and secondary cell wall. Cell wall modifications could affect the mechanical and permeability properties of the xylem sap vessels, and therefore ultimately affect solute transport and distribution to the leaves. Results also suggest that signaling cascades involving lipid and peptides might play a role in nutrient stress signaling and pinpoint interesting candidates for future studies. Finally, both nutrient deficiencies seem to affect phosphorylation and glycosylation processes, again following an opposite pattern.

### Keywords
Iron deficiency; mn deficiency; mn toxicity; shotgun proteomics; tomato; xylem sap

### Affiliations
Experimental Station Aula Dei-CSIC
Plant Stress Physiology Group, Plant Nutrition Department, Aula Dei Experimental Station, CSIC, P.O. 13034, 50080 Zaragoza, Spain

### Submitter
Laura Ceballos-Laita

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Ceballos-Laita
Plant Stress Physiology Group, Plant Nutrition Department, Aula Dei Experimental Station, CSIC, P.O. 13034, 50080 Zaragoza, Spain


