### Accession
PXD030202

### Title
TMT analysis of tissue proteomics in bevacizumab-resistant xenograft tumor tissuein nude mice

### Description
TMT proteomics was used to detect the difference in protein expression of bevacizumab-resistant xenograft tumor tissue in nude mice.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the CRC xenograft tumor tissue with acquired resistance to bevacizumab and subjected to isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (TMT) labeling using the AB SCIEX TMT reagents multiplex kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions as we previously described.

### Data Protocol
In detail, 200 μg proteins from each sample were first subjected to reduction and alkylation and then loaded in an ultracentrifuge filter (30 kDa; Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Shanghai, China), followed by two sequential buffer change centrifugations with 8 M urea and five-times volume of 50 mM NH4HCO3, respectively. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin, and peptides were centrifuged into the bottom tube for collection. Then a pair of DMSO and JB treated peptide samples were labeled with iTRAQ labeling reagent 113 and 114, respectively, and likewise another pair of biological replicates of the same samples (whole cell lysate from another batch of culture of these two treatments) were labeled with 115 and 116 TMT labeling reagents, respectively. After incubation at room temperature for 2 h, the labeled peptides were combined and dried using vacuum centrifugation. The combined TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH RP-LC (10 fractions) and then analyzed with a triple TOF 5600 MS (5600 MS; AB SCIEX, Framingham, CA, USA) as we previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Vessel co-option has been demonstrated to mediate colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CRCLM) resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. The current mechanisms underlying vessel co-option have mainly focused on "hijacker" tumor cells, whereas the function of the "hijackee" sinusoidal blood vessels has not been explored. Here, we found that the occurrence of vessel co-option in bevacizumab-resistant CRCLM xenografts was associated with increased expression of fibroblast activation protein &#x3b1; (FAP&#x3b1;) in the co-opted hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which was dramatically attenuated in HSC-specific conditional Fap-knockout mice bearing CRCLM allografts. Mechanistically, bevacizumab treatment induced hypoxia to upregulate the expression of fibroblast growth factor-binding protein 1 (FGFBP1) in tumor cells. Gain- or loss-of-function experiments revealed that the bevacizumab-resistant tumor cell-derived FGFBP1 induced FAP&#x3b1; expression by enhancing the paracrine FGF2/FGFR1/ERK1/-2/EGR1 signaling pathway in HSCs. FAP&#x3b1; promoted CXCL5 secretion in HSCs, which activated CXCR2 to promote the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tumor cells and the recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. These findings were further validated in tumor tissues derived from patients with CRCLM. Targeting FAP&#x3b1;+ HSCs effectively disrupted the co-opted sinusoidal blood vessels and overcame bevacizumab resistance. Our study highlights the role of FAP&#x3b1;+ HSCs in vessel co-option and provides an effective strategy to overcome the vessel co-option-mediated bevacizumab resistance.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, I.e.human, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Jinan University
College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Yuning Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Dongmei Zhang
College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China


