### Accession
PXD001655

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis using the Galaxy framework

### Description
Metaproteomics characterizes proteins expressed by microorganism communities (microbiome) present in environmental samples or a host organism (e.g. human), revealing insights into the molecular functions conferred by these communities.  Compared to conventional proteomics, metaproteomics presents unique data analysis challenges, including the use large protein databases derived from hundreds of organisms, as well as numerous processing steps to ensure data quality.  This data analysis complexity limits the use of metaproteomics for many researchers.  In response, we have developed an accessible and flexible metaproteomics workflow within the Galaxy bioinformatics framework.  Via analysis of human oral tissue exudate samples, we have established a modular Galaxy-based workflow that automates a reduction method for searching large sequence databases, enabling comprehensive identification of host proteins (human) as well as meta-proteins from the non-host organisms.  Downstream, automated processing steps enable BLASTP analysis and evaluation/visualization of peptide sequence match quality, maximizing confidence in results.  Outputted results are compatible with tools for taxonomic and functional characterization (e.g. Unipept, MEGAN5).  Galaxy also allows for the sharing of complete workflows with others, promoting reproducibility and also providing a template for further modification and improvement.  Our results provide a blueprint for establishing Galaxy as a solution for metaproteomic data analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Oral exudate was collected from one subject as described in Kooren et al 2011. Briefly, PerioPaper strip (Oraflow, Smithtown, New York) was used to collect exudate (a mixture of cells and fluid) from the oral premalignant lesion (OPML) and an adjacent area of healthy oral tissue, serving as a matched control sample. Immediately after collection the strip was stored at -20° C. Proteins on the PerioPaper strip were subjected to overnight on-strip trypsin digestion. The peptides were subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX). HPLC fractionation was performed on a Magic 2002 HPLC system using a Polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) as described in Bandhakavi et al 2009. In order to estimate the amount of peptides, UV chromatogram (215 nm and 280 nm absorbance) was generated for each sample. Peptide mixtures were analyzed using online capillary liquid chromatography  coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The chromatography conditions and instrumental parameters used have been described. In total, 14 RAW files (seven SCX fractions each for OPML and matched control) were generated and used for subsequent analysis.

### Data Protocol
The dataset collection MGF files generated using msconvert within GalaxyP were searched using ProteinPilot (4.5.0.0, 1654 Revision: 1656) using a modified version of the “two-step’ method – a strategy for identifying peptides from large databases  as described in Jagtap et al 2014.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics characterizes proteins expressed by microorganism communities (microbiome) present in environmental samples or a host organism (e.g. human), revealing insights into the molecular functions conferred by these communities. Compared to conventional proteomics, metaproteomics presents unique data analysis challenges, including the use of large protein databases derived from hundreds or thousands of organisms, as well as numerous processing steps to ensure high data quality. These challenges limit the use of metaproteomics for many researchers. In response, we have developed an accessible and flexible metaproteomics workflow within the Galaxy bioinformatics framework. Via analysis of human oral tissue exudate samples, we have established a modular Galaxy-based workflow that automates a reduction method for searching large sequence databases, enabling comprehensive identification of host proteins (human) as well as "meta-proteins" from the nonhost organisms. Downstream, automated processing steps enable basic local alignment search tool analysis and evaluation/visualization of peptide sequence match quality, maximizing confidence in results. Outputted results are compatible with tools for taxonomic and functional characterization (e.g. Unipept, MEGAN5). Galaxy also allows for the sharing of complete workflows with others, promoting reproducibility and also providing a template for further modification and enhancement. Our results provide a blueprint for establishing Galaxy as a solution for metaproteomic data analysis. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001655 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001655).

### Keywords
Metaproteomics ; workflows.

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, BMBB, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Pratik Jagtap

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy J. Griffin
Associate Professor, BMBB, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN


