### Accession
PXD014802

### Title
Proteomic profiling of PTMs at HP1 protein

### Description
The levels of phosphorylated HP1beta peptide forms in HeLa cells after irradiation and SAHA treatment were examined.

### Sample Protocol
Material - The human cervix adenocarcinoma (HeLa) cell line.  GFP-HP1 beta fusion protein immunoprecipited using GFP-trap (Chromotek). Protein on-bead digestion using Glu-C. LC-MS/MS analysis - Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA).

### Data Protocol
The  RAW  mass  spectrometric  data  ﬁles  were  analyzed  using  Proteome  Discoverer  software  (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA; version 2.2) with in-house Mascot search engine (Matrixscience, UK;  version 2.6.2)  to  compare  acquired  spectra  with  entries  in  the  UniProtKB  human protein  database  (version 2018_09; 21053 protein sequences 1), cRAP contaminant database and in-house HP1 database  (version  2019_05; 6 protein  sequences).  Mass tolerances  for  peptides  and  MS/MS  fragments  were  10 ppm and 0.02Da, respectively. For the HP1 database searches, Glu-C enzyme speciﬁcity with up to six missed  enzyme cleavages and the following modiﬁcations were set: acetylation (K, protein N-term),  methylation  (K,  R),  dimethylation  (K),  trimethylation (K)  and  phosphorylation  (S,  T,  Y)  as  variable   modiﬁcations.  For  searches  against  the  cRAP  and  UniProtKB  human  databases,  Glu-C  enzyme   speciﬁcity with up to  two missed enzyme cleavages, and  oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,  Q) as  variable modiﬁcations were set. Rank 1 peptides with Mascot expectation value < 0.01 and Ion Score ≥  30  were  considered.  The  abundance  of  peptides  was  quantiﬁed  automatically  using  Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. The peak intensity corresponding to each precursor ion was calculated from  the  extracted  ion  chromatograms  (XICs)  using  the  Precursor  Ions  Quantifier  node.  Selected  HP1 peptide identiﬁcations were manually veriﬁed and quantiﬁed from the  peak areas derived from the  XICs  using  Skyline  4.2  software,  including  identiﬁcation  alignment  across  the  raw  ﬁles  based  on  retention time and m/z.

### Publication Abstract
The family of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) isoforms is essential for chromatin packaging, regulation of gene expression, and repair of damaged DNA. Here we document that &#x3b3;-radiation reduced the number of HP1&#x3b1;-positive foci, but not HP1&#x3b2; and HP1&#x3b3; foci, located in the vicinity of the fibrillarin-positive region of the nucleolus. The additional analysis confirmed that &#x3b3;-radiation has the ability to significantly decrease the level of HP1&#x3b1; in rDNA promoter and rDNA encoding 28S rRNA. By mass spectrometry, we showed that treatment by &#x3b3;-rays enhanced the HP1&#x3b2; serine 88 phosphorylation (S88ph), but other analyzed modifications of HP1&#x3b2;, including S161ph/Y163ph, S171ph, and S174ph, were not changed in cells exposed to &#x3b3;-rays or treated by the HDAC inhibitor (HDACi). Interestingly, a combination of HDACi and &#x3b3;-radiation increased the level of HP1&#x3b1; and HP1&#x3b3;. The level of HP1&#x3b2; remained identical before and after the HDACi/&#x3b3;-rays treatment, but HDACi strengthened HP1&#x3b2; interaction with the KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) protein. Conversely, HP1&#x3b3; did not interact with KAP1, although approximately 40% of HP1&#x3b3; foci co-localized with accumulated KAP1. Especially HP1&#x3b3; foci at the periphery of nucleoli were mostly absent of KAP1. Together, DNA damage changed the morphology, levels, and interaction properties of HP1 isoforms. Also, &#x3b3;-irradiation-induced hyperphosphorylation of the HP1&#x3b2; protein; thus, HP1&#x3b2;-S88ph could be considered as an important marker of DNA damage.

### Keywords
Human, Hela cells, Hdac inhibitor, Irradiation, Hp1 protein

### Affiliations
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Mendel Centre for Plant Genomics and Proteomics, Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic


