### Accession
PXD009784

### Title
Changes in the urinary extracellular vesicle proteome are associated with nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies

### Description
Nephronophthisis is one of the leading genetic causes of end-stage renal disease in childhood. Early diagnostics and prognostics for nephronophthisis are currently limited. We aimed to identify non-invasive protein biomarkers for nephronophthisis in urinary extracellular vesicles. Extracellular vesicles were isolated from urine of 12 patients with a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy and 12 age- and gender-matched controls, followed by in-depth label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis of gel fractionated extracellular vesicles proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Material Twelve patients with NPH-RC and 12 age- and gender-matched control subjects were recruited at the Department of Pediatric Nephrology of the University Medical Center Utrecht, the Department of Genetics of the University Medical Center Utrecht, and the Department of Human Genetics of the Radboudumc Nijmegen. NPH-RC patients and controls were included in the AGORA (Aetiologic research into Genetic and Occupational/environmental Risk factors for congenital Anomalies) data- and biobank project, approved by the regional Committee on Research involving Human Subjects (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen 2006/048 and METC UMC Utrecht 12-473). Urine samples (40 to 400 ml) were collected from all subjects using sterile urine containers and kept on ice for a maximum of five hours until processing. We did not use the first morning void to minimize the chance for an enrichment of EVs derived from the urinary bladder. EV isolation  Supernatants were processed in three batches of eight subjects with equal numbers of patients and controls, male and female subjects and uniform mean subject age to preclude batch effects. Thawed supernatants were centrifuged at 2,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. 0.05% NP-40 was added to each supernatant as a detergent. The samples were concentrated to 1 ml by centrifugation at 4,000 g at room temperature using Amicon Ultracel 100kDa cut-off centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Concentrated samples were diluted to 1.9 ml using PBS (BBraun, Melsungen, Germany). Subsequently, 100 µl cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (PIC) (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in 525µl PBS was added to each sample. Urine was centrifuged for 16,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C to remove debris. Next, Vn96 peptide (ME-kit, New England Peptide, Gardner, MA, USA) was added to the supernatant to aggregate EVs including exosomes. The Vn96 peptide binds heat shock proteins present on the surface of EVs, allowing ‘miniprep’ isolation. Samples were incubated for 60 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The full pellets were washed with 5% cOmplete™ PIC in PBS, centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C and resuspended in 2 ml NuPAGE Sample Buffer. Cell lysis and digestion Sonified EV samples were size separated on NuPAGe Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using one-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Gels were cut prior to in-gel digestion with trypsin followed by peptide extraction LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN (Biosolve), 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject) at 35˚C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot human reference proteome FASTA file (release 2015-09, 42,122 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.

### Publication Abstract
Nephronophthisis is one of the leading genetic causes of end-stage renal disease in childhood. Early diagnostics and prognostics for nephronophthisis are currently limited. We aimed to identify non-invasive protein biomarkers for nephronophthisis in urinary extracellular vesicles. Extracellular vesicles were isolated from urine of 12 patients with a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy and 12 age- and gender-matched controls, followed by in-depth label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics analysis of gel fractionated extracellular vesicle proteins. Supervised cluster analysis of proteomic profiles separated patients from controls. We identified 156 differentially expressed proteins with fold change &#x2265;4 in patients compared to controls (P&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;.05). Importantly, expression levels of discriminating proteins were correlated with chronic kidney disease stage, suggesting possible applications for urinary extracellular vesicle biomarkers in prognostics for nephronophthisis. Enrichment analysis of gene ontology terms revealed GO terms including signaling, actin cytoskeleton and endocytosis among the downregulated proteins in patients, whereas terms related to response to wounding and extracellular matrix organization were enriched among upregulated proteins. Our findings represent the first step towards a non-invasive diagnostic test for nephronophthisis. Further research is needed to determine specificity of the candidate biomarkers. In conclusion, proteomic profiles of urinary extracellular vesicles differentiate nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy patients from healthy controls. SIGNIFICANCE: Nephronophthisis is an important cause of end-stage renal disease in children and is associated with an average diagnostic delay of 3.5&#x202f;years. This is the first study investigating candidate biomarkers for nephronophthisis using global proteomics analysis of urinary extracellular vesicles in patients with nephronophthisis compared to control individuals. We show that measuring protein markers in urinary extracellular vesicles is a promising approach for non-invasive early diagnostics of nephronophthisis.

### Keywords
Human, Nephronophthisis, Ciliopathies, Extracellular vesicle, Kidney, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


