### Accession
PXD016172

### Title
BCL9 provides multi-cellular communication properties in colorectal cancer by interacting with paraspeckle proteins

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer, which despite recent advances in treatment, remains incurable due to molecular heterogeneity of tumor cells. The B-cell lymphoma 9 (BCL9) oncogene functions as a transcriptional co-activator of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, which plays critical roles in CRC pathogenesis.  Here we have identified a β-catenin-independent function of BCL9 in a poor-prognosis subtype of CRC tumors characterized by expression of stromal and neural associated genes. In response to spontaneous calcium transients or cellular stress, BCL9 is recruited adjacent to the interchromosomal regions, where it stabilizes the mRNA of calcium signaling and neural associated genes by interacting with paraspeckle proteins. BCL9 subsequently promotes tumor progression and remodeling of the tumor microenvironment (TME) by sustaining the calcium transients and neurotransmitter-dependent communication among CRC cells. These data provide additional insights into the role of BCL9 in tumor pathogenesis and point towards additional avenues for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
To extract nuclear protein, cells were incubated with cytoplasmic lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH = 8.0, 20mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.5% Tween-20 containing protease/phosphatase Inhibitor, #5872, Cell signaling) on ice for 10mins, centrifuged at 6000xg, and the precipitate collected. This step was repeated 3 times to remove at much cytoplasmic protein as possible. Subsequently, nuclear lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100(v/v) containing protease/phosphatase inhibitor) was added to the precipitate, and sonication was used to lyse the sample before centrifugation at 16000xg for 15 minutes at 4 degrees. 1mg of the nuclear lysate was blocked with 5% BSA for 1hr at 4 degrees, before overnight incubation with anti-BCL9 (1:500 dilution, ab37305 Abcam, 6109 generated in New England Biolabs), NONO (1:500 dilution, ab70335, Abcam), SFPQ (1:500 dilution, ab38148), ILF2 (1:500 dilution, H00003608-D01, Abnova) or β-catenin (1:500 dilution, 9562L, Cell signaling) antibodies. Normal rabbit IgG (1:250 dilution, sc-3888, Santa Cruz) was used as a negative control. The following day, Protein G and A DynaBeads (10003D,10002D, ThermoFisher) were added to the nuclear lysate at a ratio of 1:1 and rotated for an additional 4hrs. The beads were washed 3 times with washing buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.4, 200mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100(v/v)). . For total protein MS analysis, IP protein samples from anti-IgG and anti-BCL9 groups were recovered by Trichloroacetic acid (TCA 47658-U, Sigma) precipitation; samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 4 degrees, before centrifugation at 16000xg for 5 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The differential nuclear location of BCL9 implied it may interact with multiple types of protein complex therefore we established the protein interaction network to evaluate the intensity of these interactions. To normalize the samples, any proteins in which the peptide number in anti-lgG was higher than the matched anti-BCL9 group (i.e. the protein didn’t exist in at least two independent experiments) were removed

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer, which despite recent advances in treatment, remains incurable due to molecular heterogeneity of tumor cells. The B-cell lymphoma 9 (BCL9) oncogene functions as a transcriptional co-activator of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway, which plays critical roles in CRC pathogenesis. Here we have identified a &#x3b2;-catenin-independent function of BCL9 in a poor-prognosis subtype of CRC tumors characterized by expression of stromal and neural associated genes. In response to spontaneous calcium transients or cellular stress, BCL9 is recruited adjacent to the interchromosomal regions, where it stabilizes the mRNA of calcium signaling and neural associated genes by interacting with paraspeckle proteins. BCL9 subsequently promotes tumor progression and remodeling of the tumor microenvironment (TME) by sustaining the calcium transients and neurotransmitter-dependent communication among CRC cells. These data provide additional insights into the role of BCL9 in tumor pathogenesis and point towards additional avenues for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Bcl9, Paraspeckles, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Harbin medical university
Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Meng Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Meng Jiang
Harbin medical university


