### Accession
PXD021672

### Title
Mapping the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein-derived peptidome presented by HLA class II on dendritic cells

### Description
Immunopeptidomic profiling of HLA-DR diverse monocyte-derived dendritic cells pulsed with SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein.

### Sample Protocol
MDDCs were pulsed with S or control protein for 18h, and sequential HLA immunopreciptation used to purify HLA associated peptides. Peptides were purified by preparative HPLC and subjected to a LC-MS/MS identification workflow.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analysed in PEAKS X software (Bioinformatic Solutions) using a protein sequence fasta file containing 20,606 reviewed human Uniprot entries downloaded on 24/05/2018, supplemented with the sequence for SARS-CoV-2 full-length S protein cloned.  Raw data for the de-N-glycosylated samples were analysed as described above with the following modifications. A standard PeaksDB search was utilised with additional variable post translational modifications set for 18O labelling (C-terminal +2.00 Da), 18O deamidation (NQ, +2.99 Da), deamidation (NQ, -0.98 Da) and oxidation (M, +15.99 Da) and a fixed modification for carboxyamidomethylation (C, +57.02).   Glycopeptides were identified by Byonic v3.8.13 (Protein Metrics, CA, USA). Spectra were extracted and searched against the same fasta file as above, but with unspecific cleavage sites and allowing unlimited missed cleavages. A library of 132 possible N-glycan compositions was utilized in a ‘rare’ variable modification search strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding and eliciting protective immune responses to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an urgent priority. To facilitate these objectives, we have profiled the repertoire of human leukocyte antigen class II (HLA-II)-bound peptides presented by HLA-DR diverse monocyte-derived dendritic cells pulsed with SARS-CoV-2 spike (S) protein. We identify 209 unique HLA-II-bound peptide sequences, many forming nested sets, which map to sites throughout S including glycosylated regions. Comparison of the glycosylation profile of the S protein to that of the HLA-II-bound S peptides revealed substantial trimming of glycan residues on the latter, likely introduced during antigen processing. Our data also highlight the receptor-binding motif in S1 as a HLA-DR-binding peptide-rich region. Results from this study have application in vaccine design, and will aid analysis of CD4+ T cell responses in infected individuals and vaccine recipients.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; coronavirus spike protein; receptor binding domain; human leukocyte antigen class ii; hla-ii; peptide presentation; post-translational modification; glycosylation; antigen processing; receptor binding domain; immunopeptidomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, United Kingdom
Jenner Institute

### Submitter
Robert Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, United Kingdom


