### Accession
PXD044642

### Title
Development of pathophysiologically relevant models of sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia for therapeutic studies

### Description
β-hemoglobin disorders, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and β-thalassemia (BT), are the most common inherited monogenic blood disorders globally. Despite decades of research, there are only four FDA-approved medications available for the management of SCD with hydroxyurea (HU) being the most widely used drug that partially benefits patients by inducing fetal hemoglobin (HbF) production. On the other hand, there are no approved oral drugs currently available for β-thalassemia patients. To our knowledge, there are currently no well-characterized erythroid progenitor cell lines available that can accurately replicate the pathophysiology of SCD and BT while also having the same genetic background apart from the disease mutation enabling consistency and reproducibility. Our novel, physiologically relevant cellular systems provide a plethora of avenues for researchers to investigate various applications related to parasite invasion, drug validation, and genome-editing in the context of SCD and BT.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment used a CRISPR/Cas9 coupled with piggyBac-based footprint-free approach, to generate immortalized erythroid progenitor cells, named BEL-A SCM with a sickle cell mutation (Codon 6, A>T) and BEL-A BTM with prevalent β-thalassemia mutation (IVS1-5 G>C), respectively. For Proteomic analysis, the proteins were extracted from the samples followed by trypsinization. The peptides were labelled using 10-plex TMT labels and fractionated using C18 stage tips. The fractions are concatenated into 6 and dried. The samples were acquired using EASY nLC 1200 nano liquid chromatography coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. The sample loading were performed by passing mobile phase A (0.1% FA). Peptides bound to the C18 were made to separate based on their hydrophobicity and eluted by passing mobile phase A (0.1% FA in Water) and B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) in gradient mode for 120 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The %B was increased gradually from 5% at 0 min to 100% in 105 min, this was further increased to 100% in 120min.Peptides eluted from the column were ionized in positive ion mode at EASY-Spray™ Source. Ionized peptides were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Under Full MS scan peptide precursors ranging between 400– 1600 m/z were acquired in Orbitrap with the resolution of 120 K. The automatic gain control (AGC) and maximum injection time (Max. IT) were set to 2e5 and 20 ms. Precursors with charge state (z) between 2-7 and intensity ≥ 1.5e4 were separated in Quadrupole. The precursors were fragmented in the higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) technique with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35±3%. Finally, the fragment ions were acquired in Orbitrap at 30K resolution. AGC and Max. IT were set to 1e5 and 200 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS raw files were searched against database Homo sapiens v110 (downloaded from NCBI) and the contaminant database in Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) software using Sequest HT and MASCOT search engine. The search parameters included full tryptic specificity with up to 1 missed cleavage. Precursor Mass Tolerance and Fragment Mass Tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. TMT6 plex and Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as static modification while acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation of methionine were set as variable modification. The PSMs, peptides and proteins identified with false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% (q-value < 0.01) were considered as true positives.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Crispr/cas9, Erythroid progenitor line, 10-plex tmt label, Mass spectrometer, Sickle cell disease, Β-thalassemia

### Affiliations
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi
CSIR-Insitute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi

### Submitter
Sivaprakash Ramalingam

### Lab Head
Dr Sivaprakash Ramalingam
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi


