### Accession
PXD040429

### Title
New Pathophysiological Insights from Serum Proteome Profiling in Equine Atypical Myopathy.

### Description
Equine atypical myopathy (AM) is a severe environmental intoxication linked to the ingestion of protoxins contained in seeds and seedlings of the sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus) in Europe. The toxic metabolites cause a frequently fatal rhabdomyolysis syndrome in grazing horses. Since toxic metabolites can also be present in co-grazing horses, it is still unclear as to why, in a similar environmental context, some horses show signs of AM whereas others remain clinically healthy. Label-free proteomics analyses on the serum of 26 diseased AM, 23 co-grazers and 11 control horses were performed to provide insights into biological processes and pathways. A total of 43 and 44 differentially expressed proteins between “AM vs co-grazing horses” and “AM vs control horses” were found. Disease-linked changes in the proteome of different groups were found to correlate with detected amounts of toxins and principal component analysis was performed to identify the 29 proteins with the greatest impact on the proteomic differences between groups. Among the pathway-specific changes the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, the coagulation/complement cascade, and the biosynthesis of amino acid were affected. Sycamore maple poisoning results in a combination of inflammation, oxidative stress, and high energy demand, which is trying to be met by enhanced glycolysis.

### Sample Protocol
Animal inclusion criteria and sampling: Included blood samples were collected in the peak months of atypical myopathy incidences (i.e., in autumn, from October to December and during the following spring from March to May).  The horses are grouped in 3 categories that will be further detailed in this section: AM horses, co-grazing horses and control horses. All blood specimens were taken either within the frame of a therapy to be initiated at the Equine veterinary hospital of the University of Liège (AM horses) or were taken on the field after horse owners provided informed consent for their horses’ inclusion in the study (co-grazers and control horses). Blood samples were collected by jugular venipuncture, were extempore kept at 4°C for maximum 2 hours before centrifugation and were then stored at -80°C until further analysis. All procedures are in accordance with the national and international guidelines for animal welfare as the study design is part of routine veterinary practice to establish a diagnosis or to prevent AM and the Animal Ethics Committee of the University of Liege was consulted.  Serum collection and quantification: Proteome analysis was performed on serum samples of 60 horses. Serum samples kept at -80°C were thawed at room temperature and briefly vortexed. Protein concentration was determined using a Pierce 660 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific™, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Subsequently, samples were divided in 10 µg/µl aliquots. Protein digestion: Serum samples were digested using Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) [29]. First, the Millipore® Microcon 30 MRCFOR030 Ultracel PL-30 columns (Merck, Germany) was conditioned using 100 µl of formic acid 1% before centrifugation at 14,500 rpm for 15 minutes. When not specified otherwise, centrifugation times of 15 minutes at 14,500 were applied. For each sample, 20 µg of protein adjusted in 100 µl of urea buffer 8M were placed in each column and centrifuged as before. The filtrate was discarded, and the filters washed three times with urea buffer before centrifugation.Reduction was performed through addition of 100 µl of dithiothreitol (DTT) and mixed for 1 minute at 400 rpm with a thermomixer before a 15-minute incubation period at 24°C. Subsequent alkylation was conducted by adding 100 µl of iodoacetamide (IAA) in the columns and mixing at 400 rpm for one minute before an incubation of 20 minutes and 10 min centrifugation at 14,500 rpm. The entire alkylation steps were conducted in the dark before removing the excess of IAA through centrifugation after addition of urea buffer. To quench the rest of IAA, 100 µl of DTT were placed on the column, mixed for 1 minute at 400 rpm, incubated (15 minutes at 24°C) before centrifugation at 14,500 rpm for 10 minutes. To remove the excess of DTT, 100 µl of urea buffer were added on the column before centrifugation. The column was then washed three times through addition of 100 µl sodium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer) 50 mM followed by centrifugation for 10 minutes. The remaining 100 µl were kept avoiding evaporation in the column. The digestion step was performed by adding 80 µl of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, USA) (1/50 in ABC buffer) in the column and mixed at 300 rpm for 1 minute before an overnight incubation at 24°C. On the following day, the Microcon columns were placed on a LoBind tube of 1.5 ml and centrifuged for 10 minutes. Then, 40 µl of ABC buffer were placed on the column before centrifugation for 10 minutes. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 10% in ultrapure water was added to the content of the LoBind Tube to obtain 0.2% TFA. The samples were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific™, USA), resuspended in acetonitrile 2% / formic acid 0.1% and transferred to an injection vial.Data-dependent LC-MS analyses were performed using nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS tim-sTOF Pro (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) coupled with an UHPLC nanoElute (Bruker).  Peptides were separated by nanoUHPLC (nanoElute, Bruker) on a 75 μm ID, 25 cm C18 column with integrated CaptiveSpray insert (Aurora, Ionopticks, Melbourne) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min, at 50°C. LC mobile phases A was water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and B ACN with formic acid 0.1% (v/v). Samples were loaded directly on the analytical column at a constant pressure of 600 bar. The digest (1 µl) was injected, and the organic content of the mobile phase was increased linearly from 2% B to 15% in 18 min, from 15 % B to 25% in 9 min, from 25% B to 37 % in 3 min and from 37% B to 95% in 5 min. Data acquisition on the timsTOF Pro was performed using Hystar 6.0 and timsControl 2.0. timsTOF Pro data were acquired using 160 ms TIMS accumulation time, mobility (1/K0) range from 0.7 to 1.4 Vs/cm².  Mass spectrometry analyses were carried out using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. One MS spectra was followed by six PASEF MSMS spectra per total cycle of 1.16 s. Two injections per sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Data analysis (Bruker) version 5.3. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.7). Mascot was set up to search the Equus Caballus NCBI database (2177884 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.050 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 5.1.0) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications were conducted using PEAKS search engine with 15 ppm as parent mass error tolerance and 0.05 Da as fragment mass error tolerance and protein quantification were based on peptide features detected from LC-MS/MS data by integrating the area under the curve. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least two identified peptides.  Quantitative analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio X Pro with ion mobility module and Q module for label-free quantification (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). Extensive quality controls were installed. Indeed, in LC-MS based proteomics studies, performing robust quality control can enhance overall protein quantification and subsequently improve accurate statistical estimates of differential abundance by detecting outlier data points. All samples were therefore digested during the same week and all analyses were conducted with the same LC column to limit variations in peak intensities and identified peptides. A control sample (HeLa digest) was injected once in every 10 analyses.  The label-free quantitation method is based on expectation - maximization algorithm on the extracted ion chromatograms of the three most abundant unique peptides of a protein to calculate the area under the curve. For quantitation, mass error and ion mobility tolerance were set respectively to 15 ppm and 0.05 1/k0.  For label-free quantitation results, peptide quality score was set to be ≥ 4 and protein significance score threshold was set to 15. The significance score is calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value (0.05). ANOVA was used as the significance testing method. Modified peptides were excluded and only proteins with at least two peptides were used for the quantitation. Total ion current was used to calculate the normalization factors. Two types of statistical analyses were conducted on the identified proteins. First, total spectral counting analysis in Scaffold was performed after identification through Mascot, by normalized t-testing and Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Second, ion intensity-based label-free quantitative analysis was performed in PEAKS Studio X Pro after peptide identification by PEAKS.  The Panther protein classification tool was then used to determine the biological significance of the confident proteins based on the resultant differentially expressed proteins between groups. ShinyGO (0.76.1) was used for visualization of the overlaps among enriched pathways using clustering techniques, and direct comparison of results in different databases. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) allowed mapping of the identified proteins and visualization of metabolic pathways.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Equine atypical myopathy; acer spp.; label-free proteomics; serum proteomics; blood biomarkers.

### Affiliations
Department of Functional Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Fundamental and Applied Research for Animals & Health (FARAH), University of Liège, 4000 Liège 1 (Sart Tilman), Belgium
University of Namur - MaSUN

### Submitter
Marc Dieu

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique-M. Votion
Department of Functional Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Fundamental and Applied Research for Animals & Health (FARAH), University of Liège, 4000 Liège 1 (Sart Tilman), Belgium


