### Accession
PXD015192

### Title
How to cope with heavy metal ions: Insights into cellular and molecular stress response in Halobacterium salinarum R1 planktonic cells and biofilms

### Description
Halobacterium salinarum R1 is an extremely halophilic archaeon capable of adhesion and biofilm formation. We have recently shown that living in biofilms facilitates higher cell survival under heavy metal ion stress in this species, while specific rearrangements of the biofilm architecture were observed upon Ni2+ and Cu2+ exposition, respectively. In this study, quantitative analyses were performed by SWATH-LC-MS/MS to determine the respective proteomes under the influences of Ni2+ and Cu2+ in planktonic and biofilm cells. Quantitative data for 1180 proteins were gained, corresponding to 46% of the predicted proteome. In planktonic cells, 234 proteins showed significant abundance changes after metal ion treatment, of which 47% occurred combined in Cu2+ and Ni2+ treated samples. Regarding biofilms, significant changes were detected for 52 proteins. Only three proteins changed under both conditions, suggesting metal-specific stress responses in biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation of planktonic and biofilm cells was performed in triplicate for each condition (untreated, Cu2+ or Ni2+ treated). Planktonic and biofilm cells were lysed osmotically by the addition of 10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), and DNA in the cell lysate was hydrolyzed treatment with DNase I. Protein concentrations were determined by a Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as a standard. Equal protein concentrations were prepared by trichloracetic acid/acetone precipitation. 50 µg protein per sample were loaded onto a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen) and run into the gel for 1.5 cm. Following Coomassie staining, protein areas were cut out, diced and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and finally overnight digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, the solution dried in a Speedvac and kept at -20°C for further analysis (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 80 µg, and separated into eight fractions using a reversed phase spin column (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz).

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. A total of 166,604 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the UniProtKB Mus musculus reference proteome (revision 12-2017, 2,570 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify 1,378 proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1% (Lambert et al., 2013). The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values, which were used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Halobacterium salinarum</i> R1 is an extremely halophilic archaeon capable of adhesion and forming biofilms, allowing it to adjust to a range of growth conditions. We have recently shown that living in biofilms facilitates its survival under Cu<sup>2+</sup> and Ni<sup>2+</sup> stress, with specific rearrangements of the biofilm architecture observed following exposition. In this study, quantitative analyses were performed by SWATH mass spectrometry to determine the respective proteomes of planktonic and biofilm cells after exposition to Cu<sup>2+</sup> and Ni<sup>2+</sup>.Quantitative data for 1180 proteins were obtained, corresponding to 46% of the predicted proteome. In planktonic cells, 234 of 1180 proteins showed significant abundance changes after metal ion treatment, of which 47% occurred in Cu<sup>2+</sup> and Ni<sup>2+</sup> treated samples. In biofilms, significant changes were detected for 52 proteins. Only three proteins changed under both conditions, suggesting metal-specific stress responses in biofilms. Deletion strains were generated to assess the potential role of selected target genes. Strongest effects were observed for &#x394;OE5245F and &#x394;OE2816F strains which exhibited increased and decreased biofilm mass after Ni<sup>2+</sup> exposure, respectively. Moreover, EPS obviously plays a crucial role in <i>H. salinarum</i> metal ion resistance. Further efforts are required to elucidate the molecular basis and interplay of additional resistance mechanisms.

### Keywords
Archaea, Halobacterium, Label-free quantitation, Stress response, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry


