### Accession
PXD018865

### Title
Mouse Muscle Stem Cell Proteome during Activation and CPEB1 Dependent Proteome in Mouse Muscle Stem Cell

### Description
Muscle Stem Cells or satellite cells (SCs) are required for muscle regeneration. In resting muscles, SCs are kept in quiescence. After injury, SCs undergo rapid activation, proliferation and differentiation to repair damaged muscles. The transcriptome alteration during SC activation is well characterized. While transcriptome is not exactly represent proteome because of post-transcriptional regulations such as miRNA induced gene silencing. However, little is known about SC proteome. We obtained quisecent SCs (QSCs) and freshly isolated SCs (fiSCs, early activated SCs) and activated SCs (ASCs) for high resolution mass spectrometry Bruker timsTOF Pro. Thus, we uncovered the QSC proteome. By comparison of QSC proteome to fiuSCs proteome or ASCs proteome, we identified the pathways that are differentially expressed between them. Forthermore, we characterized a translational regulator CPEB1 reprogrammed translation landscape for SC activation.

### Sample Protocol
QSCs are isolated from 0.5%PFA perfused mice while fiSCs are isolated from uninjured non-perfused mice. ASCs are activated by in vitro culture. These cells are harvested by RIPA buffer. To decrosslink the pre-fixed QSCs, the protein lysis is heated at 70 degree for 2 hours. Afterwards, the protein are precipitated by adding 4 fold of volome of pre-cold acetone. Then protein pellet are washed by pre-cold acetone, pre-cold 70% ethanol and pre-cold acetone. Then resuspand the protein pellet using UA buffer, followed by the addition of DTT (final concentration was 2mM). Put it at 30°C for 1.5 hours. Then, add IAA for a final concentration 10mM and protect it from light for 40 minutes. Afterwards, add trypsin (final concentration 0.25ug/ul) into the suspension for overnight digestion. Stop the digestion by adding TFA (final concentration 0.4%). After salt depletion by C18 spin tips (Thermo), the material was loaded into the Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument following the instruction of Bruker.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument are transfer to the PEAKS software. Then search the raw data by PEAKS with Unitprot database. Afterwards, the PEAKS provide all the information including peptides, peaks, proteins, and spectral counting of proteins. Then, we used spectral counting for label-free quantification of proteome following normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) method. Simply, we first obtained the spectral abundance factor by normalizing the spectral number of proteins with the length of the protein. Then, we normalized the spectral abundance factor between samples by dividing over the sum of all the spectral abundance factor. Since the NSAF was very small, we multiplied the NSAF with 1000000. Then the Student’s t-test was performed to calculate the differential express proteins between samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cpeb1, Mouse, Muscle stem cell, Proteome, Activation

### Affiliations
Division of Life Science, Center for Stem Cell Research, Center of Systems Biology and Human Health, State Key Laboratory in Molecular Neuroscience, Molecular Neuroscience Center, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.  Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Science, Disease and Drug Development, HKUST Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science, 518057, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Tom Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Tom. H. CHEUNG
Division of Life Science, Center for Stem Cell Research, Center of Systems Biology and Human Health, State Key Laboratory in Molecular Neuroscience, Molecular Neuroscience Center, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.  Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Science, Disease and Drug Development, HKUST Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science, 518057, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.


