### Accession
PXD030549

### Title
MLC phosphorylation by the kinase CaMKII

### Description
MLC1 is membrane protein highly expressed by brain perivascular astrocytes. Mutations in MLC1 account for megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), an incurable leu-kodystrophy characterized by macrocephaly, brain edema and cysts, myelin vacuolation and as-trocyte swelling, that cause cognitive and motor dysfunctions. MLC pathological models demon-strated that in astrocytes MLC1 mutations affect the swelling-activated Cl- currents (ICl,swell) medi-ated by volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC) and the consequent regulatory volume decrease (RVD), and also induce the abnormal activation of intracellular signaling pathways linked to in-flammation/osmotic stress. Despite this knowledge, MLC1 function and MLC molecular pathogen-esis are still elusive. Following the observations that calcium regulates all the MLC1-modulated processes and that intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis is altered in MLC1-defective cells, we applied biochemistry, molecular biology, video imaging, electrophysiology and proteomic techniques on cultured human and mouse astrocytes to study MLC1/calcium signaling relationships. We revealed that MLC1 binds the Ca2+ effector proteins calmodulin (CaM) and Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein ki-nase II (CaMKII) and, as result, changes its assembly, localization and functional properties in re-sponse to Ca2+ influx or release. Noteworthy, CaM binding to the COOH terminal promotes MLC1 trafficking to the plasma membrane, while CaMKII phosphorylation of the NH2 end potentiates MLC1 activation of ICl,swell, that are critically important for RVD. Overall, our results show that MLC1 is a Ca2+-regulated protein linking VRAC function and volume regulation to Ca2+ signaling in astro-cytes, opening new avenues to clarify the defective molecular pathways of MLC and other diseas-es where astrocyte swelling and brain edema underlie the pathological process.  In this contest we submit here the MS data showing MLC phosphorylation on Threonine 17.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, the phosphorylation reaction was carried out in the kinase buffer (see above) containing 2 µM CaM and 0.3 mM ATP using the commercial recombinant purified pCaMKII. After incubation, the beads were washed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins eluted from the beads were separated on a 1D-gel NuPAGE 4-12% (Novex, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and stained with Coomassie blue (Colloidal Blue Staining kit, Invitrogen). Colored bands were cut, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and finally digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), AspN (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) or GluC (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) as described in [Shevchenko et al., 1996]. To identify phosphorylated sites, peptide mixture was analyzed by nanoflow-reversed-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) using an HPLC Ultimate 3000 (DIONEX, Sunnyvale, CA U.S.A) connected on line with a linear Ion Trap (LTQ, ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA). Peptides were desalted in a trap-column (AcclaimPep-Map100 C18, LC Packings, DIONEX) and then separated in a reverse phase column, a 10 cm long fused silica capillary (SilicaTipsFS 360-75-8, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA), slurry-packed in-house with 5 μm, 200 Å pore size C18 resin (Michrom BioResources, CA). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 96% aqueous phase (5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) to 60% organic buffer (95% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) in 30 min, at 300nl/min flow rate. Analyses were performed in positive ion mode and the HV Potential was set up around 1.5-1.8kV. A data-dependent strategy was used to fragment the five more intense ions present in each full MS scan by collision-induced dissociation by CID with 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were interpreted through the SEQUEST algorithm taking into account the potential for phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues and also manually reviewed. A MS/MS was considered legitimately matched with cross-correlation scores of 1.8, 2.5, and 3 respectively for one, two, and three charged peptides and a probability cut-off for randomized identification of 0.001. MS2 and MS3 spectra were manually reviewed.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes, the main glial cells of the central nervous system, play a key role in brain volume control due to their intimate contacts with cerebral blood vessels and the expression of a distinctive equipment of proteins involved in solute/water transport. Among these is MLC1, a protein highly expressed in perivascular astrocytes and whose mutations cause megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC), an incurable leukodystrophy characterized by macrocephaly, chronic brain edema, cysts, myelin vacuolation, and astrocyte swelling. Although, in astrocytes, MLC1 mutations are known to affect the swelling-activated chloride currents (ICl,<sub>swell</sub>) mediated by the volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC), and the regulatory volume decrease, MLC1's proper function is still unknown. By combining molecular, biochemical, proteomic, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques, we here show that MLC1 is a Ca<sup>2+</sup>/Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) target protein, whose phosphorylation, occurring in response to intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> release, potentiates VRAC-mediated ICl,<sub>swell</sub>. Overall, these findings reveal that MLC1 is a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-regulated protein, linking volume regulation to Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling in astrocytes. This knowledge provides new insight into the MLC1 protein function and into the mechanisms controlling ion/water exchanges in the brain, which may help identify possible molecular targets for the treatment of MLC and other pathological conditions caused by astrocyte swelling and brain edema.

### Keywords
Mlc megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy phosphorylation mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
Italian National Institute of Health

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
Italian National Institute of Health


