### Accession
PXD028305

### Title
Downstream Molecules of YKL-40 in Regulating Apoptosis in BMDM

### Description
An iTRAQ-based proteomics analysis was performed on BMDM to screen out the potential downstream target molecules of YKL-40 in regulating macrophage apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
BMDM were isolated from male C57BL/6 mice and differentiated in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 10 ng/ml murine M-CSF. Three biological replicates were used for global proteome analysis. BMDM was treated with YKL-40 (500 ng/ml) or IgG as a control for 24 hours to assay the potential pathways involved. We collected 20 mg protein from each sample and loaded into 12% SDS-PAGE for electrophoresis. The samples then underwent filter-aided sample preparation and were dissolved in 5X dissolution buffer. Then 100 μg peptide fragments from each sample were labeled with iTRAQ-8 plex reagents according to the protocol from AB SCIEX. The labeled peptides were separated by high-performance liquid chromatography (Agilent 1260 Infinity II HPLC), followed by mass spectrometric analysis and identification.

### Data Protocol
In this project, high resolution mass spectrometer Q Exactive(Thermo Scientific) was used for iTRAQ quantitative proteomics analysis, and Higher Energy Collisional ionization (HCD) was used to obtain MS2 profile. The original atlas files (.raw files) generated by Q Exactive were transformed into .mgF files through Proteome Discoverer 2.1(Thermo Scientific), which were submitted to MASCOT2.5 for database retrieval, and then the search file (.dat file) formed on the MASCOT was sent back through Proteome Discoverer 2.1. The data with FDR<0.01 was finally screened out.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective:</b> programmed cell removal in atherosclerotic plaques plays a crucial role in retarding lesion progression. Macrophage apoptosis has a critical role in PrCR, especially in early-stage lesions. YKL-40 has been shown to be elevated as lesions develop and is closely related to macrophages. This study aimed to determine the effect of YKL-40 on regulating macrophage apoptosis and early-stage atherosclerosis progression. <b>Research design and Methods:</b> The correlations among the expression level of YKL-40, the area of early-stage plaque, and the macrophage apoptosis rate in plaques have been shown in human carotid atherosclerotic plaques through pathological and molecular biological detection. These results were successively confirmed <i>in vivo</i> (<i>Ldlr</i> <sup>-/-</sup> mice treated by YKL-40 recombinant protein/neutralizing antibody) and <i>in vitro</i> (macrophages that <i>Ykl40</i> up-/down-expressed) experiments. The downstream targets were predicted by iTRAQ analysis. <b>Results:</b> In early-stage human carotid plaques and murine plaques, the YKL-40 expression level had a significant positive correlation with the area of the lesion and a significant negative correlation with the macrophage apoptosis rate. <i>In vivo</i>, the plaque area of aortic roots was significantly larger in the recomb-YKL-40 group than that in IgG group (<i>p</i> = 0.0247) and was significantly smaller in the anti-YKL-40 group than in the IgG group (<i>p</i> = 0.0067); the macrophage apoptosis rate of the plaque in aortic roots was significantly lower in the recomb-YKL-40 group than that in IgG group (<i>p</i> = 0.0018) and was higher in anti-YKL-40 group than that in VC group. <i>In vitro</i>, the activation level of caspase-9 was significantly lower in RAW264.7 with <i>Ykl40</i> overexpressed than that in controls (<i>p</i> = 0.0054), while the expression level of Aven was significantly higher than that in controls (<i>p</i> = 0.0031). The apoptosis rate of RAW264.7 treated by recomb-YKL40 was significantly higher in the <i>Aven</i> down-regulated group than that in the control group (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001). The apoptosis inhibitor Aven was confirmed as the target molecule of YKL-40. Mechanistically, YKL-40 could inhibit macrophage apoptosis by upregulating Aven to suppress the activation of caspase-9. <b>Conclusion:</b> YKL-40 inhibits macrophage apoptosis by upregulating the apoptosis inhibitor Aven to suppress the activation of caspase-9, which may impede normal PrCR and promote substantial accumulation in early-stage plaques, thereby leading to the progression of atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Downstream molecules, Ykl-40, Bmdm, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Second Affiliated Hospital of Naval Medical University

### Submitter
Wei Huan

### Lab Head
Dr Lefeng Qu
Second Affiliated Hospital of Naval Medical University


