### Accession
PXD014269

### Title
Signature-Ion Triggered Mass Spectrometry Approach Enabled Discovery of N- and O-linked Glycosylated Neuropeptides in the Crustacean Nervous System

### Description
Discovery of N-linked and O-linked glycosylation on crustacean neuropeptides.

### Sample Protocol
Acidified MeOH extraction, DTT-IAA treatment, desalting; Analyzed by Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio was used for neuropeptide identification and generating de novo sequences Proteome Discoverer with Byonic node was used to identify glycosylation on neuropeptides

### Publication Abstract
Crustaceans are commonly used model organisms to study neuromodulation. Despite numerous reported crustacean neuropeptide families and their functions, there has been no report on neuropeptide glycosylation. This is in part due to a lack of sensitive methods that enable deciphering this intricate low-abundance post-translational modification, even though glycosylation has been shown to play an important role in neuromodulation. Here, we describe the discovery of glycosylated neuropeptides with an enrichment-free approach, taking advantage of signature oxonium ions produced in higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra. The detection of the oxonium ions in the HCD scans suggests glycan attachment to peptides, allowing electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) to be performed to selectively elucidate structural information of glycosylated neuropeptides that are buried in nonglycosylated peptides. Overall, 4 N-linked and 14 O-linked glycosylated neuropeptides have been identified for the first time in the crustacean nervous system. In addition, 91 novel putative neuropeptides have been discovered based on the collected HCD scans. This hybrid approach, coupling a shotgun method for neuropeptide discovery and targeted strategy for glycosylation characterization, enables the first report on glycosylated neuropeptides in crustaceans and the discovery of additional neuropeptides simultaneously. The elucidation of novel glycosylated neuropeptides sheds light on the crustacean peptidome and offers novel insights into future neuropeptide functional studies.

### Keywords
Crustacean nervous system, Ethcd, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Qinjingwen Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Qinjingwen Cao
Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison


