### Accession
PXD012377

### Title
A folded conformation of MukBEF and Cohesin

### Description
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC)-kleisin complexes organize chromosomal DNAs in all domains of life, where they have key roles in chromosome segregation, DNA repair and regulation of gene expression. They function through topological entrapment and active translocation of DNA, but the underlying conformational changes are largely unclear. Using structural biology, mass spectrometry and cross-linking, we investigated the architecture of two evolutionarily distant SMC-kleisin complexes: proteobacterial MukBEF and eukaryotic cohesin. We show that both contain a dynamic coiled-coil discontinuity, the elbow, near the middle of their arms that permits a folded conformation. Bending at the elbow brings into proximity the hinge dimerization domain and the head/kleisin module, situated at opposite ends of the arms. Our findings favor SMC activity models that include a large conformational change in the arms, such as a relative movement between DNA binding sites during DNA loading and translocation

### Sample Protocol
For cross-linking/mass spectrometry analysis of MukBEF, aliquots of Q eluate were thawed and injected into a Superose 6 Increase 3.2/300 column in buffer XL (20 mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8 @ 23 °C). The monomer fractions were pooled and incubated at 0.4 mg/mL with 2.5 mM BS3 for 2 h on ice before quenching with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min on ice. The sample was incubated for 2 min at 98 °C in the presence of LDS-PAGE sample buffer (Life Technologies) containing 6 % 2-mercaptoethanol. Reaction products were separated on Criterion TGX 4-20 % SDS-PAGE gels (BioRad). For analysis of cohesin, the purified trimer, N∆150-Scc2 and Scc3 were mixed at a 1:1.5:1.5 ratio and into a Superose 6 Increase 3.2/300 column in buffer (20 mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP, pH 7.7). Pentamer fractions were incubated at 2 mg/mL with 5 mM BS3 for 2 hr at 4 ˚C and then the reaction was quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min on ice. Reaction products were separated on a Criterion TGX 4-15% SDS-PAGE gel (BioRad). Gel bands corresponding to the cross-linked species were excised and digested with trypsin (Pierce, Germany) (Shevchenko et al., 2006). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted and desalted using C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). For MukBEF, peptides eluted from StageTips were dried in a Vacuum Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and dissolved in running buffer A prior to strong cation exchange chromatography (100 x 2.1 mm Poly Sulfoethyl A column; Poly LC, Colombia, MD, USA). Mobile phases A consisted of 30 % acetonitrile (v/v), 10 mM KH2PO4 at pH 3, and mobile phase B additionally contained 1 M KCl. The separation of the digest used a non-linear gradient (Chen et al., 2010) at a flow rate of 200 µl/min. Five fractions a 2 min in the high-salt range were collected and cleaned by StageTips for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. For cohesin, peptides were fractionated on an ÄKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min using 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid as mobile phase. Five 50 µl fractions were collected and dried. Samples for analysis were resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid 1.6% v/v acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted in duplicate for SEC fractions and triplicate for SCX fractions, performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The sample was separated and ionized by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid. Flow-rate of 0.3 μL/min using gradients optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation ranging from 2% mobile phase B to 45% mobile phase B over 90 min, followed by a linear increase to 55% and 95% mobile phase B in 2.5 min, respectively. The MS data was acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a three second cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,600 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 6+ were isolated and fragmented. Fragmentation by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) employed a decision tree logic with optimized collision energies (Kolbowski et al., 2017). The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The fragment spectra peak lists were generated from the raw mass spectrometric data using msConvert (version 3.0.11729) (Chambers et al., 2012)with default settings. A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (<1% FDR) linear peptide identifications, using an in-house script (Lenz et al., 2018). The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of cross-linked peptides using the Xi software suite (version 1.6.739) (Giese et al., 2016) (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) for identification. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS1 accuracy = 3 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity) allowing up to four missed cleavages; cross-linker = BS3 with an assumed reaction specificity for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini); fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine, hydrolysed / aminolysed BS3 from reaction with ammonia or water on a free cross-linker end. The identified candidates were filtered to 5% FDR on link level using XiFDR (Fischer and Rappsilber, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC)-kleisin complexes organize chromosomal DNAs in all domains of life, with key roles in chromosome segregation, DNA repair and regulation of gene expression. They function through the entrapment and active translocation of DNA, but the underlying conformational changes are largely unclear. Using structural biology, mass spectrometry and cross-linking, we investigated the architecture of two evolutionarily distant SMC-kleisin complexes: MukBEF from Escherichia coli, and cohesin from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We show that both contain a dynamic coiled-coil discontinuity, the elbow, near the middle of their arms that permits a folded conformation. Bending at the elbow brings into proximity the hinge dimerization domain and the head-kleisin module, situated at opposite ends of the arms. Our findings favour SMC activity models that include a large conformational change in the arms, such as a relative movement between DNA contact sites during DNA loading and translocation.

### Keywords
Structural maintenance of chromosomes, Dna translocation, Loop extrusion, Smc proteins, Mukbef, Crosslinking, Cohesin, Kleisin, Condensin

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK.

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK.


