### Accession
PXD030235

### Title
Mass Spectrometry analysis of human matched Anterior and Posterior lobes of Pituitary

### Description
This study provides a comprehensive proteomic analysis of five matched pairs of the anterior and posterior lobe of the pituitary, which was used to study the proteomic signature specific to both anterior and posterior lobes. Anterior Lobe n=5 Posterior Lobe n=5  A441                  PT441 A442                  PT442 A457                  PT457 A459                  PT459 A460                  PT460

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing Protocol-  Pituitary matched anterior and posterior lobes were lysed using lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 75 mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2) supplemented with protease inhibitors. The homogenates were centrifuged to obtain the supernatant. Proteins in the supernatant were quantified with BCA protein quantification. Protein enzymatic cleavage was carried out with trypsin at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were desalted and vacuum dried. Further, these peptides were quantified using the Scopes method. After quantification, these peptides were subjected to Lable free quantification using nLC-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometric techniques.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol The peptide mass fingerprint data obtained from MS were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4, using UniProt Human Proteome and contaminant database and searched with built-in three search engines Sequest HT, MSPep Search and MS Amanda 2.0. In proteome discoverer, raw files were processed with Trypsing used for digestion, maximum cleavage site of 2, default peptide length of 6 and 144 amino acid, Precursor and fragment mass tolerance 10ppm and 0.05 Dalton, Static modification containing Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.021464 Da) and dynamic modifications consisting oxidation of Methionine (+15.994915 Da), Phosphorylation at S, T, Y (+79.996 Da) and Methionine loss and Acet-ylation (N-terminal, +89.030Da). Target FDR for PSMs and peptides was set at 0.01 and the type of peptide identified was set to “unique.” The following data consists of anterior and posterior raw files generated from orbitrap, pd study and result files and Human and contaminant database used in the study.

### Publication Abstract
To date, very few mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics studies are available on the anterior and posterior lobes of the pituitary. In the past, MS-based investigations have focused exclusively on the whole pituitary gland or anterior pituitary lobe. In this study, for the first time, we performed a deep MS-based analysis of five anterior and five posterior matched lobes to build the first lobe-specific pituitary proteome map, which documented 4090 proteins with isoforms, mostly mapped into chromosomes 1, 2, and 11. About 1446 differentially expressed significant proteins were identified, which were studied for lobe specificity, biological pathway enrichment, protein-protein interaction, regions specific to comparison of human brain and other neuroendocrine glands from Human Protein Atlas to identify pituitary-enriched proteins. Hormones specific to each lobe were also identified and validated with parallel reaction monitoring-based target verification. The study identified and validated hormones, growth hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone subunit beta, exclusively to the anterior lobe whereas oxytocin-neurophysin 1 and arginine vasopressin to the posterior lobe. The study also identified proteins POU1F1 (pituitary-specific positive transcription factor 1), POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin), PCOLCE2 (procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 2), and NPTX2 (neuronal pentraxin-2) as pituitary-enriched proteins and was validated for their lobe specificity using parallel reaction monitoring. In addition, three uPE1 proteins, namely THEM6 (mesenchymal stem cell protein DSCD75), FSD1L (coiled-coil domain-containing protein 10), and METTL26 (methyltransferase-like 26), were identified using the NeXtProt database, and depicted tumor markers S100 proteins having high expression in the posterior lobe. In summary, the study documents the first matched anterior and posterior pituitary proteome map acting as a reference control for a better understanding of functional and nonfunctional pituitary adenomas and extrapolating the aim of the Human Proteome Project towards the investigation of the proteome of life.

### Keywords
Obribtrap based mass spectrometery analysis, Lc-msms, Pituitary, Label free quantification lfq, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Prof. Sanjeeva Srivastava, PhD, FRSB, FRSC  Professor and Group Head Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering  Indian Institute of Technology Bombay Mumbai – 400076, India Phone: +91-22-2576-7779 Email: sanjeeva@iitb.ac.in
Proteomics Lab, BSBE, IIT Bombay, India

### Submitter
Arghya Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sanjeeva Srivastava
Prof. Sanjeeva Srivastava, PhD, FRSB, FRSC  Professor and Group Head Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering  Indian Institute of Technology Bombay Mumbai – 400076, India Phone: +91-22-2576-7779 Email: sanjeeva@iitb.ac.in


