### Accession
PXD031112

### Title
Interactome of DENV2 NS1 and NS5 in Aedes albopictus mosquito cells

### Description
Efficient virus replication in its vector, Aedes mosquitoes, is essential for the transmission of arboviral diseases like dengue virus (DENV) in populations. In order to identify RNA-independent host factors involved in DENV replication in mosquitoes, we established a system expressing all non-structural proteins within the context of the macro protein complex as observed during viral infections. Mosquito host factors interacting with 3xFLAGED-tagged DENV non-structural proteins NS1 or NS5 proteins were identified by label-free mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Flag-pull downs for mass spectrometry Dengue-virus infected cells were harvested and whole cell extract was made by incubation in lysis buffer 1 hour at 4˚C, while rotating. Cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation at max speed in a cooled table-top centrifuge. Equal amounts (6 mg) of extract was incubated with 40µl of Flag-agarose beads overnight at 4˚C, while rotating. Beads were washed 3x with lysis buffer and 2x with PBS to remove all traces of detergents. Samples were then subjected to on-bead digestion (Baymaz et al., 2014), as follows: 50 µl of Elution buffer (EB: 2M urea, 100 mM Tris-pH 8.0 and 10 mM DTT) was added to each sample and incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature. Cysteines are alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 10 minutes, after which 0.25 µg of MS-grade trypsin (Promega) is added per sample. After 2 hours incubation in a thermoshaker at room temperature, the supernatants were collected. Beads are washed once with 50µl EB to collect as many peptides as possible, and this supernatant is combined with the first, after which 0.1 µg trypsin is added and samples are incubated overnight. The next day, samples are subjected to STAGE-tipping (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Tiny discs of C18 material are fixated in p200 tips. The C18 material is activated using Methanol, and then thoroughly washed 1x with buffer B (80% Acetronitrile, 0.1% TFA) and 2x with buffer A (0.1% TFA), after which the samples are loaded. Salts from the digestion buffer are washed away by an additional buffer A wash. When the samples will be measured, they are eluted using buffer B.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the mass spectrometer was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1(Cox and Mann, 2008) and a database for mosquito (GCF_006496715.1_Aalbo-primary.1_protein_plus-DENV.fasta). In addition to default settings, Deamidation (NQ) was used as a variable modification, and LFQ and iBAQ were enabled. Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used for filtering: reverse hits and potential contaminants are removed, number of peptides should be more than 1, and after log2 transformation of the LFQ intensities, 3 valid values should be present in at least 1 group (control, NS1 or NS5). The missing data is imputed using the default settings. Then, Students t-tests are performed for each of the baits compared to the control. R was used to visualize the data in volcano-plots and a heatmap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Denv2, Mosquito, C6/36, Ngc, Aedes, Cells

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Pieter van Rij
Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands


