### Accession
PXD011221

### Title
Improved SILAC Method for Double Labeling of Bacterial Proteome

### Description
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is a robust proteomics method with the advantages of reproducibility and easy handling. This method is popular for the analysis of mammalian cells. However, amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases the labeling efficiency and quantification accuracy, limiting the application of SILAC in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that adding high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids into SILAC minimal medium can efficiently inhibit the complicated amino acid conversions between each other. This simple and straightforward strategy facilitated the full incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good accuracy. The high labeling efficiency can be reached in different bacteria by slightly modifying the supplement of amino acids in culture media, promoting the widespread application of SILAC technique in bacterial proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For the correlation analysis, S. aureus ATCC 29213 was grown in various concentrations of ciprofloxacin, and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values were determined. S. aureus ATCC 29213 was then cultivated in OHMM with 0.6 μg/mL (1/2 MIC) ciprofloxacin and in optimized LMM (OLMM) without ciprofloxacin as a control (initial OD600 = 0.05). The cells were collected at OD600 = 1.0, and the two groups of bacteria were mixed, using the same number of cells (in fact, it is same OD600 and same volume) per group. Three biological replicates were analyzed for the correlation.

### Data Protocol
In the SILAC module, double heavy labeling (Arg10 and Lys8) was chosen. Trypsin was chosen as the protease for protein digestion. The search included carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification and Gln→pyro-Glu (N-terminus), oxidation (M), and acetylation (N-terminal) as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Peptide matches were filtered with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. In the “identify” module, the “re-quantify” and the “match between runs” options were selected; other settings were kept at their default values. Proteins identified by at least two unique peptide were used for further analysis. For the labeling check, the “Pro6” option was used to check arginine conversion to proline, but the “re-quantify” option was not chosen [36]. The following formula was used to calculate the incorporation rate with the peptide.txt output file: (H/L)/(H/L+1), where H/L is the ratio of heavy to light peptides [36]. The numbers of total prolines and heavy prolines (Pro6, 13C5/15N1) in the ms/ms.txt table were used to calculate the Pro6 conversion rate according to the following formula: Pro6/(Pro6 + Pro).

### Publication Abstract
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is a robust proteomics method with advantages such as reproducibility and easy handling. This method is popular for the analysis of mammalian cells. However, amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases the labeling efficiency and quantification accuracy, limiting the application of SILAC in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or to single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that adding high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids into SILAC minimal medium can efficiently inhibit the complicated amino acid conversions. This simple and straightforward strategy facilitated complete incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good accuracy. High labeling efficiency can be achieved in different bacteria by slightly modifying the supplementation of amino acids in culture media, promoting the widespread application of SILAC technique in bacterial proteomics. SIGNIFICANCE: Amino acid conversion in bacteria decreases labeling efficiency, limiting the application of Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in bacterial proteomics to auxotrophic bacteria or single labeling with lysine. In this study, we found that high concentrations of isotope-labeled (heavy) and natural (light) amino acids facilitate full incorporation of amino acids into the bacterial proteome with good reproducibility. This improved double labeling SILAC technique using medium supplemented with high concentrations of amino acids is suitable for quantitative proteomics research on both gram-positive and -negative bacteria, facilitating the broad application of quantitative proteomics in bacterial studies.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Bacteria, Silac, Double labeling

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China

### Submitter
Yi shuhong

### Lab Head
Dr Xuesong Sun
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


