### Accession
PXD025393

### Title
Isolation method and characterization of outer membranes vesicles of Helicobacter pylori grown in a chemically defined medium

### Description
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are small vesicles constitutively shed by all Gram-negative bacterium, which have been proposed to play a role in Helicobacter pylori persistence and pathogenesis. The methods currently available for the isolation of H. pylori OMVs are diverse and time-consuming, raising the need for a protocol standardization, which was the main aim of this study. Here, we showed that the chemically defined F12 medium, supplemented with cholesterol, nutritionally supports bacterial growth and maintains H. pylori viability for at least 72 h. Additionally, we developed an abridged protocol for isolation of OMVs from these bacterial cultures, which comprises a low-speed centrifugation, supernatant filtration through a 0.45 µm pore, and two ultracentrifugations for OMVs’ recovery and washing. Using this approach, a good yield of highly pure bona fide OMVs was recovered from cultures of different H. pylori strains and in different periods of bacterial growth. Analysis of the proteome of OMVs isolated from H. pylori F12-cholesterol cultures validated the efficacy of our isolation protocol in attaining a higher sample purity with low representation of flagella proteins. The comparison with the proteomes of H. pylori OMVs available in the literature demonstrated that OMVs carry a selective protein cargo, suggesting their importance for H. pylori survival and pathogenesis. In conclusion, this work proposes a time- and cost-efficient protocol for the isolation of H. pylori OMVs from a chemically defined culture medium that is suitable for implementation in research and in the biopharmaceutical field.

### Sample Protocol
A pellet of 5×10E11 H. pylori 26695 OMVs isolated from liquid bacterial cultures at 48 h, 64 h and 72 h of growth was lysed in cold lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS, pH7.4) containing 1x Bacterial Protease ArrestTM (GBiosciences, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 6 mg/mL lysozyme (PanReac AppliChem S. L. U., Barcelona, Spain), for 1 h on ice. Upon centrifugation (21,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C), the cleared lysate was recovered and solubilized in a solution of 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and 1x cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany), for 10 min, at 95 ºC, with a constant rotation of 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Samples were processed for proteomics following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described in Hughes et al (Hughes et al., 2019). Briefly, enzymatic digestion was achieved by adding 2 μg Trypsin/LysC to each sample and incubated overnight at 37 ºC with constant rotation (1000 rpm). Protein identification and quantitation was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), at 300 nL/min. Separation was generated by gradient mixing A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) as follows: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B), and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3×106, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8×103, intensity threshold 7.3×104, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45 s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2×105, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile. Three biological replicates were used for each time point and the LC-MS acquisition of each sample was performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) database for the Helicobacter pylori 26695 Proteome 2021_01 release, 1552 entries, and a common contaminant database from MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany). The Sequest HT and the MS Amanda 2.0 search engines, together with the Inferys PSM rescoring node, were used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set to 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, peptide N-terminus glutamine to pyro-glutamine, and protein N-terminus acetylation, methionine loss, and methionine loss plus acetylation, were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were used for quantification, precursor abundance based on intensity and normalization based on total peptide amount. Common contaminants were excluded from data analysis. Prediction of proteins cellular localization and molecular function was obtained from the gene ontology (GO) UniProt database (www.uniprot.org). The total abundance of the predicted groups was calculated by the sum of the abundance of proteins classified for each group. The ANOVA hypothesis test (individual proteins) for p-value calculation was performed for the three bacterial growth periods.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicobacter pylori, Bacterial outer membrane vesicles, Defined medium, Proteomics, Isolation protocol, Bacteria viability

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto
i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Ipatimup – Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Ceu Figueiredo
i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Ipatimup – Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;


