### Accession
PXD044040

### Title
Protein modifications in plasma during SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has ended, it is important to understand the pathology of severe SARS-CoV-2 infection associated with respiratory failure and high mortality. In this study, a proteomics approach using nano-HPLC-MS/MS (QExactive HF) was used to compare the plasma proteome of COVID-19 survivors (COVID-19; n=10) and deceased individuals (CovDeath; n=10) with that of healthy individuals (Ctr; n=10). The effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on the alteration of plasma proteins by lipid peroxidation products such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), malondialdehyde (MDA) and 15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) were also examined. The results suggest that the development of COVID-19 strongly alters the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of exocytosis and platelet degranulation. These changes were most pronounced in the CovDeath group. In addition, a significant increase in proteins modified with reactive aldehydes was observed in all patients. In the COVID-19 and CovDeath groups, the levels of 4-HNE adducts increased 2- and 3-fold, respectively, whereas MDA adducts increased 7- and 2.5-fold, respectively. Signaling kinases and proinflammatory proteins were particularly affected by these modifications, and the amount of 4-HNE modifications confirmed previous findings on the relevance of 4-HNE in disease pathogenesis and lethal outcome. Protein adducts with 15d-PGJ2 were increased 2.5-fold in COVID-19 patients, including modifications of proteins such as p53 and STAT3, whereas CovDeath showed a decrease of approximately 60% compared with Ctr.  It can be assumed that the observed changes in protein expression and modification in COVID-19 are unlikely to be used as prognostic biomarkers because they are also present in the other inflammatory diseases. However, larger studies may prove that the extent and the nature of protein modifications in plasma may be a predictor of the course of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Sample Protocol
Samples collection Plasma samples were collected from a group of 10 COVID-19 survivors (6 females and 4 males) with a mean age of 62 (54–70) years and from 10 later deceased patients with COVID-19 (6 females and 4 males) with a mean age of 68 (62–77) years who were treated at the Clinical Hospital Dubrava in Zagreb, which served as a national COVID-19 center. The control group consisted of ten healthy donors (6 females and 4 males) with a mean age of 43 (30–56) years. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.  Blood samples were collected in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes and centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 min to separate plasma. The antioxidant—butylhydroxytoluene was added to the plasma samples, which were stored at -80°C until analysis.  Protein separation and digestion Total protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay [12] and 30μg of proteins were mixed with sample loading buffer (Laemmle buffer containing 5% 2-mercaptoethanol), heated at 95°C for 7 min, and separated on 12% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE gels. Following electrophoresis, gels were fixed in 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid for 1 hour and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 for 4 hours. Complete lanes were excised from the gel and sliced into eight sections (Figure 2). Each band in the gel was reduced with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Samples were then in-gel digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:proteins). Digestion was stopped by the addition of 10% formic acid (FA) in an amount to ensure a final concentration in the samples of 0.1% [13]. The obtained peptide mixture was collected, dried under inert gas and frozen until analysis.  Proteomic analysis and protein identification  Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA and separated using a high-performance liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000; Dionex, Idstein, Germany) on a 150 mm x 75 mm PepMap RSLC capillary analytical C18 column with 2μm particle size (Dionex, LC Packings) at a constant flow rate of 0.300 µL/min. Solvents used for separation were solvent A (5% ACN with 0.1% (v/v) FA) and solvent B (90% ACN with 0.1% (v/v) FA), and the separation gradient was set to increase from 5% to 60% B over 55 min. The Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with an electrospray ionization source (ESI) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany) was used to analyze the eluted peptides. The conditions for the analysis for peptide identification have been described in detail previously [14].

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release 2023-02) using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Seattle, WA, USA). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Dynamic modiﬁcations were set as cysteine carbamidomethylation/carboxymethylation, methionine oxidation, lipid peroxidation products (4-HNE, MDA, 15d-PGJ2) with cysteine/lysine/histidine adducts [15,16]. Label-free quantification of proteins was based on the signal intensities of precursor ions, and the amount of lipid peroxidation product-protein adducts was estimated based on the peak intensity of peptides modified by 4-HNE, MDA, or 15d-PGJ2. Only proteins with at least three identified peptides longer than six amino acid residues and at least two unique peptides were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has ended, it is important to understand the pathology of severe SARS-CoV-2 infection associated with respiratory failure and high mortality. The plasma proteome, including protein modification by lipid peroxidation products in COVID-19 survivors (COVID-19; <i>n</i> = 10) and deceased individuals (CovDeath; <i>n</i> = 10) was compared in samples collected upon admission to the hospital, when there was no difference in their status, with that of healthy individuals (Ctr; <i>n</i> = 10). The obtained results show that COVID-19 development strongly alters the expression of proteins involved in the regulation of exocytosis and platelet degranulation (top 20 altered proteins indicated by analysis of variance; <i>p</i>-value (False Discovery Rate) cutoff at 5%). These changes were most pronounced in the CovDeath group. In addition, the levels of 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) adducts increased 2- and 3-fold, whereas malondialdehyde (MDA) adducts increased 7- and 2.5-fold, respectively, in COVID-19 and CovDeath groups. Kinases and proinflammatory proteins were particularly affected by these modifications. Protein adducts with 15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) were increased 2.5-fold in COVID-19 patients, including modifications of proteins such as p53 and STAT3, whereas CovDeath showed a decrease of approximately 60% compared with Ctr. This study for the first time demonstrates the formation of lipid metabolism products-protein adducts in plasma from survived and deceased COVID-19 patients, significantly distinguishing them, which may be a predictor of the course of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Keywords
Covid-19; plasma proteome; protein adducts; 4-hydroxynonenal; malondialdehyde; 15-deoxy-12, 14-prostaglandin j2

### Affiliations
Medical University of Białystok
UMB

### Submitter
Agnieszka Gęgotek

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Gegotek
UMB


