### Accession
PXD021203

### Title
Pulsed-SILAC analysis of protein translation rate changes upon protrusion formation

### Description
To assess the impact of protrusion formation on protein synthesis rates on a global scale, we carried out a pulsed-SILAC (pSILAC) analysis in MDA-MB231 cells grown with or without protrusions for 1, 2, 4, and 8 hrs. Briefly, light SILAC labelled cells were seeded on top of 2x 3 micron transwell filters without any media added to the bottom chamber. Cells were allowed to attach to the filter overnight, and the next day the media on the top was changed to medium (M) or heavy(H) SILAC DMEM. At the same time, the H SILAC media was also added to the bottom chamber of the transwell with H media on the top to induce protrusions. Cells were then allowed to form protrusions for 1, 2, 4, or 8 hrs, before being lysed and mixed with the M labelled lysates (cells without protrusions) from the same timepoint. The experiment was then repeated with switched SILAC labelling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis was done in 2-4% SDS, and equal amounts of H and M pulsed samples were mixed together. Mixed samples were then reduced with 100 mM DTT at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was performed as described before (Wiśniewsk et al., 2009), with some modifications. Briefly, reduced samples were diluted 7 fold in 8M urea, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (UA buffer), transferred to Amicon Ultra 15 Ultracel 30k devices, and concentrated by centrifugation at 5,000g for 30 min. Filters were then washed twice by addition of UA buffer and concentration as before, prior to being alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. iodoacetamide solution was then removed by centrifugation, and samples were washed 3 times with UA buffer, followed by 3 additional washes in 0.04M NH4HCO3 (ABC) buffer to remove the urea. Tyrpsin digestion was then performed by addition of Trypsin (1:100 w/w) in ABC buffer to the filter tops and incubation at 37 degress C overnight. Peptides were eluted from the filters the next day by centrifugation. Three further elutions were performed by addition of extra ABC to the filter tops and centrifugation, followed by a final elution in 30% Acetonitrile. Combined eluates were then dried with a vacuum concentrator and fractionated into 7 fractions via Pierce™ basic pH reverse-phase fractionation kit. Samples were then dried with vacuum centrifugation before analysis by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent of ~1-2 µg of each digested SILAC mix was subjected to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer-B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) against buffer-A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ˚C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyzer at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.17) software was used for database search and SILAC quantifications (see mqpar.xml file for Maxquant setting details). The search was performed against a FASTA file of the Homo Sapiens, extracted from Uniprot.org (2016). All downstream data analysis was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.1), using the H/M Normalized SILAC ratio values from the MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mda-mb231; protrusions;translation; orbitrap, Pulsed-silac; psilac

### Affiliations
qmul
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology  Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square  London EC1M 6BQ The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology  Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square  London EC1M 6BQ The United Kingdom.


