### Accession
PXD015974

### Title
The SecYEG interactome of E. coli: non-competitive binding of PpiD and YidC to the SecYEG translocon

### Description
The SecYEG translocon constitutes the major protein transporting channel in bacteria and transports an enormous variety of different secretory and inner membrane proteins. The minimal core of the SecYEG translocon consists of the three inner membrane proteins SecY, SecE and SecG, which together with appropriate targeting factors are sufficient for protein transport in vitro. However, in vivo the SecYEG translocon has been shown to associate with multiple partner proteins, which likely allow the SecYEG translocon to manage diverse substrates. For obtaining a global view on SecYEG plasticity, a label free proteomics approach was executed, which identified known SecYEG interacting proteins, verified the interaction with quality control proteins and identified several novel putative SecYEG interactors. Surprisingly, the chaperone complex PpiD/YfgM was identified as the most pronounced contact partner of SecYEG and was much dominant than the established partner protein YidC. Detailed analyses of the PpiD and YidC contact sites on SecY by site directed cross-linking revealed that PpiD and YidC use almost completely overlapping binding sites on SecY and contact the lateral gate, the plug domain and the periplasmic cavity of SecY. Still, despite having almost identical binding sites, their binding to SecY is non-competitive as determined by quantitative mass spectrometry and cross-linking. This implies that the SecYEG translocon forms different substrate-independent sub-assemblies, in which SecYEG is either in contact with YidC or with the PpiD/YfgM complex.

### Sample Protocol
For site-directed cross-linking BL21 cells containing the pEVol plasmid together with SecY or YidC-pBpa variants in pTrc99a plasmids were cultured overnight in LB medium at 37°C. 10 ml of the overnight culture was further used for inoculation of 1 l LB medium containing 0.5 mM pBpa (in NaOH), 50 μg/μl of ampicillin and 35 μg/μl of chloramphenicol. The cultures were further incubated at 37°C until they reached the early exponential growth phase (OD600=0.5-0.8) and induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG). After induction, the cultures were grown for 2 hours at 37°C, cooled down on ice for 10 minutes and harvested by centrifugation at 5000 rpm in a JLA 9.1000 rotor for 10 minutes. The cell pellets were resuspended in 10 ml of PBS buffer (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 1.76 mM KH2PO4) and divided in two multi-well plates. One plate was exposed to UV light on ice for 20 minutes (UV chamber: BLX-365, from Vilber Lourmat) while the other plate was kept in the dark.  After UV irradiation, cells were collected by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes. Each cell pellet was resuspended in 10 ml of resuspension buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Mg(Ac)2). Next, the samples were lysed by French pressing and the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,800 rpm for 30 minutes in a SS34 rotor. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 45,000 rpm for 1.5 hours in a TLA 50.2 rotor for membrane sedimentation. Next, the membrane pellets were solubilized in 1% (w/v) n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) dissolved in resuspension buffer supplemented with 10% (w/v) glycerol for 1 hour at 4°C.  YidC was purified via metal affinity chromatography using TALON® metal affinity resin (Clontech, USA). The samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C with 1 ml/1 l LB culture of pre-equilibrated TALON® metal affinity resin, washed five times with 10 ml/sample of washing buffer (40 mM imidazole, 10 % glycerol (w/v), 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Mg(Ac)2 and 0.03% DDM and eluted four times in a total volume of 2 ml elution buffer (200 mM imidazole, 10 % glycerol (w/v), 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Mg(Ac)2 and 0.03% DDM). Next the samples were precipitated with 1 volume of 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA), denatured at 56°C for 10 minutes in 35 μl of TCA loading dye (prepared by mixing one part of solution III (1 M dithiothreitol) with 4 parts of solution II (6.33% SDS (w/v), 0.083M Tris-Base, 30% glycerol and 0.053% bromophenol blue) and 5 parts of solution I (0.2M Tris, 0.02M EDTA pH 8) and analysed on SDS PAGE by Western blotting and mass spectrometry. In-gel digestion of proteins was carried out after cutting the –UV and the +UV gel lanes into equal-sized slices that were processed individually for establishing abundance profiles of identified peptides. Proteins were modified by iodoacetamide and digested by trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were separated for nano-LC-electrospray ionization-MS/MS using a FAMOS autosampler (Dionex), an Ultimate inert HPLC system (Dionex), and an Agilent HPLC 1100 pump connected to the nano-electrospray ionization source of a Finnigan LTQ-FT (Thermo Electron Corporation) for online mass detection. Peptides were first collected on a trap column (0.1 x 15 mm, Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18, 5 µm; Agilent Technology) for desalting and concentrating followed by separation on an analytical column made up by fused silica emitters (0.075 x 105 mm, 6 µm; Proxeon Biosystems) filled with Hydrosphere C18, 3 µm (YMC). Peptides were eluted during a 60-min gradient using 97% water, 3% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid as solvent A and 80% acetonitrile, 20% water, and 0.1% formic acid as solvent B at a flow rate of 0.15 µL min-1. Mass spectrometric detection consisted of full scans at a resolution of 25,000 followed by data-dependent selected ion scans at a resolution of 50,000 and low-resolution MS/MS scans using a dynamic exclusion of parent ion masses for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 searching against the UniProt E. coli proteome set sequence database (version 2018_08, 4344 entries) allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages of trypsin, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Methionine oxidation was specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. The lists of both peptide and protein identifications were filtered applying a threshold for the false discovery rate of <0.01. The LFQ algorithm was used for label-free relative quantification with a minimum ratio count of 1. Only proteins having LFQ intensity gel lane profiles that showed a UV-dependent mass shift relative to their calculated molecular mass were accepted as specific interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
The SecYEG translocon constitutes the major protein transport channel in bacteria and transfers an enormous variety of different secretory and inner-membrane proteins. The minimal core of the SecYEG translocon consists of three inner-membrane proteins, SecY, SecE, and SecG, which, together with appropriate targeting factors, are sufficient for protein transport <i>in vitro</i> However, <i>in vivo</i> the SecYEG translocon has been shown to associate with multiple partner proteins, likely allowing the SecYEG translocon to process its diverse substrates. To obtain a global view on SecYEG plasticity in <i>Escherichia coli</i>, here we performed a quantitative interaction proteomic analysis, which identified several known SecYEG-interacting proteins, verified the interaction of SecYEG with quality-control proteins, and revealed several previously unknown putative SecYEG-interacting proteins. Surprisingly, we found that the chaperone complex PpiD/YfgM is the most prominent interaction partner of SecYEG. Detailed analyses of the PpiD-SecY interaction by site-directed cross-linking revealed that PpiD and the established SecY partner protein YidC use almost completely-overlapping binding sites on SecY. Both PpiD and YidC contacted the lateral gate, the plug domain, and the periplasmic cavity of SecY. However, quantitative MS and cross-linking analyses revealed that despite having almost identical binding sites, their binding to SecY is noncompetitive. This observation suggests that the SecYEG translocon forms different substrate-independent subassemblies in which SecYEG either associates with YidC or with the PpiD/YfgM complex. In summary, the results of this study indicate that the PpiD/YfgM chaperone complex is a primary interaction partner of the SecYEG translocon.

### Keywords
Yidc, Ppid, Label-free proteomics, Secyeg translocon, Protein cross-linking

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


