### Accession
PXD026507

### Title
Mutant PDIA3 causes neurodevelopmental impairment by disturbing endoplasmic reticulum proteostasis

### Description
Identification of a disease gene enables the elucidation of the gene function in biological networks. Here we report homozygous c.170G>A (p.Cys57Tyr or C57Y) in protein disulfide isomerase A3 (PDIA3) causing syndromic intellectual disability. PDIA3 catalyzes the formation of disulfide bonds in the endoplasmic reticulum. Experiments in zebrafish embryos showed that PDIA3C57Y is pathogenic, causing developmental problems such as axonal disorganization and skeleton abnormalities. In mammalian models, expression of PDIA3C57Y inhibited axonal growth and impaired synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation. Proteomic and functional analysis revealed that PDIA3C57Y leads to dysregulation of cell adhesion and actin cytoskeleton dynamics associated with altered integrin biogenesis. These alterations were correlated with low catalytic activity of PDIA3C57Y, which also forms disulfide-crosslinked aggregates that abnormally interact with chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum. This study shows that the disturbance of the proteostasis network in intellectual disability cases adversely impacts cellular connectivity and neuronal function, constituting a pathogenic pathway to neurodevelopmental impairment.

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal tissue of mice transduced with AAV9 (Mock, PDIA3, and PDIA3C57Y) were homogenized in TEN buffer as described above. For each sample, 20 μg of lysate was precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Samples for mass spectrometry analysis were prepared as described (Plate et al, 2016). Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 1% RapiGest SF (Waters) and diluted to final volume in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher) for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were digested for 18 hr at 37°C with 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega). After digestion, the peptides from each sample were reacted for 1 h with the appropriate tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric reagent (Thermo Fisher) in 40% (v/v) anhydrous acetonitrile and quenched with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h. Samples with different TMT labels were pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated on a SpeedVac and debris removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 18,000g. MudPIT microcolumns were prepared as described (Ryno et al, 2014). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate 3000 nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). MudPIT experiments were performed by 10 l sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 30, …, 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate in buffer A) and a final step of 90% buffer C/10% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v) and each step followed by a gradient from buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to buffer B. Electrospray was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with the following settings: eluted peptides were scanned from 300 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 120,000. The top 15 peaks for each full scan were fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 30%, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, a resolution of 30,000, ACG target 1e5, maximum IT 60 ms, and scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher). Spectra were searched using SEQUEST against a UniProt mouse proteome database. The database was curated to remove redundant protein and splice-isoforms, and common contaminants were added. Searches were carried out using a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences using Percolator node for filtering and the following settings: 50 ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 6 amino acid minimum peptide length, trypsin cleavage (unlimited missed cleavage events), static Cys modification of 57.0215 (carbamidomethylation), and static N-terminal and Lys modification of 229.1629 (TMT-sixplex), FDR 0.01, 2 peptide IDs per protein. Normalization of TMT reporter ion intensities was carried out based on total peptide abundance in each channel, and subsequently, TMT ratios for each identified protein were calculated in reference to a common pooled sample. Finally, the reference-normalized TMT intensities were compared between Mock (n = 3), PDIA3 (n = 3) and PDIA3C57Y (n = 4) transduced samples and significance assessed by a two-tailed unpaired t-test using the FDR approach (Benjamini et al, 2006) and Q = 1% in Graphpad Prism. Enrichment analysis of most significant alterations between groups was performed in EnrichR platform using gene ontology (GO) database (Chen et al, 2013; Kuleshov et al, 2016). Protein-protein interaction network was generated in STRING v.11 using Pdia3 and genes related to Focal Adhesion GO term (Szklarczyk et al, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intellectual disability / cell adhesion / actin cytoskeleton / integrins / protein disulfide isomerase

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry
Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.  Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile.  Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular Studies of the Cell, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

### Submitter
Madison Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Danilo B. Medinas
Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.  Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile.  Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular Studies of the Cell, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.


