### Accession
PXD008184

### Title
PCa_Secretome_PC3vsPC3nKR -  Secretome profiling of PC3/nKR cells, a novel highly migrating prostate cancer subline derived from PC3 cells

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer in American men. The American Cancer Society’s estimates for prostate cancer in the United States for 2017 are estimated 161.360 new cases and 26,730 deaths from PCa. To study metastatic properties to bone, PC-3 cell line is mainly used classical human prostatic carcinoma cell line, established and characterized its tumorigenicity from a human prostatic adenocarcinoma metastatic to bone is reported. In addition, PC-3/nkR cell line, natural killer(NK) cells-resistant, was isolated from mammary tumor xenograft studies in mice from PC-3 was implanted to nude mice and fecund to be tumorigenic in the early 2000s. In this study, we investigated secreted proteins of the conditioned media of PC-3 and PC-3/nkR cell lines using comparative proteomics technology to identify the molecular mechanism related to metastatic processes related to PC-3/nkR. Our study showed PC-3/nkR cells are new highly migrated and NK cells-resistant cell-line compared to PC-3 cells, as novel highly malignant tumor cells to study mechanisms of PCa metastatic.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture The human prostate cancer cell line PC-3 and PC-3/nkR were obtained from the Korean Cell Line Bank (Seoul, Korea). PC-3 and PC-3/nkR cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Pierce HyClone, Fremont, CA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GE Healthcare HyClone, Logan, UT) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. All cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator.  Protein extract from conditioned medium PC-3 and PC-3/nkR cells were grown to approximately ~85% confluence (approximately cells) in 150 mm culture dishes. The cells were washed carefully with serum-free medium (SFM) three times to avoid serum contamination and incubated in SFM for 24 h at 37°C. Conditioned media was centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 10 min to remove death cells. The supernatant was concentrated using a concentrator filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and then added with Protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA). The protein concentrations of PC-3 and PC-3/nkR conditioned media samples were determined by the BCA protein assay. In addition, whole cellular proteins were isolated. The cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail. The cell lysates were collected, sonicated on ice, and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay. All proteins sample were stored at –80°C until use.  In-solution tryptic digestion and 2-plex TMT labeling For reduction and alkylation, 25 ug of protein samples were added 200 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubated at 55°C for 1 hr. proteins were alkylated with 60 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min protected from light. Samples were conducted a acetone precipitation to purify proteins and incubated with 4 volume of ice-cold acetone at - 20°C for 4hr. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and re-dissolved in 100 L of 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.5). Proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega, Medison, WI) at a ratio of 1: 50 (trypsin : protein, w/w). For quantitative proteomics, each digested proteins carried out the tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. Briefly, PC-3 and PC-3/nkR peptides were labeled by reagent 127 and 128, respectively. Quenching TMT reaction was allowed to use 8 L of 5% hydroxylamine to sample and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Each labeled peptide was combined at equal amount and dried by speed vacuum systems.  The peptide mixture was fractionated by High-pH reverse phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. Totally, 8 fractionated peptides cleaned by Ziptip (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) to remove the salt and completely dried by speed-vacuum systems followed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in Solvent A (99.9% water with 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed using Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA) connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA). Peptide separation was performed using home-made capillary column (13 cm length, 75 um diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 3um bead (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a linear gradient of 2-23% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) for 44 min and 23-90% solvent B for 5min and remained at 30% solvent B for 11min at continuous flow rate of 200 nL/min.  The peptides were ionized positive and operated in Top 15 data dependent mode equipped with nanospray ion source. The MS data were used: 2.2 kV ion spray voltage; 280°C of ion capillary temperature, 300-1400 of mass scan range for full MS and 120-2000 scan range for MS/MS; MS resolution 70,000 for full MS and 17,500 for data-dependent MS/MS; collision energy at 27 with HCD mode; for MS/MS isolation window was 1.5 m/z; and dynamic exclusion was 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis The peptide and proteins were identified and quantified using Maxquant 1.5 containing protein sequences of human downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) [20, 21]. The search parameters were the following settings: Cleavage enzyme was Trypsin/P and 2 miss cleavage; Full MS and MS/MS tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively; Fixed modification of Carbamidomethylation on Cys and variable modification of oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-termini were specified; proteins required a minimum of two peptides. For high quality proteomics results, Maxquant search results were filtered peptide score of ≥40, false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 0.01 and removed reverse and potential contaminant proteins from total identified protein list. To calculate protein ratio between PC-3 and PC-3/nkR which labeled TMT, the reporter ions were computed at 2-plex TMT at peptide N-termini and lysine. Other parameters were set to default.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer among men worldwide. Most PCa cases are not fatal; however, the outlook is poor when PCa spreads to another organ. Bone is the target organ in about 80% of patients who experience metastasis from a primary PCa tumor. In the present study, we characterized the secretome of PC3/nKR cells, which are a new subline of PC3 cells that were originally isolated from nude mice that were implanted with PC3 cells without anti-natural killer (NK) cell treatment. Wound healing and Transwell assays revealed that PC3/nKR cells had increased migratory and invasive activities in addition to a higher resistance to NK cells-induced cytotoxicity as compared to PC3 cells. We quantitatively profiled the secreted proteins of PC3/nKR and PC3 cells by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis coupled with 2-plex tandem mass tag labeling. In total, 598 secretory proteins were identified, and 561 proteins were quantified, among which 45 proteins were secreted more and 40 proteins were secreted less by PC3/nKR cells than by PC3 cells. For validation, the adapter molecule crk, serpin B3, and cystatin-M were analyzed by western blotting. PC3/nKR cells showed the selective secretion of NKG2D ligand 2, HLA-A, and IL-6, which may contribute to their NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity resistance, and had a high secretion of crk protein, which may contribute to their high migration and invasion properties. Based on our secretome analysis, we propose that PC3/nKR cells represent a new cell system for studying the metastasis and progression of PCa.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Pc-3/nkr, Pc-3, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea


