### Accession
PXD023033

### Title
Mass Spectrometry Proteotyping-Based Detection and Identification of Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli and Candida albicans in Blood

### Description
Bloodstream infections (BSIs), the presence of microorganisms in blood, are potentially serious conditions that can quickly develop into sepsis and life-threatening situations. When assessing proper treatment, rapid diagnosis is the key; besides clinical judgement performed by attending physicians, supporting microbiological tests typically are performed, often requiring microbial isolation and culturing steps, which increases the time required for confirming positive cases of BSI. The additional waiting time forces physicians to prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics and empiric treatment, before determining the precise cause of the disease. Thus, alternative and more rapid cultivation-independent methods are needed to improve clinical diagnostics, supporting prompt and accurate treatment and reducing the development of antibiotic resistance. In this study, a culture-independent workflow for pathogen detection and identification in blood samples was developed, using peptide biomarkers and applying bottom-up proteomics analyses, i.e., so-called ”proteotyping”. To demonstrate the feasibility of detection of blood infectious pathogens using proteotyping, Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus were included in the study, as the most prominent bacterial causes of bacteremia and sepsis, as well as Candida albicans, one of the most prominent causes of fungemia. Model systems including spiked negative blood samples, as well as positive blood cultures, without further culturing steps, were investigated. Furthermore, an experiment designed to study the incubation time needed for correct identification of the infectious pathogens in blood cultures was performed. Compared to the MALDI-TOF MS-based approaches, shotgun proteotyping demonstrated higher sensitivity and accuracy, and required shorter incubation time before detection and identification of the correct pathogen could be accomplished.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteotyping After the host biomass depletion methods (Saponin, Cytolysis or MolYsis), the pellets containing bacterial or fungal cells were resuspended in 150 µl of PBS. The cell suspensions were transferred to 200 µl vials containing glass beads (Sigma-Aldrich, G1145). The cells were lysed by bead-beating, using a TissueLyser (Qiagen, 85220) with the following settings: frequency 1/25 s and 5 minutes. The cell lysates were frozen at -20°C until analysis.  Digestion of samples for proteotyping into peptides Samples were thawed and sodium deoxycholate (SDC, 5%) was added to a 1% final concentration. Trypsin (2 µg/ml, 100 µl ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM pH 8) was added and samples were digested overnight (ON) at 37°C. SDC was removed by acidification with formic acid (neat) and the supernatant was stored in -20°C until analysis.  nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of proteotyping samples Peptide samples were desalted, using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, prior to analysis on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 300 mm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch), using a linear gradient from 7% to 35% B over 45 or 75 minutes, followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 minutes at a flow of 300 nL/minutes, where solvent A was 0.2% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.2% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000, m/z 400-1,600, and the Top10 most intense precursor ions, with charge states of 2 to 4, were selected for fragmentation. The isolation window was set to 1.2 Da, and MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000, m/z 200-2,000. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds and 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MiCId bioinformatics pipeline for microorganism classification and identification Microorganism Classification and Identification (MiCId) is a workflow designed for the identifications of microorganisms, proteins and estimations of microbial biomass in samples (Alves et al., 2016, 2018; Alves and Yu, 2020). For a rapid identification of microorganism, MiCId (version v.06.11.2020) workflow performs peptide identification by querying the MS/MS spectra in a peptide-centric database and assigns to every peptide a MS/MS spectrum-specific measure, namely, E- value (Alves et al., 2007, 2008, 2010; Alves and Yu, 2008). To provide microorganism identification significances, MiCId computes a weighted unified E-value by combining the spectrum-specific E-values of the identified peptides mappable to a given microorganism. For each identified microorganism, MiCId also computes a prior probability using a modified expectation-maximization method. The computed prior probabilities reflect the relative protein biomasses, due to the various reported microorganisms, in the sample.  Assigning to microorganism accurate E-values along with the prior probability, MiCId provides users a measure suitable for controlling false positives (type I errors). In MiCId’s default settings, microorganisms identified with E-values smaller or equal to 0.01 and with prior probability greater or equal to 0.01 are deemed true positives. Using these cut-off values allows users to control the false positive rate well below 5%.  Since peptides that are unique to a taxon at a given taxonomic level are often used as the main evidence for the presence of that taxon, a false identification of such unique peptides can have undesirable consequence. To better control false microorganism identification, in addition to computing a unified E-value mentioned above, MiCId put an extra requirement for an identified peptide to qualify as an unique peptide. An identified unique peptide to a given taxon must have an E-value 10-4 or less aside from uniquely mappable to that taxon (Alves et al., 2018).   The database MiCId used to query MS/MS spectra comprises 3887 organisms, including  H. Sapiens and E. caballus, covering 1959 species. Protein sequences included in the database, for the 3868 organisms (excluding Shigella), were downloaded (on April 27, 2020) from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) at ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/genbank/.  Supplementary Table 7S lists the microorganisms included. When performing database searches, up to two missed cleavage sites per peptide were allowed under the digestion rules of trypsin and Lys-C. The amino acid cysteine was kept unmodified. The mass error tolerance of 5 ppm was set for precursor ions and 20 ppm for product ions.

### Publication Abstract
Bloodstream infections (BSIs), the presence of microorganisms in blood, are potentially serious conditions that can quickly develop into sepsis and life-threatening situations. When assessing proper treatment, rapid diagnosis is the key; besides clinical judgement performed by attending physicians, supporting microbiological tests typically are performed, often requiring microbial isolation and culturing steps, which increases the time required for confirming positive cases of BSI. The additional waiting time forces physicians to prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics and empirically based treatments, before determining the precise cause of the disease. Thus, alternative and more rapid cultivation-independent methods are needed to improve clinical diagnostics, supporting prompt and accurate treatment and reducing the development of antibiotic resistance. In this study, a culture-independent workflow for pathogen detection and identification in blood samples was developed, using peptide biomarkers and applying bottom-up proteomics analyses, i.e., so-called "proteotyping". To demonstrate the feasibility of detection of blood infectious pathogens, using proteotyping, <i>Escherichia coli</i> and <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> were included in the study, as the most prominent bacterial causes of bacteremia and sepsis, as well as <i>Candida albicans</i>, one of the most prominent causes of fungemia. Model systems including spiked negative blood samples, as well as positive blood cultures, without further culturing steps, were investigated. Furthermore, an experiment designed to determine the incubation time needed for correct identification of the infectious pathogens in blood cultures was performed. The results for the spiked negative blood samples showed that proteotyping was 100- to 1,000-fold more sensitive, in comparison with the MALDI-TOF MS-based approach. Furthermore, in the analyses of ten positive blood cultures each of <i>E. coli</i> and <i>S. aureus</i>, both the MALDI-TOF MS-based and proteotyping approaches were successful in the identification of <i>E. coli</i>, although only proteotyping could identify <i>S. aureus</i> correctly in all samples. Compared with the MALDI-TOF MS-based approaches, shotgun proteotyping demonstrated higher sensitivity and accuracy, and required significantly shorter incubation time before detection and identification of the correct pathogen could be accomplished.

### Keywords
Pathogen identification, Proteotyping, Bloodstream infections, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CBB
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Gelio Alves

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Karlsson
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden


