### Accession
PXD034827

### Title
Rat sensory and motor nerve fibroblasts LC-MSMS

### Description
In this study, a quantitative proteomic technique based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was used to compare the proteome of cultured sensory and motor nerve fibroblasts (Fbs). Among a total of 2597 overlapping proteins identified, we obtained 148 differentially expressed proteins, of which 116 proteins were significantly higher expressed in sensory Fbs, and 32 proteins were significantly higher expressed in motor Fbs. Western blot and qPCR analysis were applied to validate differentially expressed proteins. Functional categorization indicated that differentially expressed proteins were linked to a diverse array of biological processes , including regeneration, axon guidance, cytoskeleton organization, cell proliferation, cell migration, cell adhesion, and tissue remodeling, which might play a critical role in the specificity of peripheral nerve regeneration. Furthermore, following co-culture of motor neurons with motor or sensory Fbs , motor Fbs significantly enhanced neurite growth than sensory Fbs. These findings indicated that nerve Fbs expressed the distinct motor and sensory phenotypes involved in different patterns of protein expression, biological processes, and effects on neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Sprague-Dawley rats (7-days-old) were anesthetized with 5% isoflurane and sanitized with 75% ethanol prior to decapitation. Then the spines were removed and the spinal canals were opened carefully to expose the spinal cord. Based on the anatomical structure, the dorsal root (sensory nerve) and the ventral root (motor nerve) were excised under a dissecting microscope. The sensory and motor nerves were sliced into 3–5 mm pieces and digested with 0.25% (w/v) trypsin at 37 °C for 18-20 min. Then, supplement with DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) to stop the digestion. Finally, the cells were inoculated in 60 mm Petri dish and cultured at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2 for 3-4d. When the cells reached 90% confluence, Fbs were purified by differential digestion and differential adherence to remove the Schwann cells. These high purity sensory and motor Fbs were used in LC-MSMS experiments. The proteins of sensory and motor Fbs were extracted using the mammalian protein extraction reagent (M-PER) (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). The concentration of protein was determined with bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Pierce).  Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling were performed essentially as described previously. Briefly, 120 μg proteins of sensory and motor Fbs were precipitated using ice-cold acetone overnight at -20°C. Then the pellets were successively dissolved, denatured, alkylated and digested using trypsin (1:50, w/w) at 37°C for 16 h. Finally, the peptides were labelled using iTRAQ kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. In order to ensure the reproducibility and accuracy, two batches (n = 8 each batch) of independent biological samples were subjected to proteomic analysis (each in duplicate). The sample (batch) 1 was labeled with iTRAQ tags 114 (sensory Fbs) and 115 (motor Fbs), while the sample (batch) 2 were labeled with iTRAQ tags 116 (sensory Fbs), 117 (motor Fbs).   Buffer A is composed of 10 mM ammonium formate in water; buffer B is composed of 10 mM ammonium formate and 90% acetonitrile; Adjust both buffers to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide (Millipore Sigma). The iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated on a Waters XBridge C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 3.5 μm) at a 1 mL /min rate with Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo, CA, USA) for 4 min. The separation gradient was as follows: 1% to 25% B in 50 minutes, 60% B in 4 minutes, and rises to 70% B in 2 minutes. Collect fractions at 1-minute intervals. Then, the fractions were combined into six and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo). The dried peptides were dissolved in 10 μL phase C (0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% ACN in water) and separated using an Eksigent Ekspert™ nanoLC 400 system coupled directly to TripleTOF 5600 Plus MS(Sciex, USA). In brief, peptide solution (8 μl) was loaded to a pre-column (Agilent, C18, 300 μ m × 5 mm, 5 μ m particle size) and desalted with C phase for 10 min at a flow rate of 5 μl /min. Then the desalted peptides were separated on a ChromXP C18 3 μm 120 A (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) at 300 nl /min. Phase A was composed of 0.1% FA and 95% ACN in H2O; Phase B was composed of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient was set from 2 % phase B to 32 % B over 120 minutes. The eluent was introduced into TripleTOF MS via a Nanospray III source (Sciex, USA). The mass spectrometry was operated in an Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode. The ion source was set with an electrospray potential of 2.2kV, interface heater temperature of 150℃, curtain gas of 25 PSI, atomizer gas of 6 PSI, and scanning range of 350 ~ 3000 m/z. Use the roll collision energy option. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed when ions with an intensity greater than 400 counter/s (CPS) and the charge state of +2 ~ +5. Each cycle has a maximum of 40 candidate ions. Dynamic exclusion is set to 20s with a 50 mDa mas tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification ProteinPilot™ Software 5.0 (Revision Number: 4769, SCIEX, USA) was used for peptide identification and protein quantification. The raw MS data file (*.wiff) for each run was searched using Paragon and ProGroup algorithms (SCIEX, USA) against rat reference proteome (29,944 proteins). This study reported a protein with an "unused" confidence threshold (Prot Score) > 1.3% with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. The relative abundance of proteins was calculated based on individual peptide ratios, the thresholds for differential expression of protein were identified via mean ± 1.64 SD (90% confidence interval).

### Publication Abstract
Functional reconstruction after peripheral nerve injury depends on the ability of the regenerated sensory and motor axons to re-innervate the suitable target organs. Therefore, it is essential to explore the cellular mechanisms of peripheral nerve-specific regeneration. In a previous study, we found that sensory and motor fibroblasts can guide Schwann cells to migrate towards the same phenotype. In the present paper, we analyzed the different effects of sensory and motor fibroblasts on sensory or motor neurons. The fibroblasts and neurons co-culture assay showed that compared with motor fibroblasts, sensory fibroblasts promote the neurite outgrowth of sensory neurons on a larger scale, and vice versa. Furthermore, a higher proportion of sensory or motor fibroblasts migrated towards their respective (sensory or motor) neurons. Meanwhile, a comparative proteomic approach was applied to obtain the protein expression profiles of sensory and motor fibroblasts. Among a total of 2597 overlapping proteins identified, we counted 148 differentially expressed items, of those 116 had a significantly higher expression in sensory fibroblasts, and 32 had a significantly greater expression in motor fibroblasts. Functional categorization revealed that differentially expressed proteins were involved in regeneration, axon guidance and cytoskeleton organization, all of which might play a critical role in peripheral nerve-specific regeneration. After nerve crush injury, ITB1 protein expression decreased significantly in motor nerves and increased in sensory nerves. In vitro, ITB1 significantly promoted axonal regeneration of sensory neurons, but had no significant effect on motor neurons. Overall, sensory and motor fibroblasts express different proteins and exert different growth promoting effects on sensory and motor neurons. This comparative proteomic database of sensory and motor fibroblasts could provide future directions for in-depth research on peripheral nerve-specific regeneration. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034827.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Motor nerve fibroblasts, Sensory nerve fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
 Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

### Submitter
Yuhua JI

### Lab Head
Dr Yuhua Ji
Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.


