### Accession
PXD017117

### Title
Infection-driven activation of transglutaminase 2  boosts glucose uptake and hexosamine biosynthesis

### Description
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a ubiquitous enzyme with transamidating activity. We report here that the expression and activity of TG2 are enhanced in cells infected with the obligate intracellular bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of TG2 activity impair bacterial development. We show that TG2 increases glucose import by up-regulating the transcription of the glucose transporter genes GLUT-1 and GLUT-3. Furthermore, TG2 activation drives one specific glucose-dependent pathway in the host, i.e. hexosamine biosynthesis. Mechanistically, we identify the glucosamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFPT) among the substrates of TG2. GFPT modification by TG2 increases its enzymatic activity, resulting in higher levels of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine biosynthesis. As a consequence, TG2 activation results in increased protein O-GlcNAcylation. The correlation between TG2 transamidating activity and O-GlcNAcylation is disrupted in infected cells because host hexosamine biosynthesis is being exploited by the bacteria, in particular to assist their division. In conclusion, our work establishes TG2 as a key player in controlling glucose-derived metabolic pathways in mammalian cells, themselves hijacked by C. trachomatis to sustain their own metabolic needs.

### Sample Protocol
In solution protein digestion: Samples were prepared in triplicate. For streptavidin-precipitation of TG2 targets samples, tryptic digestion was performed by enhanced filter-aided sample preparation. All steps were done in-filter. Briefly, samples were reduced (50 mM TCEP, 30 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide, 1 h at room temperature in the dark). Then, proteins were incubated overnight at 37 °C with 500bng trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega). Peptides were recovered by centrifugation. After TG2/GFPT1 reactions in vitro samples were diluted in a large excess of 8 M urea / 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 buffer and then, as previously described, reduced (5 mM TCEP, 30 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were first digested for 5 h at 37 °C with 500 ng rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) before being diluted 4-fold with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 to reach a concentration below 2 M urea. Samples were then incubated overnight at 37 °C with 500 ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). To achieve the complete digestion of the peptides, a second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 h at 37 °C) was performed. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 5 % final concentration and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18SPE cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions.  Mass spectrometry analysis: Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1 000 or 1 200 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 2 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). 120 or 180 min gradient of solvent B at 250 nL.min-1 flow rates were applied to separated peptides. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in DDA mode (Data Dependent Acquisition). After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70 000), the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 28. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and > 7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 35 or 45 seconds respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software 1.4.1.2 or 1.5.3.8 version against respectively a Chlamydia trachomatis Uniprot reference proteome database concatenated with Homo sapiens Uniprot reference proteome database. Data were also searched against usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries or an E. coli K12 Uniprot reference proteome database concatenated with rhGFPT1 and gpTGase proteins {Tyanova, 2016}. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable), N-ter acetylation (variable) and BP (Gln, variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied between replicates with a maximal retention time window of 2 or 0.7 min. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels.  Data analysis: To validate the identification of the BP on the glutamine of modified peptides, spectra were manually inspected (or fragment assignments).  For the global quantification, output files from MaxQuant were used for protein quantification. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode as described previously {Cox, 2014}. Unique and razor peptides, included modified peptides, with at least 2 ratio count were accepted for quantification.  For pairwise comparisons, proteins identified in the reverse and contaminant databases and proteins only identified by site were first discarded from the list. Then, proteins exhibiting fewer than 2 LFQ values in at least one condition were discarded from the list to avoid misidentified proteins. After log2 transformation of the leftover proteins, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR {Wieczorek, 2017}). Remaining proteins without any LFQ value in one of both conditions have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Proteins with a foldchange under 2 have been considered not significantly differentially abundant. Statistical testing of the remaining proteins (having a foldchange over 2) was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma {Ritchie, 2015}. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p using the robust method of Pounds and Cheng to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests {Pounds, 2006}. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to an FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a ubiquitously expressed enzyme with transamidating activity. We report here that both expression and activity of TG2 are enhanced in mammalian epithelial cells infected with the obligate intracellular bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of TG2 impairs bacterial development. We show that TG2 increases glucose import by up-regulating the transcription of the glucose transporter genes GLUT-1 and GLUT-3. Furthermore, TG2 activation drives one specific glucose-dependent pathway in the host, i.e., hexosamine biosynthesis. Mechanistically, we identify the glucosamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFPT) among the substrates of TG2. GFPT modification by TG2 increases its enzymatic activity, resulting in higher levels of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine biosynthesis and protein O-GlcNAcylation. The correlation between TG2 transamidating activity and O-GlcNAcylation is disrupted in infected cells because host hexosamine biosynthesis is being exploited by the bacteria, in particular to assist their division. In conclusion, our work establishes TG2 as a key player in controlling glucose-derived metabolic pathways in mammalian cells, themselves hijacked by C.&#xa0;trachomatis to sustain their own metabolic needs.

### Keywords
Gfpt, Chlamydia, Hexosamine biosynthesis, O-glcnacylation, Transglutaminase 2

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Agathe Subtil UMR3691 CNRS Cellular Biology of Microbial Infection Institut Pasteur 25, rue du Dr Roux 75015 Paris, France

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Agathe Subtil
Agathe Subtil UMR3691 CNRS Cellular Biology of Microbial Infection Institut Pasteur 25, rue du Dr Roux 75015 Paris, France


