### Accession
PXD012304

### Title
serum exosomes of right-sided colon cancer promote metastasis via overexpression of SPARC and LRG1

### Description
Purpose: Over the past few years, the distinction between left- and right-sided colon cancer has been brought into focus. Right-sided tumor location was associated with an inferior overall survival and progression-free survival. We aimed to perform a detailed analysis of the diversity in exosomes between left- and right-sided colon cancer using quantitative proteomics.  Experimental Design: We isolated exosomes from left- and right-sided colon cancer patients and healthy volunteers and treated colorectal cancer cell line with serum-derived exosomes. Then we performed quantitative proteomics analysis of the serum-derived exosomes and cell line treated with exosomes, respectively.  Results: The expression profile of the serum exosome proteome in patients with right-sided colon cancer is different from patients with left-sided colon cancer. Serum-derived exosomes of right-sided colon cancer promote metastasis via up-regulation of extracellular matrix-related proteins, especially proteoglycans like SPARC and glycoprotein like LRG1. Exosomal SPARC and LRG1 were closely correlated with progression-free survival.  Conclusions: Proteomic analysis identified different exosomal protein profiling between left- and right-sided colon cancer. Serum-derived exosomes of right-sided colon cancer promote metastasis via overexpression of SPARC and LRG1.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 58 patients diagnosed with AJCC stage Ⅲ colorectal cancer (CRC) and 30 healthy volunteers were recruited in Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH, Beijing, China) from 2015 to 2017. Exclusion criteria included diabetes, autoimmune diseases, blood diseases, history of chemo- or radiotherapy, and a previous history of malignancy. Serum samples of patients were collected before they underwent radical tumor resection. The serum samples from CRC patients and healthy volunteers were pooled respectively, to perform isolation of exosomes by ultracentrifugation. For ultracentrifugation, the supernatant was first centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 min at 4℃. The supernatant was then transferred into ultracentrifuge tubes with total volume of 13.3 mL. Ultracentrifuge was performed using a Beckman Optima L-100XP Ultracentrifuge at 110,000g at 4℃ for 90 min. After the ultracentrifuge step, the supernatant was removed, followed by addition of 1 mL PBS buffer to wash the pellet without disturbing it. The pellet was then dissolved with 40 mL 8M urea after the PBS was removed. The total protein concentration was determined using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The lysates were respectively diluted to 1 mg/mL with 8M urea, for Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) labeling. Labeling was performed using the TMT Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol with slight modifications. Equal amounts of protein (100 µg) from three groups were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA. Protein digestion was completed by incubation with Trypsin/Lys-C at a mass ratio of 1:25 (enzyme: protein) for 12 h at 37°C, following the manufacturer’s protocol. The digestion was terminated by heating at 60°C for 30 min. Digested proteins were then desalted, dried and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). After labeling, samples were pooled, desalted and dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The TMT labeled peptides (100 μL in 0.1% TFA) were fractionated by HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column maintained at 45°C. The peptides were eluted by a gradient acetonitrile elution buffer (pH 10) at a flow-rate of 1.0 mL/min. Each 1.5 mL elution was collected as one fraction. A total of 47 fractions were collected, dried and combined into 20 samples according to the peptide abundance. The samples were dissolved in 20 μL of 0.1% TFA for subsequent liquid chromatography (LC)- mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were separated by a 135 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.3 μL/min with the Ultimate U3000 system which was directly interfaced with the Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 2 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.1 software and there is a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 3 seconds data-dependent MS/MS scans in an Ion Routing Multipole at 35% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST search engine. In detail, the raw MS data files were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human proteome database (released on February 5, 2018). The following parameters were set as the search criteria: precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; total intensity threshold, 20,000; minimum number of peaks, 200; and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (on C) and TMT 6-plex (on K and the peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (on M) was specified as a dynamic modification. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (P < 0.05 with a false discovery rate of 5%). The high-abundance serum proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, and transthyretin) were removed from the protein list. Depletion of high-abundance proteins from the human proteomic sample protein quantification was performed using the TMT 6-plex method. Reporter monoisotopic m/z was tuned according to the raw spectral data. Proteins were quantified using unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tumor location, Exosome, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Serum, Metastasis

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


