### Accession
PXD011246

### Title
Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-derived peptides protect against aggregation of LDL and cholesterol loading of vascular cells. Molecular and Cellular basis for antiatherosclerotic efficacy

### Description
LRP1 and, in particular the region that spans the C-terminal half of domain CR9 (from Gly1127 to Cys1140), named LP3, is essential for aggregated LDL internalization and human coronary vascular smooth muscle cells (hcVSMC)-cholesterol loading. Here, we investigated whether LP3 and its retro-enantio version (DP3) are protective against sphingomyelinase (SMase) and phospholipase 2 (PLA2)-induced LDL aggregation, the structural basis underlying this protection and the impact that LRP1-derived peptides might have on hcVSMC-cholesterol loading and cholesterol-modulated signaling pathways. For this purpose, biochemical, biophysical, molecular, proteomic, and cellular experiments were performed. Turbidimetry measurements show that LP3 and DP3 inhibit LDL aggregation induced by SMase and PLA2 in a dose-dependent manner, although the efficacy of DP3 is higher. Gel filtration chromatography (GFC) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) show that LP3, and more efficiently DP3, almost completely counteract the increased percentage of aggregated LDL induced by both SMase and PLA2, respectively. Native polyacrilamide gradient gel electrophoresis (GGE), agarose gel electrophoresis (AGE) and high-performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC) partitioning of LDL phospholipids indicated that LP3 and DP3 prevent SMase-induced alterations in LDL size, electric charge and phospholipid content but not those induced by PLA2. In contrast, LP3 and DP3 show high efficacy to counteract changes in ApoB-100 conformation induced by both SMase and PLA2. Together, these results indicate that LRP1-derived peptides protect LDL against aggregation induced by SMase and PLA2 through a common mechanism based on their capacity to prevent ApoB-100 conformational changes. Proteomics and computational modeling methods suggest that LRP1 derived peptides are able to establish strong electrostatic interactions with a specific ApoB-100 basic region. TLC and confocal microscopy show that DP3 with higher efficacy than LP3 significantly reduce intracellular cholesteryl ester accumulation induced by SMase-LDL in hcVSMC. Moreover, proteomics studies evidence several signaling pathways modulated by SMase-LDL that are counteracted specifically by DP3. These findings demonstrate that LRP1 derivative peptides protect against LDL aggregation and preserve vascular cells against cholesterol loading and associated alterations in critical signal pathways

### Sample Protocol
hcVSMC were seeded in 6-well plates using M199 medium, supplemented with 20% FBS, 2% human serum, 2 mmol/L of L-glutamine, 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin. hcVSMC were treated with: LDL, LDL exposed to SMase (SMase-LDL) in absence (w/o peptide) or presence of DP3 or IP321. Aggregation of LDL was verified by turbidimetry before cell exposure to LDL. The cells were harvested after two hours of treatment in total extraction buffer (urea/bicarbonate ammonium) and analyzed by LC-MSMS.  Protein extracts from hcVSMC cells and the different LDL samples (LDL, LDL exposed to SMase in absence of peptide or in the presence of DP3 or IP321) were sequentially digested in-solution with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin. Briefly, samples were initially reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min), and they were diluted to 2 M urea for overnight digestion with Lys-C at 37 ºC. Samples were then diluted 2-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC. Tryptic peptides were desalted using a C18 column, evaporated to dryness.  The tryptic peptides derived from hcVSMC cells were injected into a nano-UPLC system (EASY-nanoLC 1000 liquid chromatograph) equipped with a 50-cm C18 column (EASY-Spray; 75-µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2-µm particles, 45 ºC) and hyphenated to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Chromatographic gradients gradient started at 5% ACN (ACN:H2O (5:95), 0.1% FA) and went up to 32% ACN (ACN:H2O (32:68), 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with an EASY-Spray nanosource with spray voltage set at 1.4 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350–1,500 with detection in the Orbitrap (120K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 100,000. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 30,000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 28% (HCD). The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (IT) with an AGC of 4,000 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v3.0.63.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra for the different LDL samples and tryptic peptides derived from hcVSMC cells were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science). The data were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database (v.2017/10). At the MS1 level, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was limited to a maximum of 5% by using a decoy database. Quantitation data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). Finally, for the different LDL samples, the Skyline software v4.1 was used to build a spectral library for the ApoB100 protein with the corresponding identified spectra and to extract all its peptide MS1 areas.

### Publication Abstract
Aggregated LDL is the first ligand reported to interact with the cluster II CR9 domain of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1). In particular, the C-terminal half of domain CR9, comprising the region Gly<sup>1127</sup>-Cys<sup>1140</sup> exclusively recognizes aggregated LDL and it is crucial for aggregated LDL binding. Our aim was to study the effect of the sequence Gly<sup>1127</sup>-Cys<sup>1140</sup> (named peptide LP3 and its retro-enantio version, named peptide DP3) on the structural characteristics of sphingomyelinase- (SMase) and phospholipase 2 (PLA<sub>2</sub>)-modified LDL particles. Turbidimetry, gel filtration chromatography (GFC) and transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) analysis showed that LP3 and DP3 peptides strongly inhibited SMase- and PLA<sub>2</sub>-induced LDL aggregation. Nondenaturing polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis (GGE), agarose gel electrophoresis and high-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) indicated that LP3 and DP3 prevented SMase-induced alterations in LDL particle size, electric charge and phospholipid content, respectively, but not those induced by PLA<sub>2</sub>. Western blot analysis showed that LP3 and DP3 counteracted changes in ApoB-100 conformation induced by the two enzymes. LDL proteomics (LDL trypsin digestion followed by mass spectroscopy) and computational modeling methods evidenced that peptides preserve ApoB-100 conformation due to their electrostatic interactions with a basic region of ApoB-100. These results demonstrate that LRP1-derived peptides are protective against LDL aggregation, even in conditions of extreme lipolysis, through their capacity to bind to ApoB-100 regions critical for ApoB-100 conformational preservation. These results suggests that these LRP1(CR9) derived peptides could be promising tools to prevent LDL aggregation induced by the main proteolytic enzymes acting in the arterial intima.

### Keywords
Lrp1, Ldl, Proteomics, Atherosclerosis

### Affiliations
Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Vicenta Llorente
Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau


