### Accession
PXD004709

### Title
Proteomic profiles of Rat Pancreatic Islets

### Description
In this study, we achieved integrated transcriptomic and proteomic profiles of GK islets in a time-course fashion at different stages of T2D. Subsequent bioinformatics analysis revealed the chronological order of T2D-related molecular events during the deterioration of pancreatic islets. Our large quantitative dataset provide a valuable resource to obtain a comprehensive picture of the mechanisms responsible for islet dysfunction and to identify potential interventions to prevent beta-cell failure in human T2D.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from isolated islets were digested into peptides by trypsin (Promega). 6-plex TMT-labeled peptides mixtures from different samples were equally pooled respectively, high pH reverse-phase chromatography was adopted to generate 15 fractions for each sample mixture. Each fraction of peptides was analyzed repeatedly by the nanoLC-MS/MS experiments, which were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed with Proteome Discovery (version 1.4). Both Sequest HT and Mascot 2.3 search engine were employed for maximal peptide identifications. The peptides confidence was set as high level (q-value < 0.01) for peptides filter. At protein level, precursor intensity fraction of 50% was selected as an optimal trade-off value for both identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Progressive reduction in &#x3b2;-cell mass and function comprise the core of the pathogenesis mechanism of type 2 diabetes. The process of deteriorating pancreatic islets, in which a complex network of molecular events is involved, is not yet fully characterized. We used RNA sequencing and tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics technology to measure the temporal mRNA and protein expression changes of pancreatic islets in Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats from 4 to 24 weeks of age. Our omics data set outlines the dynamics of the molecular network during the deterioration of GK islets as two stages: The early stage (4-6 weeks) is characterized by anaerobic glycolysis, inflammation priming, and compensation for insulin synthesis, and the late stage (8-24 weeks) is characterized by inflammation amplification and compensation failure. Further time course analysis allowed us to reveal 5,551 differentially expressed genes, a large portion of which have not been reported before. Our comprehensive and temporal transcriptome and proteome data offer a valuable resource for the diabetes research community and for quantitative biology.

### Keywords
Rat islets proteome

### Affiliations
THE INSTITUTE OF BIOPHYSICS, CAS

### Submitter
JUNJIE HOU

### Lab Head
Dr TAO XU
THE INSTITUTE OF BIOPHYSICS, CAS


