### Accession
PXD013142

### Title
Liver zonation patterns and cell size variability in isolated human hepatocytes

### Description
Human hepatocytes differ in gene expression and function across the hexagonal lobules of the tissue microarchitecture, a phenomenon referred to as liver zonation. Hepatocytes also display intra-lobular differences in cell size, but to what extent zonal expression and function correlate with cell size in isolated human hepatocytes is not entirely clear. Here, we first used our accumulated experience of nearly 100 hepatocyte isolations to assess the impact of donor background and process parameters on hepatocyte quality. We observed substantial inter-batch variability in cell size distributions and a tendency for overall cell size to affect the outcome of hepatocyte isolation and cryopreservation. We further separated cells into different size fractions and analyzed them with label-free quantitative proteomics. This showed that protein abundances in different hepatocyte size fractions recapitulated the in vivo expression patterns of well-known zonal markers. We also found that proteins with sequential enrichment across fractions largely represented biological processes with known zonal specificity. This was confirmed by differences in the metabolic activity of zonated CYP enzymes. Altogether, our results show that hepatocyte size corresponds to zonal origin, and that our size fractionation approach can be used to study zone-specific liver functions in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using the multi-enzyme digestion filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) protocol, with Lys-C and trypsin. Protein and peptide amounts were determined based on tryptophan fluorescence. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase EASY-spray LC column (50 cm × 75 µm inner diameter; Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 µm C18 particles, using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operating in data-dependent mode with survey scans at a resolution of 240000, AGC target of 3 × 106, and maximum injection time of 20 ms. The top 15 most abundant isotope patterns were selected from the survey scan with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented with nCE at 28.5. The MS/MS analysis was performed with a resolution of 15000, AGC target of 1 × 105, and maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data was processed with MaxQuant, where proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against the human UniProtKB. Carboamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and protein discovery rates were specified as 0.01. Protein copy numbers were calculated with the Proteomic Ruler approach.

### Publication Abstract
Human hepatocytes show marked differences in cell size, gene expression, and function throughout the liver lobules, an arrangement termed liver zonation. However, it is not clear if these zonal size differences, and the associated phenotypic differences, are retained in isolated human hepatocytes, the "gold standard" for in vitro studies of human liver function. Here, we therefore explored size differences among isolated human hepatocytes and investigated whether separation by size can be used to study liver zonation in vitro. We used counterflow centrifugal elutriation to separate cells into different size fractions and analyzed them with label-free quantitative proteomics, which revealed an enrichment of 151 and 758 proteins (out of 5163) in small and large hepatocytes, respectively. Further analysis showed that protein abundances in different hepatocyte size fractions recapitulated the in vivo expression patterns of previously described zonal markers and biological processes. We also found that the expression of zone-specific cytochrome P450 enzymes correlated with their metabolic activity in the different fractions. In summary, our results show that differences in hepatocyte size matches zonal expression patterns, and that our size fractionation approach can be used to study zone-specific liver functions in vitro.

### Keywords
Human, Zonation, Hepatocytes, Liver, Cell size variability

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Christine Wegler

### Lab Head
Dr Per Artursson
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden


