### Accession
PXD042186

### Title
Identification of Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis ATCC 15697 surface proteins after growth in milk phospholipid-enriched medium

### Description
Bifidobacterium infantis is associated with the gut microbiota of breast-fed infants. B. infantis promotes intestinal barrier and immune function through several proposed mechanisms, including interactions between their surface polysaccharides, the host, and other gut microorganisms. Dairy foods and ingredients are some of the most conspicuous food-based niches for this species and may provide benefits for their delivery and efficacy in the gut. Milk phospholipid (MPL)-rich ingredients have been increasingly recognized for their versatile benefits to health, including interactions with the gut microbiota and intestinal cells. Therefore, our objective was to investigate the capacity for MPL to promote survival of B. infantis during simulated digestion and to modulate bacterial polysaccharide production. To achieve these aims, B. infantis was incubated with or without 0.5% MPL in de Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe (MRS) media at 37 °C under anaerobiosis. Survival across the oral, gastric, and intestinal phases using in vitro digestion was measured using plate count, along with adhesion to goblet-like intestinal cells. MPL increased B. infantis survival at the end of the intestinal phase by at least 7% and decreased adhesion to intestinal cells. The bacterial surface characteristics, which may contribute to these effects, were assessed by ζ-potential, changes in surface proteins using comparative proteomics, and production of bound polysaccharides. MPL decreased the surface charge of the bifidobacteria from –17 to –24 mV and increased a 50 kDa protein (3-fold) that appears to be involved in protection from stress. The production of bound polysaccharides was measured using FTIR, HPLC, and TEM imaging. These techniques all suggest an increase in bound polysaccharide production at least 1.7-fold in the presence of MPL. Our results show that MPL treatment is positively correlated with increased survival during simulated digestion, a stress resistance surface protein, and bound polysaccharide production of B. infantis, suggesting its use as a functional ingredient to enhance probiotic and postbiotic effects.

### Sample Protocol
Surface proteins were extracted from a 30 mL culture of B. infantis in MRSC with or without 0.5% MPL after washing. Six mL of 5 M LiCl at 37 °C for 60 min with agitation was used to remove non-covalently bound proteins. Samples were centrifuged (10,000 x g, 20 min, 10°C) and the supernatant was subsequently dialyzed in Milli-Q water at 4 °C using cellulose dialysis tubing (MWCO 12 kDa). Surface protein extracts were concentrated using a vacufuge at 45°C and total protein was determined using a micro-BCA kit. The surface protein profile of B. infantis in response to MPL was visualized using SDS-PAGE by loading 30 mg protein per sample on a Mini-Protean TGX Stain-free gel (4–20%) and applying 90 V for 15 min followed by 180 V for 30 min. Gels were imaged using a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System and densitometric analyses of the gels were performed using Image Lab V6.1.  Gel pieces were washed in 100 µL of 50% MeOH/5% acetic acid for 60 min (two times) followed by washing with acetonitrile (ACN) for 5 min. Samples were then dried and suspended in 75 mL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (with 5 mg/ml DTT) for 30 min at RT.  After aspiration, the gel pieces were suspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 15 mg/mL iodoacetamide (75uL) and incubated for 30 min in the dark at RT. The gel pieces were then alternately incubated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ACN, twice, for 5 min each (total of four incubations) and then completely dried. Dried gel slices were rehydrated with 25 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 75-µL of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) prepared at 10 µg/mL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and driven into the gel pieces for 15 minutes at 37ºC. Finally, 25 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the trypsin mix and incubated overnight. The peptides were extracted 3X from the polyacrylamide with 50 µL 50% ACN and 5% formic acid. A final extraction with 50 mL of ACN was performed. The extracted pool was completely dried in a vacufuge and peptides were resuspended in 20 mL of 50 mM acetic acid.   Capillary-liquid chromatography-nanospray tandem mass spectrometry (Capillary-LC/MS/MS) of protein identification was performed on a Thermo Scientific orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray FAIMS Pro™ Source operated in positive ion mode. Samples (6.4µL) were separated on an easy spray nano column (PepmapTM RSLC, C18 3µ 100A, 75µm X150mm, Thermo Scientific) using a 2D RSLC HPLC system. Each sample was injected into the µ-Precolumn Cartridge and desalted with 0.1% Formic Acid in water for 5 min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and ACN (with 0.1% formic acid) was used as mobile phase B. Flow rate was set at 300nL/min. Mobile phase B was increased from 2% to 16% in 45 min and then increased from 16-25% in 10 min and again from 25-90% in 1 min and then kept at 90% for another 2 min before being brought back quickly to 2% in 1 min. The column was then equilibrated at 2% of mobile phase B (or 98% A) for 15 min.  MS/MS data was acquired with a spray voltage of 1.95 KV and a capillary temperature of 305 °C was used. The scan sequence of the mass spectrometer was based on the preview mode data dependent TopSpeed™ method: the analysis was programmed for a full scan recorded between m/z 375-1500 and a MS/MS scan to generate product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in consecutive scans starting from the most abundant peaks in the spectrum in the next 3 seconds. To achieve high mass accuracy MS determination, the full scan was performed at FT mode and the resolution was set at 120,000 with internal mass calibration. Three compensation voltages (cv=-50, -65 and -80v) were used for samples acquisition. The AGC Target ion number for FT full scan was set at 4 x 10^5 ions, maximum ion injection time was set at 50 ms and microscan number was set at 1. MSn was performed using HCD in ion trap mode to ensure the highest signal intensity of MSn spectra. The HCD collision energy was set at 32%. The AGC Target ion number for ion trap MSn scan was set at 3.0E4 ions, maximum ion injection time was set at 35 ms and microscan number was set at 1. Dynamic exclusion is enabled with a repeat count of 1 within 60s and a low mass width and high mass width of 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot Daemon V2.7.0 via ProteomeDiscoverer V2.4 and the database searched against the most recent Uniprot databases. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions were set to 10ppm, accidental pick of 1 13C peaks was also included into the search. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was used as a fixed modification and considered variable modifications were oxidation (Met) and deamidation (N and Q). Four missed cleavages for the enzyme were permitted. A decoy database was also searched to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Peptides were filtered according to 1% FDR. Proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered as reliable identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bifidobacteria, Surface proteins, Milk phospholipids

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Department of Food Science and Technology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA

### Submitter
Erica Kosmerl

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Jimenez-Flores
Department of Food Science and Technology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA


