### Accession
PXD001960

### Title
Epigenetics and Proteomics join Transcriptomics on the quest towards TB Biomarkers

### Description
Even though recent reports estimate a reduction in the spread and contraction of Tuberculosis (TB), 30 % of the world population are currently being latently infected by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). This latent infection can at any time develop into active disease. Biomarkers to monitor this process as well as biomarkers for disease susceptibility and TB diagnosis is urgently needed in order to facilitate a more drastic decrease in the spread of Mtb and better care for TB patients. Our understanding of biology combined with evolving technical advances in high-throughput techniques, led us to investigate the possibility of additional role players (epigenetics and proteomics) in the quest to (a) understand the biology of TB host response and (b) search for biomarkers in TB diagnostics and –susceptibility. We engaged in a pilot study, using a relatively small sample set to interrogate the DNA methylome, transcriptome and proteome in monocytes and granulocytes of TB patients and healthy latently infected participants.  The observations in this study provide a first glimpse at the level- and sources of diversity in the epigenome and proteome amongst TB patients and latently infected controls despite limitations due to small sample size. Functionally the differences between the disease phenotypes observed in the different platforms were congruent and suggest regulation of function not only at the transcriptional level, but also by DNA methylation and microRNA. We conclude that the current data support the notion to develop a large scale study of especially the DNA methylome while care should be taken in the study design to account for variation based on gender, age and cell type.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea, RapiGest (Waters) and ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced and alkylated, followed by a tryptic digest. The peptide solution was desalted by C18 reverse-phase chromatography, dried under vacuum, and resolubilized to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml.  Each peptide sample was analyzed on an Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, which was equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap at normal scan speed following collision-induced dissociation of the ten most abundant precursors per cycle (charge state ≥ 3, isolation width 2.0 m/z, normalized collision energy 35%).

### Data Protocol
We performed LFQ using Progenesis 4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics) by automatic alignment of total ion chromatograms of raw files, using imported pep.xml files from Sequest searches against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database. The search identifications were statistically scored using PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) within the TPP (Keller et al., 2005) and all peptides with an iProbability score above 0.9 were considered resulting in a protein FDR of 1%. After manually improving the alignment, quantified peaks were filtered for identification by sequence search and overall protein abundances were calculated thereof.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Epigenetics, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Switzerland

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Switzerland


