### Accession
PXD020953

### Title
The DIALib-QC software tool for the systematic assessment of spectral library quality in data-independent acquisition proteomics

### Description
DIALib-QC (DIA library quality control) tool is used for the systematic evaluation of a spectral library’s characteristics, completeness and mass-accuracy ensuring correct identification and accurate quantitation of peptides and proteins from DIA/SWATH processing tools.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 70% confluence, harvested, lysed and proteins denatured in 8 M urea, 0.1% RapiGest, and 100 mM NH4HCO3. Protein content was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (60 min, 37°C), alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, darkness).Peptides were separated with a NanoLC 400 interfacePlus HPLC system (Eksigent) configured in micro-flow mode and emitted into a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX). Peptides were trapped on a 10 x 0.3 mm trap cartridge Chrom XP C18CL, 5 µm, 120 Å (Eksigent) at 10µL/min and separated on a ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 2.4 µm, 150 x 0.2mm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 5 µL/min using a gradient from 3-35% B in 98 min, 35-40% in 5 min, 40-80 % B in 2 min, isocratic flow at 80% B for 8 min, 80-3% B in 2 min and isocratic at 3% B for 25 min. Proteolytic digestion (Trypsin): Protein were digested using 1:50 trypsin (enzyme/protein) and samples desalted with tC18 SepPak cartridges. Data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and SWATH mode for spectral ion library generation and targeted data analysis. DDA replicates of each of top-10, top-20, top-40, top-50 and top-100 mode configuration were acquired in the Triple TOF 6600 system. Precursor spectra (400-1250 m/z) and fragment ion spectra (100-1500 m/z) were collected with dynamic accumulation. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 15eV was used for fragmentation to mimic SWATH like fragmentation conditions. DIA data was collected in high-sensitivity mode from 100 to 1500 m/z with 25 milliseconds (ms) accumulation time and 250ms accumulation time for MS1 using 100 variable acquisition window scheme. Five analytical replicates of the K562 cell digest in SWATH mode were measured for statistical confidence.

### Data Protocol
All DDA wiff files were converted to mzML files using the ABSciex MS Data Converter version 1.3 beta. The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (5.2.0) was used for the analysis of the shotgun proteomics runs. The datasets were searched with Comet (2017.01r1) against the full non-redundant, canonical human proteome from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2018_07) with 20,270 ORFs and appended contaminants, decoy sequences and iRT peptides (Biognosys). Parent mass error was set to ±50 ppm., fragment bin tolerance was set to 0.05 m/z. The search identifications were combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet and iProphet within the TPP. MAYU (1.07) was used to select a threshold of protein FDR of 1%. SpectraST was used in library generation mode with CID-QTOF settings and a consensus library was consecutively generated using spectrast2tsv.py. DIALib-QC.1.0 Tool was used to evaluate the quality and characteristics of spectral assay libraries, prior to SWATH data analysis. We used two different DIA software tools, Sciex PeakView and Biognosis Spectronaut, to perform the targeted data extraction of five analytical DIA replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry, also known as Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH), is a popular label-free proteomics strategy to comprehensively quantify peptides/proteins utilizing mass spectral libraries to decipher inherently multiplexed spectra collected linearly across a mass range. Although there are many spectral libraries produced worldwide, the quality control of these libraries is lacking. We present the DIALib-QC (DIA library quality control) software tool for the systematic evaluation of a library's characteristics, completeness and correctness across 62 parameters of compliance, and further provide the option to improve its quality. We demonstrate its utility in assessing and repairing spectral libraries for correctness, accuracy and sensitivity.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Dialib-qc, Dia, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Head of Proteomics Research, Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

### Submitter
Mukul Midha

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Robert L. Moritz
Head of Proteomics Research, Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA


