### Accession
PXD046120

### Title
The deubiquitinase cofactor UAF1 interacts with USP1 and plays an essential role in spermiogenesis

### Description
Spermiogenesis defines the final phase of male germ cell differentiation. Multiple deubiquitinating enzymes have been linked to spermiogenesis, yet the impacts of deubiquitination on spermiogenesis remain poorly characterized. Here, we investigated the function of UAF1 in mouse spermiogenesis and male fertility. We selectively deleted Uaf1 in premeiotic germ cells using Stra8-Cre knock-in mouse strain (Uaf1 sKO), and found that Uaf1 is essential for spermiogenesis and male fertility. We found that UAF1 interacts and colocalizes with USP1 in testes. Conditional knockout of Uaf1 in testes results in disturbed expression and localization of USP1, suggesting that UAF1 regulates spermiogenesis through the function of the deubiquitinating enzyme USP1. We used tandem mass tag-based proteomics to identify differentially expressed proteins and potential underlying mechanisms, and found that conditional knockout Uaf1 in testes results in reduced levels of proteins essential for spermiogenesis. Thus, the UAF1/USP1 deubiquitinase complex is essential for normal spermiogenesis by regulating the levels of spermiogenesis-related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting of round spermatids Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) purification was conducted as previously described to collect round spermatids from 8-week-old WT and Uaf1 sKO mice for  proteomics (Bastos et al., 2005; Gaysinskaya et al., 2014; Lima et al., 2017). After removing the tunica albuginea, the testes were placed in 5 ml PBS containing collagenase type I (120 U/ml) and mixed for 10 min at 35°C. The testes were digested in 5 ml of 0.25% trypsin plus 0.1 ml of deoxyribonuclease I (5 mg/ml) at 35°C for 8 min and then terminated by the addition of 0.5 ml fetal bovine serum (FBS). The suspension was passed through a 70 μm honeycomb filter. Centrifuge the cell suspension at 4℃ at 500g for 5 min and remove the supernatant. And then cells sediment was resuspended in 1 ml DMEM with 40 μg Hoechst 33342, 2 μl Zombie NIR™ dye and 5 μl DNase I. The cell suspension was stirred at 34°C for 20 min, then centrifuged at 500g for 5 min at 4°C and resuspended in PBS at a concentration of 105 ml for sorting. Using FACS, populations of fluorescently labelled collection cells were collected according to the sorting channel into 1.5-ml LoBind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf, 022431021) containing 0.5 mL PBS. The cell suspension was centrifuged and some of the supernatant was removed leaving about 10μl PBS.  Proteomic analysis Round spermitids for proteomic analysis was obtained from 8-week-old C57BL/6 male mice and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis with a standard protocol. In brief: (1) FACS purification was conducted to collect round spermatids from 8-week-old WT and Uaf1 sKO mice. Round spermtids were transferred to tubes containing lysis buffer (1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) on ice. After homogenization, the cell extracts were centrifuged at 13,000g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation, and the protein concentration was determined. After trypsin digestion and purification, peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using the TMT kit. Released peptides were subjected to LCMS/MS identification and quantification on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Finnigan Nanospray II electrospray ionization source. The raw data were processed using Domain Annotation (InterProScan), GO Annotation (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), and KEGG Pathway Annotation (KEGG online service tools KAAS mapper).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis Differentially expressed proteins were identified using 1.3-fold change and the Wilcoxon-test p < 0.05 threshold. Subsequently, multiple bioinformatics tools were performed to analyze these proteins. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to analyze enriched pathways. The R package clusterProfiler and Metascape (http://metascape.org) were used for Genes Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathways enrichment analyses. For GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was applied to test differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. Results with a corrected p < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Uaf1;usp1;male infertility;spermiogenesis;deubiquitylation

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China,
Shandong University

### Submitter
Ziqi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ziqi Wang
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China,


