### Accession
PXD014774

### Title
Widespread glucose-mediated repression of plant biomass utilization in the white-rot fungus Dichomitus squalens

### Description
Carbon catabolite repression (CCR) occurs in the presence of sufficient concentrations of easy metabolizable carbon sources (e.g. glucose), down-regulating the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in the breakdown of complex carbon sources. The extent of CCR at a global level is unknown in wood-rotting fungi – and was investigated in Dichomitus squalens with transcriptomics and exo-proteomics. Approximately 10% of expressed genes had lower expression in presence of glucose compared to Avicel or xylan alone. The glucose repressed genes included key components for utilization of plant biomass – CAZymes, sugar transporters and carbon catabolic genes. The majority of polysaccharide degrading CAZymes were repressed and included activities towards all major polymers. The repression found in the transcriptome was strongly supported by exo-proteomics – there was repression of almost all of the CAZymes whose transcripts were repressed on Avicel. The clear CCR-mediated effects indicate biotech production of CAZymes by D. squalens would benefit from de-repressed or constitutively expressing strains. The extent of CCR is surprising given that D. squalens rarely experiences high sugar concentrations in its woody environment.

### Sample Protocol
After two days, from triplicate transfer cultures of Dichomitus squalens CBS464.89 growing on either cellulose (Avicel) or xylan or those polysaccharides supplemented with 3% w/v D-glucose, the liquid from the ring-plate (PMID:17291611) compartments was pooled and centrifuged to remove any solid material. The proteins were precipitated and re-suspended as described previously (PMID:24965873). Note that the objective of the proteomic analysis was to compare equivalent volumes of the culture supernatant (not equivalent amounts of protein) from cultures growing on a polysaccharide with or without glucose supplementation. For the trypsin digests, a third of the volume of the re-suspended proteins from the Avicel-only cultures was used compared to the other samples. The same volume of each of the cleaned-up digests was subsequently analysed by nanoHPLC-MS/MS. Samples were separated on a 75 um x 10 cm C18 reversed-phase column connected on-line to a Velos LTQ-Orbitrap. MS/MS acquisitions were done using a data dependent acquisition method on the top ten 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was processed using the precursor ion quantitation workflow from Proteome Discoverer 2.2.  Data was queried against the Dichomitus Squalens CBS 464 v1.0 protein models available from the Joint Genome Initiative organization.  SequestHT search criteria used was 1 trypsin miscleavage allowed, carbamydomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxydation of methionine as a variable modification.  Precursor ion tolerance used was 10 ppm and MSMS fragment tolerance was 0.6 Da.  A minimum of two peptides of high confidence (FDR < 0.01) was selected as minimum requirement for protein identification.  Relative protein quantitation was based on the reported protein area values calculated by Proteome Discoverer using peak areas of extracted ion chromatograms of identified peptides with pair-wise matching across samples.

### Publication Abstract
The extent of carbon catabolite repression (CCR) at a global level is unknown in wood-rotting fungi, which are critical to the carbon cycle and are a source of biotechnological enzymes. CCR occurs in the presence of sufficient concentrations of easily metabolizable carbon sources (e.g., glucose) and involves downregulation of the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in the breakdown of complex carbon sources. We investigated this phenomenon in the white-rot fungus <i>Dichomitus squalens</i> using transcriptomics and exoproteomics. In <i>D. squalens</i> cultures, approximately 7% of genes were repressed in the presence of glucose compared to Avicel or xylan alone. The glucose-repressed genes included the essential components for utilization of plant biomass-<i>c</i>arbohydrate-<i>a</i>ctive en<i>zyme</i> (CAZyme) and carbon catabolic genes. The majority of polysaccharide-degrading CAZyme genes were repressed and included activities toward all major carbohydrate polymers present in plant cell walls, while repression of ligninolytic genes also occurred. The transcriptome-level repression of the CAZyme genes observed on the Avicel cultures was strongly supported by exoproteomics. Protease-encoding genes were generally not glucose repressed, indicating their likely dominant role in scavenging for nitrogen rather than carbon. The extent of CCR is surprising, given that <i>D. squalens</i> rarely experiences high free sugar concentrations in its woody environment, and it indicates that biotechnological use of <i>D. squalens</i> for modification of plant biomass would benefit from derepressed or constitutively CAZyme-expressing strains.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> White-rot fungi are critical to the carbon cycle because they can mineralize all wood components using enzymes that also have biotechnological potential. The occurrence of carbon catabolite repression (CCR) in white-rot fungi is poorly understood. Previously, CCR in wood-rotting fungi has only been demonstrated for a small number of genes. We demonstrated widespread glucose-mediated CCR of plant biomass utilization in the white-rot fungus <i>Dichomitus squalens</i> This indicates that the CCR mechanism has been largely retained even though wood-rotting fungi rarely experience commonly considered CCR conditions in their woody environment. The general lack of repression of genes encoding proteases along with the reduction in secreted CAZymes during CCR suggested that the retention of CCR may be connected with the need to conserve nitrogen use during growth on nitrogen-scarce wood. The widespread repression indicates that derepressed strains could be beneficial for enzyme production.

### Keywords
Cazymes, Dichomitus, Carbon catabolite repression, Regulation

### Affiliations
Concordia University
Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Marcos Di Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald P. de Vries
Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, The Netherlands


