### Accession
PXD004591

### Title
Integration of two in-depth proteomics approaches determines the high grade serous ovarian cancer-associated kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) degradome

### Description
Kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) is a serine peptidase that is over-produced in the most lethal form of ovarian cancer, called high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). To determine its underlying molecular mechanism of action, a comprehensive analysis of KLK7 degradome in the OVMZ-6 cell-secreted proteins was performed using two complementary proteomic approaches, quantitative PROtein Topography and Migration Analysis Platform (qPROTOMAP) and Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates (TAILS).

### Sample Protocol
OVMZ-6 cell-secreted proteins were treated with active recombinant KLK7 or assay buffer as follows: 200 parts concentrated conditioned media in PBS: 1 part active kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (or assay buffer control) [18 h, 37 ˚C]. Assay buffer- and KLK7-treated samples were reduced and dimethylation of N-termini and lysine residues with light formaldehyde (+28.031300 Da) or heavy formaldehyde (+34.063117 Da) was performed respectively. These samples were pooled, and digested with trypsin (50 parts sample: 1 part trypsin [18 h, 37 ˚C]). Trypsin-digested sample was enriched for KLK7-generated neo-N-termini using the HPG-ALD polymer and analysed using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML files using MSconvert, facilitated by ProteoWizard software [Kessner et al. (2008), Bioinformatics, 24(21):2534-6], and were searched using X!Tandem CYCLONE (2011.12.01.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, Institute for Systems Biology) contained within the TPP [v4.6.0], with high-resolution k-score against the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) human protein database [released February 2015] supplemented with known contaminants [cRAP database released February 2012; 115 entries; Global Proteome Machine Organisation]. Reverse sequences informed false positive identification frequency. Search parameters were as follows: precursor ion mass (monoisotopic) tolerance ± 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance ± 20 ppm; and semi-Arg-C proteinase cleavage allowing for up to one missed cleavage. Fixed modifications included C carbamidomethylation (+ 57.021464) and light dimethylation (+ 28.031300) of N-termini and K residues. Variable modifications included M oxidation (+ 15.994919) and the mass difference of H and L dimethylation (+ 6.031817) for N-termini and K residues. The searches were followed by a refinement step that included non-specific and unexpected cleavage. Peptide Prophet (v4.8.0) was used to curate peptide-spectrum matches of FDR ≤ 1% and assign representative proteins/ protein isoforms. XPRESS software [Han et al. (2001), Nat Biotechnol, 19(10):946-51] within the TPP was used for relative quantification of H:L peptide ratios. Data from each of three experimental/biological replicates was analyzed independently of other replicates. For TAILS-processed peptides in individual replicates, putative KLK7-generated neo-N-termini included all H-labelled peptides (a) that were identified by at least two spectra (across replicates and with different variable modifications included); (b) from proteins annotated to be extracellular or of cell surface origin in the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA); and (c) with log2 (H: L) ≥ -2 (or undefined, as for peptides identified only in the KLK7-treated sample). A log2 (H: L) ≥ -2 cut-off has been shown before to discriminate neo-N-termini, generated by the protease of interest, from other peptide species in dimethylation TAILS (Kleifeld 2011). Data from each of three biological replicates was analysed independent of other replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) is a serine peptidase that is over expressed in ovarian cancer. <i>In vitro</i> functional analyses have suggested KLK7 to play a cancer progressive role, although monitoring of KLK7 expression has suggested a contradictory protective role for KLK7 in ovarian cancer patients. In order to help delineate its mechanism of action and thereby the functional roles, information on its substrate repertoire is crucial. Therefore, in this study a quantitative proteomics approach-PROtein TOpography and Migration Analysis Platform (PROTOMAP)-coupled with SILAC was used for in-depth analysis of putative KLK7 substrates from a representative ovarian cancer cell line, SKOV-3, secreted proteins. The Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) approach was used to determine the exact cleavage sites and to validate qPROTOMAP-identified putative substrates. By employing these two technically divergent approaches, exact cleavage sites on 16 novel putative substrates and two established substrates, matrix metalloprotease (MMP) 2 and insulin growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), were identified in the SKOV-3 secretome. Eight of these substrates were also identified on TAILS analysis of another ovarian cancer cell (OVMZ-6) secretome, with a further seven OVMZ-6 substrates common to the SKOV-3 qPROTOMAP profile. Identified substrates were significantly associated with the common processes of cell adhesion, extracellular matrix remodeling and cell migration according to the gene ontology (GO) biological process analysis. Biochemical validation supports a role for KLK7 in directly activating pro-MMP10, hydrolysis of IGFBP6 and cleavage of thrombospondin 1 with generation of a potentially bioactive N-terminal fragment. Overall, this study constitutes the most comprehensive analysis of the putative KLK7 degradome in any cancer to date, thereby opening new avenues for KLK7 research.

### Keywords
High-grade serous, Transcriptome, Microenvironment, Degradome, Extracellular, Ovarian cancer, Substrate, Protease, Omics, Matrix metalloprotease, Tumour, Kallikrein-related peptidase, Thrombospondin

### Affiliations
NHMRC Principal Research Fellow | Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation | Queensland University of Technology  at the Translational Research Institute Leader, Kallikrein Protease & Tumour Microenvironment Group| Scientific Director, Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre-Queensland
Queensland University of Technology, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation at the Translational Research Institute

### Submitter
Lakmali Munasinghage Silva

### Lab Head
Dr D. Prof Judith Ann Clements
NHMRC Principal Research Fellow | Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation | Queensland University of Technology  at the Translational Research Institute Leader, Kallikrein Protease & Tumour Microenvironment Group| Scientific Director, Australian Prostate Cancer Research Centre-Queensland


