### Accession
PXD028242

### Title
Relative Quantification of the Effect of Blood Meal Iron on Protein Expression in Mosquito Ovaries 24 h Post Feeding

### Description
Aedes aegypti [Linnaeus in Hasselquist (Diptera: Culicidae); yellow fever mosquito] transmits several viruses that infect millions of people each year including, Zika, dengue, yellow fever, chikungunya, and West Nile. Disease transmission occurs during blood feeding. Only the females blood feed as they require a bloodmeal for oogenesis. In the bloodmeal, females receive a substantial iron load in the forms of holo-transferrin and hemoglobin. We are interested in the effects of the iron in a bloodmeal on the expression of proteins during oogenesis. Our previous data showed that during digestion of a blood meal, the gut iron concentration decreases 10-fold, while that of the ovaries doubles from ingestion to 72 hours post feeding. Approximately 72 hours post feeding, eggs are laid with ~125 ng Fe each. We are interested in the effects of the blood meal iron on the expression of proteins detected in the ovaries during the early oogenesis, 24 hours post feeding, before eggs are laid. We have used tandem mass tag-labeling proteomics to quantify proteins expressed at this early stage following feeding of a controlled iron diet. Our findings provide the first quantitative report of differential ovary protein expression in early oogenesis in mosquitoes fed three different iron diets.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem mass tag (TMT) Isobaric and Isotopic Mass Tagging kit was used to quantitate ovary protein expression based on iron content of the diet. Mated, adult female mosquitoes 8-9 days post-eclosion were fed one of two isoproteinic diets maintained at 27oC in glass feeders for 2 h. The diets were: Kogan’s (1990) artificial bloodmeal (ABM) with hemoglobin ((+)Fe): 10% (w/v) Porcine Albumin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) , 1.5% (w/v) Porcine IgG (Sigma), 0.8% (w/v) Porcine Hemoglobin (Sigma) and 5 mM ATP (Sigma) in feeding buffer (~56 ng Fe/l); Kogan’s (1990) ABM without hemoglobin ((-)Fe): 10.7% (w/v) Porcine Albumin, 1.6% (w/v) Porcine IgG and 5 mM ATP in feeding buffer (~24 ng Fe/l), or a Porcine bloodmeal (Porcine BM, 603 ng Fe/l). Ovaries from animals from each diet group were pooled; thus, samples from each diet represented a total of 90 ovary pairs collected from 6 different, laboratory-raised Ae. aegypti mosquito populations. Ovary protein extraction was performed as described previously. After protein concentrations were determined by SDS-Lowry, all samples were frozen and stored at -80oC until TMT-labeling. TMT-labeled peptides from ovaries of animals fed different diets were analyzed simultaneously by LC-MS/MS. Ovary samples at the trophic phase of oogenesis (24 h PBM) for the (+)Fe diet, (-)Fe diet , and the Porcine BM were collected and processed as previously described and TMT-labeled following the manufacturer instructions for the TMT6plex kit (Catalogue # 90061; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, to prepare samples for TMT-labeling, 6 l of each sample ((+)Fe: 33.9 g; (-)Fe: 34.4 g; Porcine BM: 41.4 g) was diluted in sterile ddH2O up to 50 l, then 45 l 100 mM TEAB was added and mixed with each sample. Since these samples were complex protein mixtures, 5 L 2% SDS was mixed in to bring the final volume to 100 l. Next, 5 l 200 mM TCEP was added and mixed with each sample and incubated at 55oC for 1 h in the dark. Further, 5 l 375 mM IAA was mixed into each sample and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 30 min in the dark. Finally, 1 ml acetone, prechilled at -20oC, was mixed with each sample and allowed to precipitate overnight at -20oC. Samples were centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 10 min, 4oC. Supernatants were decanted and the precipitated pellets were dried at RT for 10 min. Sample pellets were suspended in 50 l 100 mM TEAB and trypsin digested in solution overnight (1 µg trypsin (Promega):15 µg sample protein) at 37oC, following the protocol provided by the Analytical & Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility. TMT6plex labels were dissolved in 41 l acetonitrile for 5 min, RT, with occasional vortexing, and 6 g (based on original sample protein concentration) trypsin-digested sample was added to a unique TMT6plex label, and incubated for 1 h, RT. To quench the labeling reaction, 8 l 5% hydroxylamine was mixed with each sample and incubated for 15 min, RT. Samples were dried down to pellets using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator with medium heat. In preparation for LC-MS/MS, sample pellets were dissolved in 6 l 0.1% TFA pH 3.0, yielding sample concentrations of 1 g/l (based on original sample protein concentration). Next, 2 l of each TMT-labeled diet sample was combined into one tube for a total volume of 6 l (Tube 1), which was then further divided into 2 tubes of 3 l each (Tubes A and B). Each tube had a total protein concentration of 3 g (based on original sample protein concentration). Samples were stored at -80oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to analysis, each sample, Tube A or Tube B, was thawed and desalted following the protocol provided by the Analytical & Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility. Each TMT-labeled sample, Tube A or Tube B, was analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion). Running multiple analyses of each tube minimized the chances that a low abundance protein goes unidentified. Eluted peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (75-μm ID × 10 cm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a beginning and holding at 5% B at 10 min then a 5-20% gradient of solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 65 minutes, followed by a 20-35 % gradient of solvent B over 45 minutes, a 35-95% gradient of solvent B over 0.1 minutes, then a hold at 95% solvent B for 5 min. All flow rates were at 400 nL/min. Solvent A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Data dependent scanning was performed by the Xcalibur v 2.1.0 software (Andon, Hollingworth et al. 2002) using a survey mass scan at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning m/z 350–1600, followed by CID MS/MS of the ten most intense ions in the linear ion trap analyzer. Precursor ions were selected by the MIPS setting with selection or rejection of ions held to a +/− 10 ppm window. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 30 seconds after a single MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra output was obtained as a raw file and the spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.0.305 software (Thermo) for quantitative analysis against the Ae. aegypti database downloaded from UniProt (Aedesaegypti_UniprotKB_2020_7159.fasta). For protein identification, the following options were used: MS/MS spectra matches considered fully tryptic peptides with up to 3 missed cleavage sites, variable modifications considered during the search included methionine oxidation (15.995 Da), TMT6plex on the N termini (+229) and cysteine carbamidomethylation, and proteins were identified at 99% confidence with XCorr score cut-offs (Qian, Liu et al. 2005) as determined by a reversed database search. The results were also qualitatively validated using X!Tandem, another search engine and displayed with Scaffold Q+S v 4.11.0 (Proteome Software, Inc.), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra (Keller, Nesvizhskii et al. 2002), TMT 6 plex (N-term), TMT 6 plex (K); variable modification: oxidation (M); false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01; protein quantification: the protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein; and experimental bias: normalizes all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio should be 1 after normalization. Criteria for identifying proteins regulated by iron in the diet are defined as follows: A candidate protein was validated as being regulated by iron in the diet during the trophic phase of oogenesis by meeting the following criteria for multiple analyses: (1) a minimum of two unique peptides per protein were identified; (2) all peptides had a greater than 95% identification confidence; (3) protein was identified in both the Proteome Discoverer and Scaffold outputs from the same analysis; (4) protein was identified in two separate analyses; (5) the difference between increased or decreased expression of a protein due dietary iron was significant (p<0.05) using the Holm-Sidak method for multiple unpaired t-tests in Prism 6, Version 6.07 (Graph Pad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA); (6) the direction of protein expression, either upregulated or downregulated, was consistent among analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Aedes aegypti [Linnaeus in Hasselquist; yellow fever mosquito] transmits several viruses that infect millions of people each year, including Zika, dengue, yellow fever, chikungunya, and West Nile. Pathogen transmission occurs during blood feeding. Only the females blood feed as they require a bloodmeal for oogenesis; in the bloodmeal, holo-transferrin and hemoglobin provide the females with a high iron load. We are interested in the effects of the bloodmeal on the expression of iron-associated proteins in oogenesis. Previous data showed that following digestion of a bloodmeal, ovarian iron concentrations doubles by 72 hr. We have used shotgun proteomics to identify proteins expressed in Ae. aegypti ovaries at two oogenesis developmental stages following blood feeding, and tandem mass tag-labeling proteomics to quantify proteins expressed at one stage following feeding of a controlled iron diet. Our findings provide the first report of mosquito ovarian protein expression in early and late oogenesis. We identify proteins differentially expressed in the two oogenesis development stages. We establish that metal-associated proteins play an important role in Ae. aegypti oogenesis and we identify new candidate proteins that might be involved in mosquito iron metabolism. Finally, this work identified a unique second ferritin light chain subunit, the first reported in any species. The shotgun proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005893, while the tandem mass tag-labeled proteomic data are available with identifier PXD028242.

### Keywords
Ovary, Proteomics, Bloodmeal, Aedes aegypti, Iron

### Affiliations
Nutritional Sciences, Division of Agriculture, Life and Veterinary Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Dawn Geiser

### Lab Head
Dr Joy J. Winzerling
Nutritional Sciences, Division of Agriculture, Life and Veterinary Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA


