### Accession
PXD000169

### Title
Analysis of the honeybee sperm proteome using MudPit and 2D PAGE

### Description
Honeybee semen was collected by gently squeezing the male abdomens. Samples were pooled and then centrifuged. Pelleted sperm was collected and analysed with both 2D PAGE and gel-free methods. For the 2D PAGE, protein spots were digested using trypsin. Extracted peptides, resolved on a C18 column, were analysed by an Agilent LC/MSD Trap XCT Ultra 6330 mass spectrometer. Spectra were searched against the honeybee protein sequences (RefSeq release 48) using Mascot algorithm (with 1 missed cleavage, Cys-carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and Met-oxidation and N/Q-deamidation as variable modifications). For the MudPit analysis the sperm sample was digested by trypsin. Peptides were resolved using strong cation exchange chromatography followed by reverse phase (C18) HPLC and finally analysed by an Agilent QTOF mass spectrometer. Resulting spectrum files were converted to mzXML and merged using ProteoWizard msconvert. These were then searched against honeybee protein sequences using Mascot, Omssa and X!tandem (all with 1 missed cleavage, and Met-oxidation and N/Q-deamidation as variable modifications). Results of the three search engines were pooled using TPP.

### Sample Protocol
All males used for experimental work originated from colonies of Apis mellifera that we kept in an animal yard at the University of Western Australia. We collected sperm from males at an age of 2−3 weeks after enclosure to ensure that males had reached sexual maturity. Sperm was collected by using a technique previously developed to artificially inseminate honeybees.20,21 In brief, males were anaesthetized with chloroform to initiate male ejaculation, which proceeded by gently squeezing the male abdomen between two fingers. As soon as the ejaculate appeared at the tip of the male’s endophallus it was collected with a glass capillary connected to a syringe. To separate sperm from its surrounding seminal fluid, we applied a previously developed method.20 In short, semen was diluted in Hayes solution (9.0 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L CaCl2, 0.2 g/L KCl, 0.1 g/L, NaHCO3, pH 8.7), briefly mixed, and centrifuged for 25 min at 3000 rpm (850 × g) and 4 °C. This procedure was repeated three times. Final sperm pellets were resuspended in 50 μL of Hayes solution and frozen at −80 °C prior to further analyses. To identify proteins present in honeybee sperm, we used both gel-based and non-gel-based approaches as follows.

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins, we initially used the PeptideAtlas honeybee Biosequence Set22 (24,557 nonredundant sequences), the BeeBase Amel_pre_release258 (11,062 sequences) and the honeybee NCBI RefSeq release 48 protein databases (10,618 sequences). However, since we identified nearly the same number of proteins with any of these databases and NCBI records are better annotated, we decided to use this database throughout all subsequent analysis. Spectra from the gel-based experiment were analyzed using ProteinScape version 2.1.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) that in turn triggered the Mascot 2.2 core algorithm (Matrix Science) to match the data against the honeybee sequences (an in-house database built from the RefSeq protein database plus common contaminants) with the following options: scoring: standard, enzyme: semitrypsin with 1 missed cleavage, fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable modifications: Met oxidation and Gln and Asn deamidation, precursor-ion tolerance: 100 ppm, fragment-ion tolerance: 0.5 Da. To further improve the identification confidence of proteins with significant Mascot scores below 70 and above 50, proteins were accepted only if their observed molecular masses were within 30% of the calculated values. Identifications with Mascot scores above 70 were accepted regardless of their positions on the gel.

### Publication Abstract
In the social bees, ants, and wasps, females (queens) mate only during a brief period early in their lives and afterward store a lifetime supply of sperm in a specialized organ, the spermatheca. In some species, stored sperm can remain viable for several decades and is used by queens to fertilize millions of eggs. The physiological adaptations that allow this prolonged survival are unknown. To unravel them, we conducted proteomic analyses on the sperm of the honeybee Apis mellifera to define proteins that are bee-specific or highly divergent from sequences in the sperm proteomes of flies or mammals and might therefore be associated with long-term sperm survival. We identified a honeybee sperm proteome of 336 members and defined the subset of proteins or protein networks that cannot be discerned in the sperm proteomes of fruit flies and humans. This subset contained a significant number of proteins that are predicted to act in enzyme regulation or in nucleic acid binding and processing. From our analysis we conclude that long-term survival of sperm in social insects could be underpinned by substantial changes in only a specific subset of sperm proteins that allow physiological adaptation to storage. The unexpected preponderance of proteins predicted to be involved in transcriptional processes and enzyme regulation suggest these are the primary targets of this adaptation.

### Keywords
Sperm. lc-ms, Mudpit, Honey bee, 2d page

### Affiliations
University of Western Australia
†Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER), ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, ‡ Centre for Comparative Analysis of Biomolecular Networks, and ⊥Centre for Evolutionary Biology, School of Animal Biology, The University of Western Australia, 6009 Crawley, Australia

### Submitter
Reza Zareie

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Baer
†Centre for Integrative Bee Research (CIBER), ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, ‡ Centre for Comparative Analysis of Biomolecular Networks, and ⊥Centre for Evolutionary Biology, School of Animal Biology, The University of Western Australia, 6009 Crawley, Australia


