### Accession
PXD034354

### Title
Higher Temperature Porous Graphitic Carbon Separations Differentially Impact Distinct Glycopeptide Classes

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based discovery glycoproteomics is highly dependent on the use of chromatography paradigms amenable to analyte retention separation. When compared against established stationary phases such as reversed phase and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography, reports utilizing porous graphitic carbon (PGC) have detailed its numerous advantages. Recent efforts have detailed the utility in porous graphitic carbon in high throughput glycoproteomics, principally through enhanced profiling depth and liquid phase resolution at higher column temperatures. However, increasing column temperature was shown to impart disparaging effects in glycopeptide identification. Herein we further elucidate this trend, describing qualitative and quantitative effects of increased column temperature on glycopeptide identification rates, signal intensity, resolution, and spectral count linear response. Through analysis of enriched bovine and human glycopeptides, species with high mannose and sialylated glycans were shown to most significantly benefit and suffer from high column temperatures, respectively. These results provide insight as to how porous graphitic carbon separations may be appropriately leveraged for glycopeptide identification while raising concerns over quantitative and pseudo-quantitative label free comparisons as temperature changes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Urea was dissolved in 50mM Tris-HCl to a concentration of 8M, which was then used to resuspend 300mg of standard glycoproteins at a concentration of 2.0ug/uL. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 100mM DTT at room temperature for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 200mM IAA at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Alkylation was quenched with excess DTT prior to diluting the mixture 1:10 to reduce Urea concentration to <1M. Trypsin was added 1:100 for 4 hours at 37°C, followed by 1:50 and overnight incubation at 37°C. Cell Preparation Prostate cancer cell lines were produced by Ricke and colleagues and have been described elsewhere39.  Cell lines were grown and maintained in phenol-free DMEM/Ham’s F12 (Gibco) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (HyClone) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution (Gibco). T175 culture flasks were placed in an incubator at 5% CO2 and 98% humidity. Cells were grown to 90% confluency, washed with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (Cytiva), and harvested using a cell scraper. Cell pellets were washed twice using phosphate-buffered saline and stored at −80°C for subsequent processing. Cell pellets were resuspended in 4 volumes of 4% SDS prior to lysis via ultrasonication. Protein concentration was estimated via bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 450nM DTT for 30 minutes at 55°C followed by alkylation with 10mM IAA at room temperature for 15 minutes. Protein was extracted through repeated additions of cold 80% acetone and incubation at -20°C. Protein was reconstituted in 8M Urea with 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. 300mg aliquots were taken, diluted, and digested similarly to the standard proteins. Glycopeptide Enrichment Glycopeptides were enriched using a custom spin tip method. Briefly, 200uL pipette tips were packed with 3mg sterile cotton and loaded with polyHYDROXYETHYL-A packing resin at a 30:1 bead-to-peptide ratio. Beads were hydrated in 1% TFA prior to loading. Following flushing and conditioning of beads, samples were repeatedly applied in 80% ACN+1% TFA followed by washing steps in the same buffer. Glycopeptides were eluted in 10% ACN+5% FA prior to drying under vacuum. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and serially diluted 1x to 16x prior to LC-MS analysis. LC-MS Analysis Samples were separated on a custom PGC capillary column, prepared as described in the supplemental information (Figure 1). Glycopeptides were trapped in 3% B for 18 minutes, followed by a 52-minute gradient from 15% B to 40% B. Column was washed at 75% B for ten minutes followed by another ten-minute wash at 95%B. The column was then equilibrated to 3% for the final ten minutes. Glycopeptides were analyzed in technical triplicate on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operating in duration data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. DDA analysis was given a 3 second acquisition window rather than selecting top N precursors. MS1 settings were as follows: resolution, 120,000; m/z range, 400-2,000; RF lens, 30%; AGC target, 2.0e5; maximum injection time, 50ms; microscans, 1; polarity, positive. MS2 settings were as follows: resolution, 60,000; detector, orbitrap; isolation width, 1.6m/z; activation, HCD; collision energy mode, stepped HCD; collision energies, 20-30-40; first mass, 120m/z; AGC target, 5.0e4; maximum injection time, 118ms. Precursors were also required to meet an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 for selection. Allowed charges states were 2+ to 7+; precursors were excluded after 1 occurrence for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Protein Metrics Byonic as the engine. Datafiles belonging to the bovine standard glycoprotein digests were searched against a custom fasta database containing the respective protein sequences from Uniprot. The pancreatic cancer cell lines were searched against the Uniprot Human proteome (as found on October 30th, 2021). Both standard glycoproteins and complex cell digests were searched using the following parameters. Cleavage enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 2; precursor mass tolerance, 25ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 20ppm; fragmentation type, HCD; total common modifications, 4; total rare modifications, 1; MS/MS diagnostic peaks, HexNAc [H+], 204.087. Modifications were set as follows: fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl of Cysteine; variable modifications - oxidation of Methionine, deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine, acetylation of N-terminus. The built-in 309 mammalian N-glycans were set as rare modifications. The only other notable workflow inclusion is that Proteome Discoverer was instructed to keep all peptide results rather than those determined as ‘high’ confidence. FDR cutoff was set to 1% and glycopeptide data were filtered to only contain those species with a score > 150, delta_mod > 10, and a log_prob > 1. During data analysis we also filtered positive results to those species identified in at least 2/3 replicates in each dilution at each temperature.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based discovery glycoproteomics is highly dependent on the use of chromatography paradigms amenable to analyte retention and separation. When compared against established stationary phases such as reversed-phase and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography, reports utilizing porous graphitic carbon have detailed its numerous advantages. Recent efforts have highlighted the utility in porous graphitic carbon in high-throughput glycoproteomics, principally through enhanced profiling depth and liquid-phase resolution at higher column temperatures. However, increasing column temperature has been shown to impart disparaging effects in glycopeptide identification. Herein we further elucidate this trend, describing qualitative and semiquantitative effects of increased column temperature on glycopeptide identification rates, signal intensity, resolution, and spectral count linear response. Through analysis of enriched bovine and human glycopeptides, species with high mannose and sialylated glycans were shown to most significantly benefit and suffer from high column temperatures, respectively. These results provide insight as to how porous graphitic carbon separations may be appropriately leveraged for glycopeptide identification while raising concerns over quantitative and semiquantitative label-free comparisons as the temperature changes. RAW MS glycoproteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034354.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Porous graphitic carbon, Glycopeptide, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Department of Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI

### Submitter
Daniel Delafield

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Department of Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Sciences Division, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI


