### Accession
PXD017907

### Title
Metaproteomic responses of in vitro gut microbiomes to resistant starches

### Description
Resistant starches (RS) are dietary compounds processed by the gut microbiota into metabolites, such as butyrate, that are beneficial to the host. The production of butyrate by the microbiome appears to be affected by the plant source and type of RS as well as the individual’s microbiota. In this study, we used in vitro culture and metaproteomic methods to explore the consistency and variations in individual microbiome's functional responses to three types of RS - RS2(Hi Maize 260), RS3(Novelose 330) and RS4(Fibersym RW). Results showed that RS2 and RS3 significantly altered the levels of protein expression in the individual gut microbiomes, while RS4 did not result in significant protein changes. Significantly elevated protein groups were enriched in carbohydrate metabolism and transport functions of families Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae. In addition, Bifidobacteriaceae was significantly increased in response to RS3. We also observed taxon-specific enrichments of starch metabolism and pentose phosphate pathways corresponding to this family. Functions related to starch utilization, ABC transporters and pyruvate metabolism pathways were consistently increased in the individual microbiomes in response to RS2 and RS3; in contrast, the downstream butyrate producing pathway response varied. Our study confirm that different types of RS have markedly variable functional effects on the human gut microbiome, and also found considerable inter-individual differences in microbiome pathway responses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were washed for three rounds using cold (-20°C) acetone. Then, samples were re-suspended in 100 µL of 6M urea buffer (pH=8.0), and a DC™ assay [Bio-Rad Laboratories, Mississauga, ON, Canada] was performed to determine protein content. 50 µg of protein from each sample was used for in-solution digestion. 2 µL of dithiothriotol (DTT) [43815; MilliporeSigma] was added to each tube, then tubes incubated with shaking for 30 minutes on an Eppendorf Thermomixer C (800 rpm/56°C). 2 µL of iodoacetamide (IAA) [I1149; MilliporeSigma] was then added to each sample, and incubated in darkness for 40 minutes at rt. 1 µg trypsin [T1426; MilliporeSigma] was then added to digest the proteins with incubation at 37°C for 24 hours. Samples were then acidified to pH ~2-3 using 5% (v/v) formic acid and were desalted using C18 beads [ReproSil120 C18-AQ; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, DE]. All samples were run on Eksigent 425 nanoHPLC connected to Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer [Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA] with a 240 min gradient. Peptides were separated with an in-house made column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm) packed with reverse phase beads [1.9 μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany]. The samples were loaded at 5% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and analyzed by a  gradient from 5 to 30% (v/v) buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS analysis was done with a full MS scan from 350 to 1750 m/z in Orbitrap, followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions in ion trap. Microbiome samples corresponding to each individual were run on LC-MS/MS in a randomized order. Spectral data were collected as *.RAW files.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed automatically, following the MetaPro-IQ workflow using the MetaLab software (version 1.0)[25], with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 involved in the workflow. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modifications, and Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) modifications were included as variable modification in the database search space. The MetaLab database search results allows for protein identification and quantification and serves as a basis for identifying biochemical pathways that are differentially expressed. The output provides massive information on the dataset, including summary, peptides, protein groups, functional and taxonomic data tables, etc.

### Publication Abstract
Resistant starches (RS) are dietary compounds processed by the gut microbiota into metabolites, such as butyrate, that are beneficial to the host. The production of butyrate by the microbiome appears to be affected by the plant source and type of RS as well as the individual's microbiota. In this study, we used <i>in vitro</i> culture and metaproteomic methods to explore individual microbiome's functional responses to RS2 (enzymatically-resistant starch), RS3 (retrograded starch) and RS4 (chemically-modified starch). Results showed that RS2 and RS3 significantly altered the protein expressions in the individual gut microbiomes, while RS4 did not result in significant protein changes. Significantly elevated protein groups were enriched in carbohydrate metabolism and transport functions of families Eubacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae. In addition, Bifidobacteriaceae was significantly increased in response to RS3. We also observed taxon-specific enrichments of starch metabolism and pentose phosphate pathways corresponding to this family. Functions related to starch utilization, ABC transporters and pyruvate metabolism pathways were consistently increased in the individual microbiomes in response to RS2 and RS3. Given that these taxon-specific responses depended on the type of carbohydrate sources, we constructed a functional ecological network to gain a system-level insight of functional organization. Our results suggest that while some microbes tend to be functionally independent, there are subsets of microbes that are functionally co-regulated by environmental changes, potentially by alterations of trophic interactions.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Resistant starch, In vitro, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Universtiy of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


