### Accession
PXD022220

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of Mycoplasma pneumoniae identifies potential macrolide resistance determinants

### Description
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is one of the leading causes of community-acquired pneumonia in children and adolescents. Because of the wide application of macrolides in clinical treatment, macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae strains have become increasingly common worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance in M. pneumoniae are poorly understood. In the present work, we analyzed the whole proteomes of macrolide-sensitive and macrolide-resistant strains of M. pneumoniae using a tandem mass tag-labeling quantitative proteomic technique. In total, 165 differentially expressed proteins were identified, of which 80 were upregulated and 85 were downregulated in the drug-resistant strain compared with the sensitive strain. Functional analysis revealed that these proteins were predominantly involved in protein and peptide biosynthesis processes, the ribosome, and transmembrane transporter activity, which implicates them in the mechanism(s) of resistance of M. pneumoniae to macrolides. Our results provide new insights into drug resistance in M. pneumoniae and identify potential targets for further studies on resistance mechanisms in this bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Proteins were extracted using RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Protein (100 µg) was diluted with 100 mM TEAB to a final volume of 100 µL. TCEP (10 mM) was added to each sample tube and the mixtures were reacted at 56 °C for 1 h. Proteins were alkylated using 20 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. Pre-chilled acetone (−20 °C, 180 µL) was added and the mixture was stored at −20 °C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 8,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The acetone was carefully removed without disturbing the white pellet and the pellet was allowed to dry for 2–3 min. The acetone-precipitated protein pellet (100 µg) was resuspended in 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB. Free trypsin (2 µg) was added to the protein solution and the solution was incubated at 37 °C overnight. Each experiment was repeated three times.  Labeling and peptide fractionation Immediately before use, the TMT labeling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature. Anhydrous ACN (41 µL) was added to each tube and the reagent was allowed to dissolve for 5 min with occasional vortexing. The samples were labeled with the TMT reagent. The reaction was incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Hydroxylamine (5%, 8 µL) was added to each sample, and the reactions were quenched over a 15 min period. Samples were combined in equal amounts in fresh microcentrifuge tubes, and the mixed samples were divided into eight fractions using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed and searched against the UniProt M. pneumoniae database using Proteome Discover 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine residue alkylation was set as the static modification, and methionine oxidation was set as the variable modification. The mass tolerance of the precursor was 15 ppm and the peptide false discovery rate was controlled at ≤1%

### Publication Abstract
Mycoplasma pneumoniae is one of the leading causes of community-acquired pneumonia in children and adolescents. Because of the wide application of macrolides in clinical treatment, macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae strains have become increasingly common worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying drug resistance in M. pneumoniae are poorly understood. In the present work, we analyzed the whole proteomes of macrolide-sensitive and macrolide-resistant strains of M. pneumoniae using a tandem mass tag-labeling quantitative proteomic technique, Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier&#xa0;PXD022220. In total, 165 differentially expressed proteins were identified, of which 80 were upregulated and 85 were downregulated in the drug-resistant strain compared with the sensitive strain. Functional analysis revealed that these proteins were predominantly involved in protein and peptide biosynthesis processes, the ribosome, and transmembrane transporter activity, which implicates them in the mechanism(s) of resistance of M. pneumoniae to macrolides. Our results provide new insights into drug resistance in M. pneumoniae and identify potential targets for further studies on resistance mechanisms in this bacterium.

### Keywords
Whole proteomes, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Quantitative proteomic technique, Drug resistance, Differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
department of Bacteriology Capital Institute of Pediatrics
 Beijing BioTech Pack Technology Company

### Submitter
Jing Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Yuan Jing
department of Bacteriology Capital Institute of Pediatrics


