### Accession
PXD038702

### Title
A quantitative and site-specific atlas of the PADI4-induced citrullinome reveals widespread existence of citrullination

### Description
Citrullination refers to the conversion of arginine into the non-essential amino acid citrulline. Despite its importance in physiology and disease, global identification of citrullinated proteins and modification sites has remained challenging. Here, we combined quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics with differentiation of a leukemia cell line into neutrophil-like cells to reveal a comprehensive atlas of citrullination sites. Collectively, we identified 14.056 citrullination sites within 4.008 proteins and quantified their regulation in response to PADI4-specific inhibitor GSK484. Hereby we uncovered general principles about the mechanistic and biological aspects of citrullination function, while providing site-specific and quantitative regulation of thousands of PADI4 substrates, including signature histone marks and numerous non-histone events on transcriptional regulators and chromatin-related signaling effectors. Collectively, we describe systems attributes of the human citrullinome, reveal the existence of thousands citrullinated autoantigens in neutrophil cells, and provide a resource framework for investigating PADI4-specific functions and substrates for years to come.

### Sample Protocol
HL60 cells were grown in RPMI media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin (100U/ml) at 37°C and 5% CO2. A proportion of the cells were differentiated over the course of 4 days to neutrophil-like cells by the addition of 1.25% DMSO to the media. In triplicates, the cells were washed in 37°C PBS and transferred to 37°C Locke’s solution (10 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl and 2 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Glucose) at a concentration of 2x106 cells/ml. Calcium activation of PADI4 was achieved by the addition of calcium ionophore Af23187 (cat. C7522, Merck) at 4µM, for either 15 or 30min, at 37°C. Control samples, of both un-differentiated HL60 cells and differentiated neutrophil-like cells were harvested from Locke’s solution prior to calcium treatment for further sample preparation.   Neutrophil-like cells were in quadruplicates incubated in Locke’s solution, as described above, with a range of GSK 484 (cat. SML1658, Merck) concentrations at 37°C for one hour prior to calcium activation, 4µM, by calcium ionophore Af23187 (cat. C7522, Merck). The GSK 484 concentrations were 1µM, 5µM and 20µM, in addition to a DMSO-control.   Cell pellets were lysed in 10 pellet volumes lysis buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 50mMTris, pH 8.5). Following vigorous vortexing and snap freezing in liquid nitrogen, the lysates were homogenized by sonication of 2 pulses of 10 seconds at 30W. The homogenized lysates were then reduced and alkylated, by the addition of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 5mM and chloroacetamide (CAA) 5mM for one hour RT. The proteins were digested using Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys-C, 1:100 w/w) for 3 hours RT. Following a three-fold dilution in 50mM Tris, the digested proteins were digested a second round by Lys-C (1:200 w/w) overnight RT. Following digestion samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v).  Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. The peptides were eluted from the column using 4 ml of 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were frozen overnight at -80°C in 15ml Falcon tubes with punctured caps and dried to completion by lyophilisation for 96 hours. The dry pellets were dissolved in 25mM ABC pH 8.5, and concentration estimated by absorbance at 280nm on a NanoDrop instrument.  For each replicate 0.6mg peptide was fractionated into 46 fractions using an XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5µm 4.6mm x 250 mm column (Waters) on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex) operating at a flow rate of 1mL/min with three buffer line. Fractions were collected into a 96-deep well plate every 60 to 90seconds. The fractions were then transferred to low-bind Eppendorf tubes with punctured caps, frozen at -80°C overnight. The frozen samples were dried to completion by lyophilisation for 96 hours and then dissolved in 1% formic acid (FA).   Samples were measured using a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument or Exploris instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) on a 15cm long analytical column, with an internal diameter of 75µm, packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9µm beads (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was heated to 40°C using a column oven and peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA). The gradient ranged from 4% buffer B to 38% over 30 minutes, followed by an increase to 90% buffer B over 4 minutes to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a washing block of 6 minutes. For the pilot experiment, performed on the Q-Exactive HF-X instrument, electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2kV, capillary temperature to 275°C and RF level to 40%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750m/z, maximum injection time of 60ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3,000,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3m/z with an AGC of 200,000 charges. Precursor fragmentation was achieved using HCD For the optimized GSK experiment, performed on the Q-Exactive HF-X instrument electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2kV, capillary temperature to 275°C and RF level to 40%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 120,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750m/z, maximum injection time at auto mode and normalized AGC target was set to 200%. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3m/z with 200% normalized AGC target. Precursor fragmentation was achieved using HCD.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data output files were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30), a freely available software routinely used in the field (Cox and Mann, 2008, 2011). Default MaxQuant setting were used with exceptions outlined below. A HUMAN.fasta database was extracted from UniProt on May 5, 2020 to serve as a theoretical spectral library. The HUMAN.fasta database contained 96,821 protein entries. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (S, T and Y), deamidation (N, Q and R), methylation (K and R), di-methylation (K and R), lysing tri-methylation and lysine acetylation were included as variable modifications. Citrullination, was included in the variable modification, deamidation of N, Q and R, was defined as a neutral loss of cyanic acid, HNOC (mass of 43.01Da) and diagnostic mass reminant H(11)C(5)N(3)O, the immunonium ion (mass of 129.09Da). A maximum of 3 variable modifications per peptide was used and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Matching between runs was enabled, with a match window of 0.7 minute and an alignment time window of 20min. Minimum delta score for modified peptides of 6ppm was used.  Default setting for filtering by posterior error probability was used to achieve a false discovery rate <1% at the peptide-spectrum match, protein assignment and site-specific levels. Label free quantification by iBAQ was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the importance of citrullination in physiology and disease, global identification of citrullinated proteins, and the precise targeted sites, has remained challenging. Here we employed quantitative-mass-spectrometry-based proteomics to generate a comprehensive atlas of citrullination sites within the HL60 leukemia cell line following differentiation into neutrophil-like cells. We identified 14,056 citrullination sites within 4,008 proteins and quantified their regulation upon inhibition of the citrullinating enzyme PADI4. With this resource, we provide quantitative and site-specific information on thousands of PADI4 substrates, including signature histone marks and transcriptional regulators. Additionally, using peptide microarrays, we demonstrate the potential clinical relevance of certain identified sites, through distinct reactivities of antibodies contained in synovial fluid from anti-CCP-positive and anti-CCP-negative people with rheumatoid arthritis. Collectively, we describe the human citrullinome at a systems-wide level, provide a resource for understanding citrullination at the mechanistic level and link the identified targeted sites to rheumatoid arthritis.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Gsk-484, Padi, Deamination, Padi4, Hl60

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Alexandra Rebak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


