### Accession
PXD030281

### Title
Drosophila early embryos LC-MSMS

### Description
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation is a mechanism to promote mRNA translation in a wide variety of biological contexts.The conserved RNA-binding protein family CPEB has been shown to mediate canonical cytoplasmic polyadenylation of target transcripts. We have previously reported evidence for RNA-interference factor Dicer-2 as a component of a non-canonical complex, that operates independent of CPEB in Drosophila. In this study, we investigate Dicer-2 mRNA targets and protein co-factors in cytoplasmic polyadenylation. Using RIP‐Seq analysis we identify hundreds of potential Dicer-2 target transcripts, ~60% of which were previously found as targets of the cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase Wispy, suggesting widespread roles of Dicer-2 in cytoplasmic polyadenylation. Large-scale immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry revealed Ataxin-2 and Twenty-four among the high-confidence interactors of Dicer-2. Complex analyses indicated that both factors form an RNA‐independent complex with Dicer‐2, and mediate interactions of Dicer‐2 with Wispy. Functional poly(A)‐test analyses showed that Twenty‐four and Ataxin-2 are required for cytoplasmic polyadenylation of a subset of Dicer‐2 targets. Our results reveal components of a novel cytoplasmic polyadenylation complex that operates during Drosophila early embryogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Following immunoprecipitation, samples on beads were washed thrice with 500 µl of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and resuspended in 60 µl of 6 M urea in 200 mM ABC. Proteins were then reduced by adding DTT (10 µl DTT 10 mM, 37ºC, 60 min), alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 µl of IAM 20 mM, 25ºC, 30 min), diluted with 200 mM ABC to reach a final urea concentration of 1M, and digested overnight with trypsin (1 µg, 37ºC). The peptide mixture was collected and acidified to a final concentration of 5 % formic acid. Samples were desalted using a C18 column, evaporated to dryness and diluted to 10 µl with 0.1 % formic acid in milliQ water. Forty five percent of the peptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 2-cm C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap-100, Thermo; 100 µm i.d., 5 µm), and a reversed-phase chromatography 25cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos, Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and gradually increased to 35% buffer B in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 90% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 300 °C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. The background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and full MS scans with 1 microscan at resolution of 60 000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350−2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s, and the charge-state filter disqualifying singly charged peptides for fragmentation was activated. Following each survey scan, the 20 (CID) most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via CID were acquired in the linear ion trap, AGC was set to 1e4 and isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 10 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the Mascot search engine (v2.5.1, Matrix Science [1]) was used for peptide identification. Data were searched against the UP_Drosophila database protein database plus the most common contaminants (total of 22605 sequences). A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of Methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation was defined as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of Cysteines was set as fixed modification. The identified peptides were filtered 5%FDR.  Protein-protein interactions were assessed using SAINTexpress (Teo et al., 2014) and Top3 (Silva et al., 2006) analysis. For Top3 analysis, the log2 corresponding to the average area of the three most intense peptides per protein as calculated by Proteome Discoverer was used as quantitation indicator and a Student's t-test was performed between the 3 replicates of each state to pinpoint differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Drosophila, Dicer-2, Early embryos

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. University of Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne

### Submitter
Hima Priyanka Nadimpalli

### Lab Head
Dr Fátima, Gebauer
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain. University of Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain


