### Accession
PXD020900

### Title
Streamlining of defenses against copper makes host-restricted pathogen reliant on custom-made operon

### Description
Copper is both essential and toxic to living beings, which therefore tightly control its intracellular concentration. At the host-pathogen interface, copper is used by phagocytic cells to kill invading microorganisms. We investigated copper homeostasis in the whooping cough agent Bordetella pertussis, which lives in the human respiratory mucosa and has no environmental reservoir. B. pertussis has considerably streamlined copper homeostasis mechanisms relative to other Gram-negative bacteria. Its single remaining defense line against copper intoxication consists in a metallochaperone diverted for copper passivation and two enzymes involved in peroxide detoxification, which together fight two stresses encountered in phagolysosomes. The three proteins are encoded by an original, composite operon assembled in an environmental ancestor and which is under sensitive control by copper. Interestingly, this system appears to play a role in persistent infection in the nasal cavity of B. pertussis-infected mice. Combining responses to co-occurring stresses in a tailored operon reveals a new strategy adopted by a host-restricted pathogen to optimize survival at minimal energy expenditure.

### Sample Protocol
B. bronchiseptica and B. pertussis were grown in SS medium for 16 h supplemented or not with 2 mM CuSO4, and the cultures were stopped at OD600 of 1.6-1.8. The bacteria were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 100 mM NaCl, with Complete protease inhibitor (Roche) and lysed with a French Press. Clarified lysates were ultracentrifuged for 1 hour at 100,000 g at 4 ° C to separate soluble and insoluble fractions. Both fractions were heated at 100°C in 5% SDS, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 10 mM Tris (pH 8) for 3 min and loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. The migration was stopped soon after the samples entered the separating gel. The gel was briefly stained with Coomassie Blue, and one gel slices were taken for each sample. In gel digestion of gel slices was performed as previously described (Miguet L, Bechade G, Fornecker L, Zink E, Felden C, et al. (2009) Proteomic analysis of malignant B-cell derived microparticles reveals CD148 as a potentially useful antigenic biomarker for mantle cell lymphoma diagnosis. J Proteome Res 8: 3346-3354.). A UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for separation of the protein digests. Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reversed phase column (75 µm×500 mm, 2 µm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific, temperature 55 °C). Trapping was performed during 4 min at 5 μL/min, with solvent A (98 % H2O, 2% ACN and 0.1 % FA). Elution was performed using two solvents A (0,1 % FA in water) and B (0,1 % FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Gradient separation was 3 min at 3% B, 170 min from 3 % B to 20% B, 10 min from 20 % B to 80% B and maintained for 15 min at 80% B. The column was equilibrated for 6 min with 3% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analyzed by Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 400–1200 range with resolution 70,000 (m/z 200). The target value was 3.00E+06. Fifteen most intense peaks with charge state between 2 and 5 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 5.0E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms for full MS scans and 100 ms for tandem mass spectrum. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data was interpreted using search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, against two target decoy databases composed of all potential open reading frames of at least 30 residues between stop codons of B. pertussis or B. bronchiseptica (54890 and 74418 entries, respectively), plus sequences of recombinant trypsin and classical contaminants (118 entries). Cys carbamidomethylation or propionamidation, Met oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications. Up to one trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. Peptides were filtered out with Proline 2.0 according to the cutoff set for proteins hits with 1 or more peptides larger than 9 residues, ion score > 10 and 2% protein false positive rates. Spectral counting analyses were performed with Proline 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Copper is both essential and toxic to living beings, which tightly controls its intracellular concentration. At the host-pathogen interface, copper is used by phagocytic cells to kill invading microorganisms. We investigated copper homeostasis in Bordetella pertussis, which lives in the human respiratory mucosa and has no environmental reservoir. B. pertussis has considerably streamlined copper homeostasis mechanisms relative to other Gram-negative bacteria. Its single remaining defense line consists of a metallochaperone diverted for copper passivation, CopZ, and two peroxide detoxification enzymes, PrxGrx and GorB, which together fight stresses encountered in phagocytic cells. Those proteins are encoded by an original, composite operon assembled in an environmental ancestor, which is under sensitive control by copper. This system appears to contribute to persistent infection in the nasal cavity of B. pertussis-infected mice. Combining responses to co-occurring stresses in a tailored operon reveals a strategy adopted by a host-restricted pathogen to optimize survival at minimal energy expenditure.

### Keywords
Metallochaperone, Oxidative stress, Evolution, Copper homeostasis, Bordetella pertussis, Host-restricted pathogen, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UMS 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Saliou Jean-Michel
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UMS 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France


