### Accession
PXD014927

### Title
Molecular identification of a BAR domain-containing coat complex for endosomal recycling of transmembrane proteins

### Description
Protein trafficking requires coat complexes that couple recognition of sorting motifs in transmembrane cargos with biogenesis of transport carriers. The mechanisms of cargo transport through the endosomal network are poorly understood. Here, we identify a sorting motif for endosomal recycling of cargos including the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor and semaphorin 4C by the membrane tubulating BAR domain-containing sorting nexins SNX5 and SNX6. Crystal structures establish that this motif folds into a β-hairpin that binds a site in the SNX5/SNX6 phox homology domains. Over sixty cargos share this motif and require SNX5/SNX6 for their recycling. These include cargos involved in neuronal migration and a Drosophila snx6 mutant displays defects in axonal guidance. These studies identify a sorting motif and provide molecular insight into an evolutionary conserved coat complex, the ‘Endosomal SNX-BAR sorting complex for promoting exit 1’ (ESCPE-1), which couples sorting motif recognition to BAR domain-mediated biogenesis of cargo-enriched tubulo-vesicular transport carriers.

### Sample Protocol
TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography. Samples were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled.  The pooled sample was then evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).   Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry. High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%.  For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded 14-09-17: 140000 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and the data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. The Perseus software platform was used for the statistical analysis of proteomics datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Protein trafficking requires coat complexes that couple recognition of sorting motifs in transmembrane cargoes with biogenesis of transport carriers. The mechanisms of cargo transport through the endosomal network are poorly understood. Here, we identify a sorting motif for endosomal recycling of cargoes, including the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor and semaphorin 4C, by the membrane tubulating BAR domain-containing sorting nexins SNX5 and SNX6. Crystal structures establish that this motif folds into a &#x3b2;-hairpin, which binds a site in the SNX5/SNX6 phox homology domains. Over sixty cargoes share this motif and require SNX5/SNX6 for their recycling. These include cargoes involved in neuronal migration and a Drosophila snx6 mutant displays defects in axonal guidance. These studies identify a sorting motif and provide molecular insight into an evolutionary conserved coat complex, the 'Endosomal SNX-BAR sorting complex for promoting exit 1' (ESCPE-1), which couples sorting motif recognition to the BAR-domain-mediated biogenesis of cargo-enriched tubulo-vesicular transport carriers.

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Transmembrane proteins, Ci-mpr, Snx-bars, Endosomes

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences University of Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Boris Simonetti

### Lab Head
Dr Pete Cullen
School of Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences University of Bristol


