### Accession
PXD014795

### Title
Frequent mutations on amino-terminal BCL7A domain compromise its tumor suppressor role in DLBCL.

### Description
Mutations in genes encoding the various subunits of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex are frequently observed in different human cancers. In diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), genetic changes in BCL7A, a subunit of the SWI/SNF complex, have been recently reported but the functional role of such genetic changes remains unknown. BCL7A mutations concentrate at the first exon and the most frequently mutated hotspot is the splice donor site of the first intron. By using in vitro and in vivo analyses, we show that restoration of BCL7A drives a tumor suppressor-like phenotype. Further, we found that splice site mutations block the tumor suppressor phenotype and prevent BCL7A from binding to the SWI/SNF complex. Finally, we identified that the SWI/SNF complex accumulates mutations in a third of DLBCL tumors, especially in the GCB subtype. These discoveries highlight the tumor suppressor role of BCL7A mutations in DLBCL, and suggest that the SWI/SNF complex is involved in DLBCL pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.6a) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.6.0.7) for further statistical analysis. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. To define potential interactors, a one-sided T-test was performed requiring at least two LFQ valid values in the “bait” group, FDR<0.15 and a log2ratio > 2. Then, a two-sample Student T-test was performed between TA and NL20 cell lines, and proteins previously defined as interactors that changed more than log2ratio >1 or log2ratio <-1 with a q-value <0.15 were defined as differential interactors.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in genes encoding subunits of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex are frequently found in different human cancers. While the tumor suppressor function of this complex is widely established in solid tumors, its role in hematologic malignancies is largely unknown. Recurrent point mutations in BCL7A gene, encoding a subunit of the SWI/SNF complex, have been reported in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), but their functional impact remains to be elucidated. Here we show that BCL7A often undergoes biallelic inactivation, including a previously unnoticed mutational hotspot in the splice donor site of intron one. The splice site mutations render a truncated BCL7A protein, lacking a portion of the amino-terminal domain. Moreover, restoration of wild-type BCL7A expression elicits a tumor suppressor-like phenotype in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, splice site mutations block the tumor suppressor function of BCL7A by preventing its binding to the SWI/SNF complex. We also show that BCL7A restoration induces transcriptomic changes in genes involved in B-cell activation. In addition, we report that SWI/SNF complex subunits harbor mutations in more than half of patients with germinal center B-cell (GCB)-DLBCL. Overall, this work demonstrates the tumor suppressor function of BCL7A in DLBCL, and highlights that the SWI/SNF complex plays a relevant role in DLBCL pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Bcl7a, Swi/snf

### Affiliations
CNIO

### Submitter
Elvira Fdez

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
CNIO


