### Accession
PXD041352

### Title
LC-MS of interacting partners Toxoplasma gondii GRA57

### Description
We identified GRA57 as a Toxoplasma gondii secreted effector required for parasite survival of interferon gamma in HFFs. To identify interaction partners of GRA57 during infection of HFFs, which could indicate how GRA57 functions to protect the parasite, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments with an endogenously tagged RHGRA57-HA strain.To enable detection of protein-protein interactions specific to activated cells, HFFs were pre-stimulated before infection with 2.5 U/ml IFN for 6 h, which we found was sufficient to induce IFN responses while retaining host cell viability. HFFs were infected for 24 h with either RH∆Ku80 or RHGRA57-HA parasites prior to lysis. GRA57-HA was immunoprecipitated from lysates, then co-immunoprecipitated proteins were identified by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation HFFs grown to confluency in T175 flasks were pre-stimulated with 2.5 U/ml IFN (Bio-Techne, 285-IF-100) for 6 hours prior to infection with RH∆Ku80 or RHGRA57-HA in triplicate. 24 h post-infection, infected cells were washed 3 x in cold PBS then lysed in cold immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCL, 0.5 mM EDTA + 0.4 % NP40, pH 7.5 in H2O, supplemented with 2 x cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Lysates were syringe lysed 6 x through a 30 g needle, then centrifuged at 2000 g for 20 minutes to remove the insoluble fraction. Soluble fractions were added to 50 l/sample anti-HA agarose matrix (Thermo), then incubated overnight at 4°C with rotation. The matrix was washed three times with IP buffer, then proteins were eluted in 30 L 3 x Sample Loading Buffer (NEB) at room temperature for 10 minutes.   Mass spectrometry  20 l of each IP elution was loaded on a 10 % Bis-Tris gel and run into the gel for 1 cm, then stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain. Proteins were alkylated in-gel prior to digestion with 100 ng trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C.  Supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1 % TriFluoroAcetic acid (TFA). 1-10 l of acidified protein digest was loaded onto a 20 mm x 75 m Pepmap C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC (Thermo Scientific) prior to elution via a 50 cm x 75 m EasySpray C18 column into a Lumos Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  A 70 ’ gradient of 6 %-40 %B was used to elute bound peptides followed by washing and re-equilibration (A= 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO; B= 80 % ACN, 5 % DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid). The Orbitrap was operated in “Data Dependent Acquisition” mode followed by MS/MS in “TopS” mode using the vendor supplied “universal method” with default parameters.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed to identify tryptic peptides using Maxquant (maxquant.org) and searched against the Toxoplasma (ToxoDB-56_TgondiiGT1_AnnotatedProteins) and Human (Uniprot, UP000005640) reference proteome databases and a common contaminants database. A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives, at peptide and protein false detection rates (FDR) of 1 %. T-test based volcano plots of fold changes were generated in Perseus (maxquant.net/perseus) with significantly different changes in protein abundance determined by a permutation based FDR of 0.05 % to address multiple hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii secretes protein effectors to subvert the human immune system sufficiently to establish a chronic infection. Relative to murine infections, little is known about which parasite effectors disarm human immune responses. Here, we used targeted CRISPR screening to identify secreted protein effectors required for parasite survival in IFN&#x3b3;-activated human cells. Independent screens were carried out using 2 Toxoplasma strains that differ in virulence in mice, leading to the identification of effectors required for survival in IFN&#x3b3;-activated human cells. We identify the secreted protein GRA57 and 2 other proteins, GRA70 and GRA71, that together form a complex which enhances the ability of parasites to persist in IFN&#x3b3;-activated human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs). Components of the protein machinery required for export of Toxoplasma proteins into the host cell were also found to be important for parasite resistance to IFN&#x3b3; in human cells, but these export components function independently of the identified protein complex. Host-mediated ubiquitination of the parasite vacuole has previously been associated with increased parasite clearance from human cells, but we find that vacuoles from GRA57, GRA70, and GRA71 knockout strains are surprisingly less ubiquitinated by the host cell. We hypothesise that this is likely a secondary consequence of deletion of the complex, unlinked to the IFN&#x3b3; resistance mediated by these effectors.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Dense granule, Effectors, Hff

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK & Cell Biology of Host-Pathogen Interaction Laboratory, Instituto Gulbenkian Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK & Cell Biology of Host-Pathogen Interaction Laboratory, Instituto Gulbenkian Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal


