### Accession
PXD023267

### Title
Combinatorial high throughput drug screening identifies a synergistic drug interaction that sensitizes mesenchymal pancreatic cancer to immune checkpoint blockade

### Description
KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly immunosuppressive and resistant to targeted therapies, immune checkpoint blockade and engineered T cells. Here, we performed a systematic high throughput combinatorial drug screen and identified a synergistic interaction between the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the multi-kinase inhibitor nintedanib. This interaction targets KRAS-directed oncogenic signaling in the aggressive and therapy resistant non-glandular mesenchymal subtype of PDAC, driven by an allelic imbalance, increased gene-dosage and expression of oncogenic KRAS. Mechanistically, the combinatorial treatment induces cell cycle arrest and cell death and initiates an interferon response. Using single cell RNA sequencing and immunophenotyping, we show that the combination therapy reprograms the immunosuppressive microenvironment and primes cytotoxic and memory T cells to infiltrate the tumors, thereby sensitizing mesenchymal PDAC to PD-L1 inhibition. This work opens new avenues to target the therapy refractory mesenchymal PDAC subtype.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate was cleared with centrifugation for 1 h at 52,000 xg. Protein concentration was determined with a Bradford Assay and adjusted to 5 mg/ml. Kinobead pulldown assays were performed as previously described by Klaeger et al.. Inhibitors of interest were spiked into 0.5 mL lysate at increasing concentrations (DMSO, 3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 mM, 3 mM and 30 mM) and incubated for 45 min at 4°C. This was followed by incubation with kinobeads  for 30 min at 4°C. To assess the degree of protein depletion from the lysates by the kinobeads, a second kinobead pulldown (with fresh beads) was performed on the unbound fraction of the vehicle control (so-called pulldown of pulldown). This enabled the determination of a correction factor for each protein that was used to calculate apparent dissociation constants for a drug-target complex. Proteins bound to kinobeads were eluted with LDS sample buffer ( containing 50 mM DTT. Kinobead eluates were alkylated with 55 mM CAA and run into a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (approximately 1 cm). In-gel digestion was performed according to standard procedures.  Generated peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid (FA), an amount corresponding to 1 µg peptides was injected. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 µm x 2 cm, packed in-house with 5 µm C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbruch-Entringen, Germany) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 10 min Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 µm x 45 cm, packed in-house with 3 µm C18 resin; Reprosil Gold, Dr. Maisch) applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separated using a 60 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The HF-X was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60K (automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 charges, maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms. MS2 spectra for peptide identification were recorded via sequential isolation of up to 18 precursors (isolation window 1.7 m/z, AGC target value of 1e5, maxIT of 25 ms, dynamic exclusion of 25 s) and fragmentation via HCD (NCE of 26%).

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant (v.1.5.7.4) by searching against the Swissprot database (murine, 16,996 entries, downloaded on 23.11.2018) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, and quantification was done with the LFQ option. Results were adjusted to 1% peptide spectrum match (PSM) and 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Each compound was processed separately.

### Publication Abstract
KRAS-mutant pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly immunosuppressive and resistant to targeted and immunotherapies. Among the different PDAC subtypes, basal-like mesenchymal PDAC, which is driven by allelic imbalance, increased gene dosage and subsequent high expression levels of oncogenic KRAS, shows the most aggressive phenotype and strongest therapy resistance. In the present study, we performed a systematic high-throughput combination drug screen and identified a synergistic interaction between the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the multi-kinase inhibitor nintedanib, which targets KRAS-directed oncogenic signaling in mesenchymal PDAC. This combination treatment induces cell-cycle arrest and cell death, and initiates a context-dependent remodeling of the immunosuppressive cancer cell secretome. Using a combination of single-cell RNA-sequencing, CRISPR screens and immunophenotyping, we show that this combination therapy promotes intratumor infiltration of cytotoxic and effector T cells, which sensitizes mesenchymal PDAC to PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibition. Overall, our results open new avenues to target this aggressive and therapy-refractory mesenchymal PDAC subtype.

### Keywords
Kinobead pull-downs, Immune checkpoint inhibition, Pancreatic cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Scrna-seq, Combination therapy

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanlytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Julia Woortman

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technical University of Munich Partner Site of the German Cancer Consortium


