### Accession
PXD029634

### Title
Proteomic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from patients with pulmonary tuberculosis: a pilot study from Zanzibar, Tanzania

### Description
This study aimed at exploring the proteomic profile of PBMCs to predict response to treatment in pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). This was a pilot study conducted among 8 adult patients from Zanzibar, Tanzania with confirmed PTB. Blood samples were collected at baseline, at 2 months of treatment, and at the end of 6 months of treatment. Proteins were extracted from PBMCs and analysed using LC‑MS/MS‑based label‑free quantitative proteomics. Overall, 3,530 proteins were quantified across the samples, and 12 differentially expressed proteins were identified at both 2 months of treatment and at treatment completion, which were involved in cellular and metabolic processes, as well as binding and catalytic activity. Seven were downregulated proteins (HSPA1B/HSPA1A, HSPH1, HSP90AA1, lipopolysaccharide binding protein, complement component 9, calcyclin-binding protein, and protein transport protein Sec31A), and 5 proteins were upregulated (SEC14 domain and spectrin repeat-containing protein 1, leucine-rich repeat-containing 8 VRAC subunit D, homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase, NEDD8-activating enzyme E1 regulatory subunit, and N-acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase-like protein). The results showed that proteome analysis of PBMCs can be used as a novel technique to identify potential biomarkers to assess treatment efficacy in PTB. The novel proteins elucidated in this work may provide new insights for understanding PTB pathogenesis, treatment, and prognosis.   

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of proteins from PBMCs and Protein digestion Blood samples (4 mL) were collected using BD Vacutainer® CPT™ (cell preparation tubes with sodium heparin). Blood samples were then centrifuged following manufacturer's instruction, and PBMCs were collected. The PBMCs were subsequently washed thoroughly to remove the plasma, dextran, and other components of the gel in the CPT™ tube. The first wash was done with TBS by diluting 1:5. The whole tubes, which were about 6 mL each, were filled up. Then, the samples were centrifuged at 400 × g at room temperature for 10 minutes, to make sure the cells were pelleted. The supernatant was removed. The second wash was done by adding another 4 mL of TBS in the tube with a cell pellet. The pellet was gently dissolved by pipetting in and out a few times. Afterward, another centrifugation at 400 × g at room temperature for 5 minutes was performed to make sure that the cells were pelleted. The supernatant was removed. The third wash was done in a similar manner to the second wash. Following this, red blood cells were lysed by using a red cell lysis buffer with 150 mM of ammonium chloride. Approximately 2.5 mL of the lysis buffer was added to the cell pellet; then, the tubes were shacked to dissolve the pellet. The tubes were subsequently incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature, and centrifugated at 400 × g at room temperature for 5 minutes. Finally, the supernatant was decanted. PBMCs pellets were extracted into a 100-μL lysis buffer consisting of 0.1 M Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 M dithiothreitol (reducing agent), and 2% SDS. The samples were subsequently transported to the University of Bergen. The proteomics analysis was done at the Proteomics Unit of the University of Bergen (PROBE). Protein concentrations were measured using Direct Detect® (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), which is an infrared-based biomolecular quantitation system that provides accurate and precise results despite the presence of SDS. Proteins were digested using the FASP method see Hernadez-Valladares et al for details. In brief 20 ug of protein were reduced with 0.1 M dithiotreitol (DTT) and heated to 95 °C for 5 min. The proteins were alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA).  Buffer exchange was performed in a  Microcon-30 kDa Centrifugal filters (Millipore, #MRCF0R030) using 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5, freshly prepared).  Trypsin was dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and added to the samples in a 1:25 ratio, saples were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Desalting was done using Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate (2 mg sorbent per well, Waters #186001828BA). 2.3  LC/MS method  =. 5 ug of digested peptides  were pressure-loaded onto an HPLC column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, 3 μm, 75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), with trapping and desalting carried out at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes using 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid. Analytical separation was carried out with Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 (3 μm, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at a flow rate of 270 nL/min. The elution gradient was run using mobile phase A (0.1% of formic acid in water) and B (100% ACN). Tryptic peptides underwent a 20-minute isocratic elution with 80% buffer B followed by another 20-minute isocratic elution with 5% buffer B.  As peptides were eluted from the HPLC column, they were electrosprayed directly into a linear quadrupole ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Instrument control was through Tune 2.7.0 and Xcalibur 2.2. The mass spectrometric data was acquired in positive ion mode, with an 1,800-V ion spray voltage, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, and a capillary temperature of 260°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 240,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target value of 1e6 in the linear ion trap with the maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 300 ms). The 12 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold value of 3,000 counts and charge states of ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1e4 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy CID with a normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled. The maximum allowed accumulation time for CID was 150 ms, with an isolation window of 2 Da, an activation q value of 0.25, and an activation time of 10 ms. The resulting fragment ions were scanned out in the low-pressure ion trap at a normal scan rate and recorded with the secondary electron multipliers. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 40 seconds. Lock-mass internal calibration was not enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data management and analysis  Four softwares were used for this study: MaxQuant v1.5.5.1, Perseus v1.5.6.0, SPSS v25, and Excel 2019. The raw files from the LC-MS/MS were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 and the integrated Andromeda search engine in PROBE. Moreover, for both proteins and peptides, the maximum FDR was set to 0.01. MaxQuant maps the sequences of detected peptides and uses these peptide levels to determine the identified protein level. Since the protein levels likely vary between samples due to minor differences in handling and analysis, normalization of protein levels is essential. Consequently, label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithms within MaxQuant, MaxLFQ, were used to create the normalized protein intensities. They were normalized in relation to the levels of common proteins in a sample.  To construct a relative scale, LFQ uses the signal intensity and the number of observations of commonly observed peptides. This is used to assign new, normalized intensities of peptides, along with an absolute scale of summed-up peptide intensities, LFQ intensities. The LFQ algorithm is incorporated into the search engine of MaxQuant and produces two distinctive data outputs: samples without standardized levels and the same samples with LFQ corrected levels. While the unnormalized spectra – "Intensity" – have been merely used to detect the presence of proteins within a sample, the LFQ values – "LFQ intensity" – were used for statistical analysis.[29] The normalized data from MaxQuant were saved in a .txt file. The file was uploaded to Perseus version 1.5.6.0, and "LFQ intensities" were selected as expression data. Potential contaminants, reverse hits, rows only identified by site, and empty rows were removed from the matrix.[30] The different samples were then grouped into "0M", "2M", and "6M", and a matrix was generated. The intensities values were transformed to log2 values, and gene annotations were uploaded for Homo sapiens.  In order to compare the differing expression of proteins detected between the groups, ANOVA was carried out using permutation-based FDR, with the number of randomizations set at 250 and the FDR at 0.05. The data were normalized on the protein level with Z-scoring prior to hierarchical clustering. To visualize the results, a heat map was created to evaluate the significantly differently proteins' levels between the groups.  The significantly expressed proteins of interest were further analyzed with IBM SPSS Statistics 25. Besides one-way ANOVA, the Tukey's range test was also carried out. After running one-way ANOVA and Tukey's range test in SPSS, box plots were constructed for each of the significantly expressed proteins to illustrate the mean and the median Log2 intensity differences of these proteins detected in the PBMCs of PTB patients at different treatment time points (0M, 2M and 6M).

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed at exploring the proteomic profile of PBMCs to predict treatment response in pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). This was a pilot study conducted among 8 adult patients from Zanzibar, Tanzania with confirmed PTB. Blood samples were collected at baseline, at 2 months of treatment, and at the end of treatment at 6 months. Proteins were extracted from PBMCs and analyzed using LC-MS/MS based label free quantitative proteomics. Overall, 3,530 proteins were quantified across the samples, and 12 differentially expressed proteins were identified at both 2 months of treatment and at treatment completion, which were involved in cellular and metabolic processes, as well as binding and catalytic activity. Seven were downregulated proteins (HSPA1B/HSPA1A, HSPH1, HSP90AA1, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein, complement component 9, calcyclin-binding protein, and protein transport protein Sec31A), and 5 proteins were upregulated (SEC14 domain and spectrin repeat-containing protein 1, leucine-rich repeat-containing 8 VRAC subunit D, homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase, NEDD8-activating enzyme E1 regulatory subunit, and N-acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase-like protein). The results showed that proteome analysis of PBMCs can be used as a novel technique to identify protein abundance change with anti-tuberculosis treatment. The novel proteins elucidated in this work may provide new insights for understanding PTB pathogenesis, treatment, and prognosis.

### Keywords
Biomarkers; peripheral blood mononuclear cells; proteomics; pulmonary tuberculosis; treatment response.

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, University of BErgen
Centre of International Health, Department of Global  Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Even Birkeland

### Lab Head
Dr Tehmina Mustafa
Centre of International Health, Department of Global  Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, Norway


