### Accession
PXD041105

### Title
Mass spectrometric analyses of the oxidation state of Cys281 in peptide fragment.

### Description
Oxidized cysteine residues are highly reactive and can form functional covalent conjugates, of which the allosteric redox switch formed by the lysine-cysteine NOS bridge is an example. Here, we report a non-canonical FAD-dependent enzyme Orf1 that adds a glycine-derived N-formimidoyl group to glycinothricin to form the antibiotic BD-12. X-ray crystallography was used to investigate this complex enzymatic process, which showed Orf1 has two substrate-binding sites that sit 13.5 Å apart unlike canonical FAD-dependent oxidoreductases. One site could accommodate glycine and the other glycinothricin or glycylthricin. Moreover, an intermediate-enzyme adduct with a NOS-covalent linkage was observed in the later site, where it acts as a two-scissile-bond linkage facilitating nucleophilic addition and cofactor-free decarboxylation. The chain length of nucleophilic acceptors vies with bond cleavage sites at either N–O or O–S accounting for N-formimidoylation or N-iminoacetylation. The resultant product is no longer sensitive to aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, a strategy that antibiotic-producing species employ to counter drug resistance in competing species.

### Sample Protocol
Orf1 (50 nM) was incubated in a solution with 250 nM glycine for 30 seconds or 60 seconds, respectively. To stop the reactions, 100 mM N-acetylglycine was added, followed by addition of 40 mM dimedone to derivatize the sulfenic peptide if any. The samples were then subjected to overnight trypsin digestion in containing 25 mM NH4HCO3 with 5 g l-1 trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The Byonic software 4.2.10 (protein metric) was used for peptide identification. The search parameter was set as: precursor mass tolerance ~20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ~20 ppm, maximum missed cleavages ~5, and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464), oxidation (+15.994915), dimedone adduct (+138.068068) and methionine oxidation (+15.994915) with target protein database.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidized cysteine residues are highly reactive and can form functional covalent conjugates, of which the allosteric redox switch formed by the lysine-cysteine NOS bridge is an example. Here, we report a noncanonical FAD-dependent enzyme Orf1 that adds a glycine-derived N-formimidoyl group to glycinothricin to form the antibiotic BD-12. X-ray crystallography was used to investigate this complex enzymatic process, which showed Orf1 has two substrate-binding sites that sit 13.5&#x2009;&#xc5; apart unlike canonical FAD-dependent oxidoreductases. One site could accommodate glycine and the other glycinothricin or glycylthricin. Moreover, an intermediate-enzyme adduct with a NOS-covalent linkage was observed in the later site, where it acts as a two-scissile-bond linkage facilitating nucleophilic addition and cofactor-free decarboxylation. The chain length of nucleophilic acceptors vies with bond cleavage sites at either N-O or O-S accounting for N-formimidoylation or N-iminoacetylation. The resultant product is no longer sensitive to aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, a strategy that antibiotic-producing species employ to counter drug resistance in competing species.

### Keywords
N-formimmidolation and iminoacetylation enzyme

### Affiliations
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529 Taiwan
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yung-Lin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tsung-Lin Li
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529 Taiwan


