### Accession
PXD036103

### Title
Function of ERphagy receptors is regulated via phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination pathways

### Description
Selective autophagy of the ER (ERphagy) is an important regulator of ER remodeling and critical to maintain cellular homeostasis upon environmental changes. ERphagy receptors link the ER with autophagic membrane thus regulating ERphagy flux. We recently showed that members of the FAM134 family play overlapping and distinct roles during stress-induced ERphagy. Yet the mechanisms on how they are activated remain largely unknown. In this study we analyzed mTOR-mediated dynamic phosphorylation of FAM134 as a trigger of FAM134-driven ERphagy. An unbiased screen of kinase inhibitors revealed CK2 to be essential for FAM134B- and FAM134C-driven ERphagy upon mTOR inhibition. Identified dynamic phosphorylation sites on FAM134C in cells were fitting with predicted CK2 targeting sites, indicating a direct regulatory role of CK2 in FAM134-driven ERphagy. Using super-resolution microscopy, we showed that activity of CK2 is essential for the formation of high-density clusters of FAM134B and FAM134C. Consistently, FAM134B and FAM134C proteins carrying point mutations of selected Serin residues, within their reticulon homology domain, are unable to form high-density clusters. In addition, we provide evidence that the ubiquitination machinery is required for ERphagy and that FAM134B and FAM134C clustering is activated by phospho-dependent ubiquitination. Treatment with CK2 inhibitor SGC-CK2-1 prevents Torin1-induced ERphagy flux as well as ubiquitination of FAM134 proteins and consistently, treatment with E1 inhibitor suppresses Torin1-induced ERphagy flux. Therefore, we propose CK2 dependent phosphorylation of ERphagy receptors precedes ubiquitin-dependent ERphagy flux activation.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells stably expressing FAM134 proteins were cultured for 3 weeks in SILAC media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and streptomycin and labelled amino acids (L-arginine (Arg0), L-lysine (Lys0), L-arginine- U-13C6 99% (Arg6), L-lysine-4,4,5,5-D4 96–98% (Lys4), L-arginine-U-13C6-15N4 99% (Arg10), L-lysine- U-13C6-15N2 99% (Lys8)). To induce FAM134 protein expression, labelled U2OS cells were treated with doxycycline for 24h. Light-, Medium- or heavy-labeled cells were subjected to indicated conditions and harvested in ice-cold lysis buffer: 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.0), 120 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) NP40, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 & 2. Lysates from individual labelled cell lines were cleared by centrifugation at 20000 x g for 15 min at 4°C and mixed 1:1:1 ratio (light/medium/heavy) prior to overnight incubation at 4°C with monoclonal anti-HA-agarose antibody with constant mixing. Beads were then washed 3 times and bait proteins (FAM134s) were either directly trypsin digested on-beads or in gel and peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8).Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a reference proteome database containing human protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB using Andromeda search engine.Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 p.p.m. in MS mode, 20 p.p.m. in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and Phospho(STY)were searched as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosomal degradation, Chek1, Ck2, Er homeostasis, Er remodeling, Mtor, Ubiquitination, Fam134c, Fam134b, Er fragmentation, Selective autophagy, Atm, Stress response, Endoplasmic reticulum, Atr

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, D-55118 Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, D-55118 Mainz, Germany


