### Accession
PXD017144

### Title
Antagonistic regulation of apoptosis by polysulfides and thioredoxin via persulfidation of caspases

### Description
Hydrogen sulfide has been implicated in a large number of physiological processes including cell survival and death, encouraging research into its mechanisms of action and therapeutic potential. Recent studies suggest that the cellular effects of hydrogen sulfide are mediated in part by sulfane sulfur species including persulfides and polysulfides. In the present study, we investigated the apoptosis-modulating effects of polysulfides, in particular, in relation to the caspase cascade that mediates the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Biochemical analyses revealed that organic or synthetic polysulfides strongly and rapidly inhibited the enzymatic activity of caspase-3, a major effector protease in apoptosis. Enzyme inhibition was attributed to persulfidation of the catalytic cysteine. In apoptotically stimulated HeLa cells, short-term exposure to polysulfides triggered the persulfidation and deactivation of cleaved caspae-3. These effects were antagonized by the thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase system (Trx/TrxR). Indeed, Trx/TrxR restored the activity of polysulfide-inactivated caspase-3 in vitro, and inhibition of TrxR potentiated polysulfidemediated suppression of caspase-3 activity in situ. We further found that under conditions of low TrxR activity, early cell exposure to polysulfides lead to enhanced persulfidation of initiator caspase-9, resulting in decreased apoptosis. Beyond these observations, we show that the proenzymes, procaspase-3/-9, are basally persulfidated in resting (unstimulated) cells and become depersulfidated during their processing and activation. Inhibition of TrxR attenuated the depersulfidation and activation of caspase-9. Taken together, our results reveal that polysulfides target the caspase-9/3 cascade to suppress cancer cell apoptosis. The findings further suggest that Trx/TrxR-mediated depersulfidation may regulate caspase-dependent cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate, from cells that were treated with polysulfides, was sperated on SDS-PAGE.In gel digestion of the proteins sized 10-50kDa. LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MSMS data was analyzed by Proteome discoverer software and the identification was done by the Sequest search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide has been implicated in a large number of physiological processes including cell survival and death, encouraging research into its mechanisms of action and therapeutic potential. Results from recent studies suggest that the cellular effects of hydrogen sulfide are mediated in part by sulfane sulfur species, including persulfides and polysulfides. In the present study, we investigated the apoptosis-modulating effects of polysulfides, especially on the caspase cascade, which mediates the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Biochemical analyses revealed that organic or synthetic polysulfides strongly and rapidly inhibit the enzymatic activity of caspase-3, a major effector protease in apoptosis. We attributed the caspase-3 inhibition to persulfidation of its catalytic cysteine. In apoptotically stimulated HeLa cells, short-term exposure to polysulfides triggered the persulfidation and deactivation of cleaved caspase-3. These effects were antagonized by the thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase system (Trx/TrxR). Trx/TrxR restored the activity of polysulfide-inactivated caspase-3 <i>in vitro</i>, and TrxR inhibition potentiated polysulfide-mediated suppression of caspase-3 activity <i>in situ</i> We further found that under conditions of low TrxR activity, early cell exposure to polysulfides leads to enhanced persulfidation of initiator caspase-9 and decreases apoptosis. Notably, we show that the proenzymes procaspase-3 and -9 are basally persulfidated in resting (unstimulated) cells and become depersulfidated during their processing and activation. Inhibition of TrxR attenuated the depersulfidation and activation of caspase-9. Taken together, our results reveal that polysulfides target the caspase-9/3 cascade and thereby suppress cancer cell apoptosis, and highlight the role of Trx/TrxR-mediated depersulfidation in enabling caspase activation.

### Keywords
Persulfidation, Polysulfides, Caspases, Thioredoxin, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Moran Benhar
Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel


