### Accession
PXD038270

### Title
The oncogenic role of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. Gallolyticus-Phosphoproteome-Part1

### Description
Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (SGG), an opportunistic gram-positive pathogen responsible for septicemia and endocarditis in the elderly, is often associated with colon cancer (CRC). In this work, we investigated the oncogenic role of SGG strain UCN34 using the azoxymethane (AOM)-induced CRC model in vivo, organoids formation ex vivo and full proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis from murine colons. To identify SGG-specific pathogenic traits, the choice of the control bacterium was important, and we selected the genetically closest and non-pathogenic relative of SGG named S. gallolyticus subsp. macedonicus (SGM). We showed that SGG UCN34 accelerates colon tumor development in the murine CRC model. To test SGG’s capacity to induce pre-cancerous transformation of the murine colonic epithelium, we grew ex vivo organoids which revealed unusual structures with compact morphology. To understand the molecular changes induced by SGG UCN34, we compared full proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of murine colon chronically colonized by SGG UCN34 or SGM. We found that 136 proteins and 583 phosphorylation sites were differentially regulated following colonization by SGG UCN34. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) indicates a pro-tumoral shift induced specifically with SGG UCN34, as most proteins and phosphoproteins identified were associated with digestive cancer. Comprehensive analysis of the altered phosphoproteins using ROMA software revealed possible activation by SGG UCN34 of several cancer hallmark pathways, i.e. MAPK (ERK, JNK and p38), mTOR and integrin/ILK/actin signaling. Altogether, our results reveal for the first time that the oncogenic role of SGG UCN34 is associated with activation of multiple cancer-related signaling pathways which cannot be recapitulated in basic in vitro culture models.

### Sample Protocol
All proteins from previously frozen samples (tumors and healthy parts of murine colon) were extracted using AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen). Protein concentrations were estimated using NanoDrop A280 measures absorbance. The quantity of 300µg of samples were incubated overnight at -20°C with 80% MethOH, 0.1 M Ammonium Acetate glacial (buffer 1). Proteins were then precipitated by centrifugation at 14000 G for 15 min at 4°C and the pellets washed twice with 100 µl of buffer 1. Then the samples were dried on a SpeedVac (Thermofisher) vacuum concentrator. Proteins were resuspended in 100 µl of 8 M Urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced in 100 µl of 5 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at 57°C for one hour and then alkylated with 20 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea. Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added twice at 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:substrate, incubated at 37°C during 2 h and then overnight. Each sample were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and 90% of the starting material was enriched using TitansphereTM Phos-TiO kit centrifuge columns (GL Sciences, 5010-21312) as described by the manufacturer. After elution from the Spin tips, the phospho-peptides and the remaining 10% eluted peptides were vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (10 µL of 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus musculus (UP000000589) SwissProt database and a common database of contaminants using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications for proteomes. Phospho serines, threonines and tyrosines were also set as variable modification in phosphoproteome analyses. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks or 0.6 Da for phosphoproteome analyses. FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305) v3.9.3 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching for proteome setting and simple ratios for phosphoproteomes) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we investigated the oncogenic role of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (SGG), a gut bacterium associated with colorectal cancer (CRC). We showed that SGG UCN34 accelerates colon tumor development in a chemically induced CRC murine model. Full proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of murine colons chronically colonized by SGG UCN34 revealed that 164 proteins and 725 phosphorylation sites were differentially regulated. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) indicates a pro-tumoral shift specifically induced by SGG UCN34, as&#x2009;~&#x2009;90% of proteins and phosphoproteins identified were associated with digestive cancer. Comprehensive analysis of the altered phosphoproteins using ROMA software revealed up-regulation of several cancer hallmark pathways such as MAPK, mTOR and integrin/ILK/actin, affecting epithelial and stromal colonic cells. Importantly, an independent analysis of protein arrays of human colon tumors colonized with SGG showed up-regulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK pathways, providing clinical relevance to our findings. To test SGG's capacity to induce pre-cancerous transformation of the murine colonic epithelium, we grew ex vivo organoids which revealed unusual structures with compact morphology. Taken together, our results demonstrate the oncogenic role of SGG UCN34 in a murine model of CRC associated with activation of multiple cancer-related signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Streptococcus gallolyticus, Colorectal cancer, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


