### Accession
PXD040627

### Title
Expression of Blue Pigment Synthetase A from Streptomyces lavenduale Reveals Insights on the Effects of Refactoring Biosynthetic Megasynthases for Heterologous Expression in Escherichia coli

### Description
High GC bacteria from the genus Streptomyces harbor expansive secondary metabolism. The expression of biosynthetic proteins and the characterization and identification of biological “parts” for synthetic biology purposes from such pathways are of interest. However, the high GC content of proteins from actinomycetes in addition to the large size and multi-domain architecture of many biosynthetic proteins (such as non-ribosomal peptide synthetases; NRPSs, and polyketide synthases; PKSs often called “megasynthases”) often presents issues with full-length translation and folding.  Here we evaluate a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) from Streptomyces lavenduale, a multidomain “megasynthase” gene that comes from a high GC (72.5%) genome. While a preliminary step in revealing differences, to our knowledge this presents the first head-to-head comparison of codon-optimized sequences versus a native sequence of proteins of Streptomycete origin heterologously expressed in E. coli. We find that any disruption in co-translational folding from codon mismatch that compromises activity as measured by pigment titer is explainable via the formation of more inclusion bodies as opposed to compromising folding or posttranslational modification in the soluble fraction. This result supports that one could apply any refactoring strategies that improve soluble expression in E. coli without concern that the protein that reaches the soluble fraction has compromised folding.

### Sample Protocol
50 ug of each purified protein sample were precipitated using the established acetone precipitation method. Proteins were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 20% methanol, followed by reduction using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin: total protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system coupled to a Thermo scientific Obitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for the discovery of proteomics

### Data Protocol
The acquired LCMS raw data were converted to mgf files and searched against the latest UniProt E. coli protein database supplemented with BpsA and other common contaminant protein fasta sequences using Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). Phosphopantetheine modification to L-serine was defined as a variable modification in addition to other common structural modification parameters, such as carbamidomethyl and oxidized methionine. The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 5.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The quantitative report of phosphopantetheine-modified peptide was analyzed by Skyline v 22.2 (University of Washington).

### Publication Abstract
High GC bacteria from the genus Streptomyces harbor expansive secondary metabolism. The expression of biosynthetic proteins and the characterization and identification of biological "parts" for synthetic biology purposes from such pathways are of interest. However, the high GC content of proteins from actinomycetes in addition to the large size and multi-domain architecture of many biosynthetic proteins (such as non-ribosomal peptide synthetases; NRPSs, and polyketide synthases; PKSs often called "megasynthases") often presents issues with full-length translation and folding. Here we evaluate a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) from Streptomyces lavenduale, a multidomain "megasynthase" gene that comes from a high GC (72.5%) genome. While a preliminary step in revealing differences, to our knowledge this presents the first head-to-head comparison of codon-optimized sequences versus a native sequence of proteins of streptomycete origin heterologously expressed in E. coli. We found that any disruption in co-translational folding from codon mismatch that reduces the titer of indigoidine is explainable via the formation of more inclusion bodies as opposed to compromising folding or posttranslational modification in the soluble fraction. This result supports that one could apply any refactoring strategies that improve soluble expression in E. coli without concern that the protein that reaches the soluble fraction is differentially folded.

### Keywords
Natural products, Synthetic biology, Streptomyce, Refactoring, Codon optimization, Heterologous expression

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


