### Accession
PXD014019

### Title
Cancer associated fibroblast-derived WNT2 increases tumor angiogenesis in colon cancer

### Description
WNT2 is important for placenta vascularization and acts as a pro-angiogenic factor for liver and other endothelial cells (ECs). WNT2 induction has been shown in many carcinomas and is associated with tumor progression. In colorectal cancer (CRC) WNT2 is selectively elevated in cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs), leading to increased invasion and metastasis. However, if there is a role for WNT2 in colon cancer angiogenesis has not been addressed so far.  Here, we demonstrate that WNT2 enhances EC migration and invasion, while it induces ß catenin dependent signaling in only a small subset of HUVECs. We show that siRNA-mediated knockdown of WNT2 in CAFs reduced the growth of vessel-like structures significantly in a co-culture assay, while the overexpression of WNT2 in skin fibroblasts otherwise being devoid of WNT2 led to increased angiogenesis in vitro. In a xenograft model, overexpression of WNT2 in HCT116 led to enhanced tumor volume and vessel density. Moreover, WNT2 expression correlates with vessel markers in human CRC. Secretome profiling of CAFs revealed that proteins related to angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling are regulated by WNT2. Thus, stroma-derived WNT2 positively affects angiogenesis in CRC by shifting the balance towards pro-angiogenic signals.

### Sample Protocol
siRNA-mediated knockdown  siRNA-mediated knockdown of WNT2 in CAFs was conducted using Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent and SMARTpool ON-TARGETplus siRNA. Cells transfected with ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Pool served as controls. In brief, CAFs were seeded in antibiotic-free medium about 16 to 18 h before transfection into T75 cell culture flasks. 20 µl of Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX were added to 980 µl of OptiMEM™, mixed by inverting and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Meanwhile, 20 µl of siRNA were mixed into another 980 µl Opti MEM™. The contents of the two tubes were mixed together and after an incubation for 20 min at room temperature the mixture was added to the cells. Cells were incubated for 72 h at 37°C before further usage. Knockdowns were verified via qPCR.  Collection of supernatant Three biological replicates of CAF-NTC and CAF-siWNT2 were grown for 72 h after transfection with the respective siRNAs. They were washed twice with 1 x Dulbecco´s Phosphate Buffered Saline and were cultivated for 6 h under serumfree conditions in RPMI 1640. Supernatants were collected, filtered through 0.2 µm sterile-filters and precipitated in ethanol at a dilution factor of 1:5 overnight at  20°C.  Protein sample preparation The proteins were used for a filter-assisted protein digest as described previously. In short, the precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 4536xg for 30 min, the supernatant discarded and the protein pellet dried. After dissolving in sample buffer the protein concentration was determined and 20 µg of total protein was used for the digestion. After reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodacetamid (both Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) and dried via vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC-MS/MS for proteomics For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis the peptides were resolved in 5 µL 30% formic acid and diluted with 40 µL of mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 1 µL for the supernatant samples and 10 µL of cytoplasmic and nuclear samples were injected into the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to the QExactive Orbitrap MS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria).  Peptides were trapped on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed on a 50 cm × 75 μm Pepmap100 analytical column (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). For the supernatant samples 1 µL of sample was injected. The 85 min HPLC method included a 43 min gradient from 7% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For the cytoplasmic and nuclear samples 10 µL were injected. The 135 min HPLC method included a 95 min gradient from 8% to 40% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric settings were the same for all fractions. The resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1,400 m/z. The top eight abundant peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and resulting fragments analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.338 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
WNT2 acts as a pro-angiogenic factor in placental vascularization and increases angiogenesis in liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (ECs) and other ECs. Increased WNT2 expression is detectable in many carcinomas and participates in tumor progression. In human colorectal cancer (CRC), WNT2 is selectively elevated in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), leading to increased invasion and metastasis. However, if there is a role for WNT2 in colon cancer, angiogenesis was not addressed so far. We demonstrate that WNT2 enhances EC migration/invasion, while it induces canonical WNT signaling in a small subset of cells. Knockdown of WNT2 in CAFs significantly reduced angiogenesis in a physiologically relevant assay, which allows precise assessment of key angiogenic properties. In line with these results, expression of WNT2 in otherwise WNT2-devoid skin fibroblasts led to increased angiogenesis. In CRC xenografts, WNT2 overexpression resulted in enhanced vessel density and tumor volume. Moreover, WNT2 expression correlates with vessel markers in human CRC. Secretome profiling of CAFs by mass spectrometry and cytokine arrays revealed that proteins associated with pro-angiogenic functions are elevated by WNT2. These included extracellular matrix molecules, ANG-2, IL-6, G-CSF, and PGF. The latter three increased angiogenesis. Thus, stromal-derived WNT2 elevates angiogenesis in CRC by shifting the balance towards pro-angiogenic signals.

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Colon cancer, Tumor stroma, Huvec, Cancer associated fibroblasts, Wnt2

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


