### Accession
PXD026194

### Title
Conus striatus Venom Duct LC/MS/MS

### Description
The venom of cone snails is highly variable both between and within species, as well as spatially along the venom duct. However, defferences of defensive and predatory venoms in "hook-and-line" fish hunting clades and their venom duct origins has not been investigated. In this study a combination of proteomics and transcriptomic approaches were used to decode the venom profiles of C. striatus from the Pionoconus clade. The raw data files obtained from the reduced alkylated and digested venom duct sections (distal, central and proximal), injected predatory and defensive induced venoms are submitted here.

### Sample Protocol
Four adult specimens of C. striatus collected from Coral Reef in the Northern Great Barrier Reef, Australia were used for the study. Three specimens (A, B and C) were sacrificed and the distal (D), central (C) and proximal (P) thirds stripped of cellular content and 25% of the content used for further proteomic studies. Predatory and defensive induced injected venom was collected from Specimen D.  In house optimised method for conotoxin extraction from dissected cone snail venom ducts was used.   Stripped venom duct cells from each section were triturated with 500 μl chilled 30% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 1% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged for 20 min at 12,000g. The supernatant was removed and spun at 12,000 g for another 10 min to separate the fine insoluble material from the crude venom. Protein estimates were obtained using NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) A280 method. The venom extracts were immediately lyophilised until further use.  Aliquots of collected venom (50 μg) were lyophilized and reconstituted in 50 μL of freshly prepared 100 mM NH4HCO3 in 30% acetonitrile at pH 8 prior to reduction and alkylation using the previously described triethylphosphine/iodoethanol protocol. Sigma proteomics sequencing grade trypsin was used for enzyme digestion of reduced and alkylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
Native injected and dissected venoms, reduced alkylated venoms and trypsin digested venoms were centrifuged (12,000 g) to remove particulate matter prior to liquid chromatography-electrospray mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS) performed on an Sciex TripleTOF 5600 instrument coupled to a Shimadzu 30 series HPLC. HPLC separation was achieved on a Zorbax C18 4.6 x 150 mm column using a linear 1.3% B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (aq) min–1 gradient at a flow rate of 0.2 ml min-1 over 90 min. The gradient is optimised to elute the hydrophilic components in the beginning and hydrophobic protein like components towards the end of the run to capture the toxin peptides eluting in between. A cycle of one full scan of the mass range (MS) (300–2000 m/z) followed by multiple tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) was applied using a rolling collision energy relative to the m/z and charge state of the precursor ion up to a maximum of 80 eV.

### Publication Abstract
The venom duct origins of predatory and defensive venoms has not been studied for hook-and-line fish hunting cone snails despite the pharmacological importance of their venoms. To better understand the biochemistry and evolution of injected predatory and defensive venoms, we compared distal, central and proximal venom duct sections across three specimens of C. striatus (Pionoconus) using proteomic and transcriptomic approaches. A total of 370 conotoxin precursors were identified from the whole venom duct transcriptome. Milked defensive venom was enriched with a potent cocktail of proximally expressed inhibitory &#x3b1;-, &#x3c9;- and &#x3bc;-conotoxins compared to milked predatory venom. In contrast, excitatory &#x3ba;A-conotoxins dominated both the predatory and defensive venoms despite their distal expression, suggesting this class of conotoxin can be selectively expressed from the same duct segment in response to either a predatory or defensive stimuli. Given the high abundance of &#x3ba;A-conotoxins in the Pionoconus clade, we hypothesise that the &#x3ba;A-conotoxins have evolved through adaptive evolution following their repurposing from ancestral inhibitory A superfamily conotoxins to facilitate the dietary shift to fish hunting and species radiation in this clade.

### Keywords
Conus striatus, Trypsin digested, Reduced alkylated, Tripletof 5600

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience 
Institute for Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia

### Submitter
Himaya Siddhihalu Hewage

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Lewis
Institute for Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia


