### Accession
PXD012186

### Title
Impact of HPV16 E6 and E7 oncogenes together with Chlamydia trachomatis infection on proteome changes in immortalized oral keratinocytes

### Description
Certain types of Human papilloma viruses (HPV) are the etiological agents for cervical cancer. However, not all infections of high-risk HPVs will finally lead to cancer since most HPV infections are cleared without any consequences. Chlamydia trachomatis is the most prevalent sexual transmitted bacteria and is an obligatory intracellular pathogen exhibiting tropism in endocervical epithelial cells. Over the past decades, C. trachomatis is thought to be a potential co-factor for cervical cancer formation, but there are also studies that did not show such a correlation. To address this question in molecular terms, we stably expressed HPV16 E6 and E7 in spontaneously immortalized NOKs (normal oral keratinocytes) and performed SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) with or without C. trachomatis infection to study the impact of HPV16 oncogene expression and C. trachomatis infection on host proteome changes.

### Sample Protocol
In the first part of the study three groups of samples were compared: normal oral keratinocytes (NOKs pWPI) transduced with empty lentiviral vector, NOKs expressing HPV16 E6 and E7 oncogenes, and NOKs HPV16E6E7 infected with C. trachomatis (Ctr), the protein profile was studied after 24 and 48 hours of Ctr infection. In the second part the influence of Ctr infection on NOKs was studied without HPV16E6E7 expression. Triplicates were prepared in each group. The cells were isotopically labelled by triplex SILAC media: 13C6 Arg and D4 Lys (medium channel), 13C6 15N4 Arg and 13C6 15N2 Lys (heavy), triple label swap was applied. See the “Labelling scheme” for details. The cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate and the corresponding light, medium and heavy lysates were mixed in 1:1:1 protein ratio. The mixed lysates were digested and the digests were desalted. The peptides were separated by two-dimensional LC – first the high pH RPLC fractionation was performed, 13 fractions were collected, first two and the last one were combined. The fractions were then analyzed by nano-LC coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantification was performed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.0.1 coupled with Andromeda search engine. Data were searched against a database constructed by merging the reference proteome sets of Homo sapiens (UP000005640, Nov 2017), Human papillomavirus type 16 and type 18 (UP000106302 and UP000009109, Nov 2017) and Chlamydia trachomatis (UP000050023, Mar 2017). MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of common contaminants. The identification and quantification parameters of MaxQuant were set as follows: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled); maximal charge per peptide z=7; minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids; maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term, maximum number of variable modifications set to 5 per peptide; digestion with trypsin/P with maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search. Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation of peptide identification was based on target decoy approach using reverted search database. FDR filter of 0.01 was applied on peptide spectrum match level. For peptide quantitation Arg+6 [13C6] and Lys+4 [D4] were set for the medium channel and Arg+10 [13C6 15N4] and Lys+8 [13C6 15N2] were set for the heavy channel. Re-quantify function was enabled. Normalized ratios were used for the calculation of labelling site occupancies. For protein quantification, only protein groups with at least 2 unique peptides with SILAC ratio were considered. In total, 12 combined samples were analyzed, each one consisting of 11 fractions. For the purpose of MaxQuant evaluation the fractions from one sample were set as one experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Although the role of high-risk human papillomaviruses (hrHPVs) as etiological agents in cancer development has been intensively studied during the last decades, there is still the necessity of understanding the impact of the HPV <i>E6</i> and <i>E7</i> oncogenes on host cells, ultimately leading to malignant transformation. Here, we used newly established immortalized human keratinocytes with a well-defined HPV16 <i>E6E7</i> expression cassette to get a more complete and less biased overview of global changes induced by HPV16 by employing transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). This is the first study combining transcriptome and proteome data to characterize the impact of HPV oncogenes in human keratinocytes in comparison with their virus-negative counterparts. To enhance the informative value and accuracy of the RNA-Seq data, four different bioinformatic workflows were used. We identified potential novel upstream regulators (e.g., CNOT7, SPDEF, MITF, and PAX5) controlling distinct clusters of genes within the HPV-host cell network as well as distinct factors (e.g., CPPED1, LCP1, and TAGLN) with essential functions in cancer. Validated results in this study were compared to data sets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), demonstrating that several identified factors were also differentially expressed in cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC) and HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCs). This highly integrative approach allows the identification of novel HPV-induced cellular changes that are also reflected in cancer patients, providing a promising omics data set for future studies in both basic and translational research.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated cancers still remain a big health problem, especially in developing countries, despite the availability of prophylactic vaccines. Although HPV oncogenes have been intensively investigated for decades, a study applying recent advances in RNA-Seq and quantitative proteomic approaches to a precancerous model system with well-defined HPV oncogene expression alongside HPV-negative parental cells has been missing until now. Here, combined omics analyses reveal global changes caused by the viral oncogenes in a less biased way and allow the identification of novel factors and key cellular networks potentially promoting malignant transformation. In addition, this system also provides a basis for mechanistic research on novel key factors regulated by HPV oncogenes, especially those that are confirmed <i>in vivo</i> in cervical cancer as well as in head and neck cancer patient samples from TCGA data sets.

### Keywords
Human papillomavirus, Chlamydia trachomatis, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Division of Viral Transformation Mechanisms, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Klimentova

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Niebler
Division of Viral Transformation Mechanisms, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


