### Accession
PXD040273

### Title
Metaproteomics to study metabolic handoffs in the Idas modiolaeformis symbiosis

### Description
The goal of this study was to identify the key functions of the six main symbionts that are hosted in gills of the marine bivalve, Idas modiolaeformis, which lives at deep-sea hydrocarbon seeps and wood falls in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. These symbionts include the main autotrophic methane- and sulfur-oxidizing lineages (Methyloprofundus, Thioglobus, Thiodubillierella), as well as a Methylophagaceae methylotrophic autotroph, a flavobacterial degrader of complex polysaccharides Urechidicola and a Nitrincolaceae heterotroph that specializes in degradation of nitrogen-rich compounds such as peptides and nucleosides. Four I. modiolaeformis individuals were preserved in RNAlater following retrieval from a brine pool habitat in the Eastern Mediterranean at 1,150 m water depth (32° 13.4' N 34° 10.7' E), using a remotely-operated vehicle. RNAlater was discarded after 24 hours, and the specimens were kept at -80°C until DNA/RNA/protein co-extraction using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Cat. No. 80004, Qiagen).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and peptide preparation  DNA/RNA/protein co-extraction using AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Cat. No. 80004, Qiagen). We resuspended the protein precipitates from the 4 individuals in 60 µl of SDT lysis buffer [4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT] and heated to 95°C for 10 min. The SDT protein mixture was cleaned up, reduced, alkylated and digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol as described previously (Wiśniewski et al. 2009, Nat. Methods 6, p 359–362). We performed all centrifugation steps mentioned below at 14,000 x g. We combined lysates (60 μl) with 400 μl of urea solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and loaded it onto 10 kDa MWCO 500 μl centrifugal filters (VWR International) followed by centrifugation for 20 min. We washed filters once by applying 200 μl of urea solution followed by 20 min of centrifugation to remove any remaining SDS. We performed protein alkylation by adding 100 μl IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in urea solution) to each filter and incubating for 20 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation for 20 min. The filters were washed three times with 100 µL of urea solution with 15 min centrifugations, followed by a buffer exchange to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate). Buffer exchange was accomplished by three cycles of adding 100 μl of ABC buffer and centrifuging for 15 min. For tryptic digestion, we added 1 μg of MS grade trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 40 μl of ABC buffer to each filter and incubated for 16 hours in a wet chamber at 37°C. We eluted tryptic peptides by the addition of 50 μl 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuging for 20 min. Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  LC-MS/MS All proteomic samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as previously described (Mordant A. and M. Kleiner 2021,Microbiology Spectrum doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01877-21). We loaded 1.2 μg peptide of each sample onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (ThermoFisher Scientific) in loading solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Elution and separation of peptides on the analytical column (75 cm x 75 µm EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material, Thermo Fisher Scientific; heated to 60 °C) was achieved at a flow rate of 300 ml min-1 using a 140 min gradient going from 95 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and 5% buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) to 31 % buffer B in 102 min, then to 50 % B in 18 min, and finally to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 99 % B. The analytical column was connected to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Eluting peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization (ESI). Carryover was reduced by a wash run (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile, 99 % eluent B) between samples. MS1 spectra were acquired by performing a full MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 on a 380 to 1600 m/z window. MS2 spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition selecting for fragmentation the 15 most abundant peptide ions (Top15) from the precursor MS1 spectra. A normalized collision energy of 25 was applied in the HCD cell to generate the peptide fragments for MS2 spectra. Other settings of the data-dependent acquisition included: a maximum injection time of 100 ms, a dynamic exclusion of 25 sec, and the exclusion of ions of +1 charge state from fragmentation. About 50,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification We constructed a protein sequence database for protein identification using the protein sequences predicted from the 7 metagenome-assembled genomes obtained in this study (NCBI accession number PRJNA930646). To identify peptides from the host, we used the annotated protein sequences of the bathymodioline mussel Bathymodiolus childressi obtained in a previous study (PRIDE PXD008089-1) (Assié et al. 2020, ISME J., 14:104-22), since no annotated Idas protein sequences were available. We added sequences of common laboratory contaminants by appending the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The final database contained 49,401 protein sequences and is included with this PRIDE submission in fasta format. Searches of the MS/MS spectra against this database were performed with the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523 as previously describedby (Mordant A. and M. Kleiner 2021, Microbiology Spectrum doi doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01877-21). The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer and only peptides identified at a 5% FDR were retained for protein identification. Proteins were inferred from peptide identifications using the Protein-FDR Validator node in Proteome Discoverer with a target FDR of 5%. To estimate species abundances based on proteinaceous biomass using the metaproteomic data we followed the previously-described approach (Kleiner et al. 2017, Nat. Commun., 8: 1558) with the added filter criterion of requiring two protein-unique peptides for a protein to be retained for biomass calculations.

### Publication Abstract
Bathymodioline mussels rely on thiotrophic and/or methanotrophic chemosynthetic symbionts for nutrition, yet, secondary heterotrophic symbionts are often present and play an unknown role in the fitness of the organism. The bathymodioline Idas mussels that thrive in gas seeps and on sunken wood in the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, host at least six symbiont lineages that often co-occur. These lineages include the primary symbionts chemosynthetic methane- and sulfur-oxidizing gammaproteobacteria, and the secondary symbionts, Methylophagaceae, Nitrincolaceae and Flavobacteriaceae, whose physiology and metabolism are obscure. Little is known about if and how these symbionts interact or exchange metabolites. Here we curated metagenome-assembled genomes of Idas modiolaeformis symbionts and used genome-centered metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics to assess key symbiont functions. The Methylophagaceae symbiont is a methylotrophic autotroph, as it encoded and expressed the ribulose monophosphate and Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle enzymes, particularly RuBisCO. The Nitrincolaceae ASP10-02a symbiont likely fuels its metabolism with nitrogen-rich macromolecules and may provide the holobiont with vitamin B12. The Urechidicola (Flavobacteriaceae) symbionts likely degrade glycans and may remove NO. Our findings indicate that these flexible associations allow for expanding the range of substrates and environmental niches, via new metabolic functions and handoffs.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Metagenomics, Deep-sea, Bacteria-animal symbiosis, Metaproteomics, Mollusk, 1d-lc-ms/ms, Metaproteome, Chemosynthesis, Bivalve, Metagenome

### Affiliations
PMB, North Carolina State University, USA
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Simina Vintila

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
PMB, North Carolina State University, USA


