### Accession
PXD005745

### Title
Quantitative proteomics shows extensive remodelling induced by N limitation in Prochlorococcus sp. SS120 C4PR_LIV

### Description
Prochlorococcus is the most abundant photosynthetic organism on Earth, contributing significantly to the global primary production and playing a prominent role in biogeochemical cycles. Prochlorococcus requires the capability to accommodate to environmental changes in order to proliferate in oligotrophic oceans, in particular regarding nitrogen availability. A precise knowledge of the composition and changes of the proteome is necessary to gain fundamental insights into such response. Here we study the effects of extreme nitrogen limitation, a feature of the oligotrophic oceans inhabited by this organism.

### Sample Protocol
Prochlorococcus marinus sp. strain SS120 (low-light adapted ecotype) was routinely cultured in polycarbonate flasks (Nalgene) using PCR-S11 medium as described (16). The seawater used as basis for this medium was kindly provided by the Instituto Español de Oceanografía (Spain). Cultures were grown in a culture room at 24 ºC under continuous blue irradiance (4 µE m -2 s-1). Growth was determined by measuring the absorbance of cultures at 674 nm and cells were collected during the exponential phase of growth.Cultures (10 L) reaching 0.05 units of absorbance at 674 nm were split into two aliquots: one used as control culture while 100 µM of azaserine (O-(2-Diazoacetyl)-L-serine, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA) was added to the other. They were then kept under light and temperature standard conditions and the cells were collected at the indicated times. Cells were harvested at 26,000 g for 8 min at 4 ºC using an Avanti J-25 Beckman centrifuge equipped with a JA-14 rotor. For proteomic studies cells were resuspended in 2 mL of cold 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 mM of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Samples were stored at -20/-80 ºC until used.Samples containing 100 µg of protein were incubated with Rapigest (Waters Corporation) at a final concentration of 0.05 % (w/v) for 10 min at 80 °C. Samples were then reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 9 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Finally, trypsin (50:1) was added and samples incubated overnight at 37 °C. To stop the proteolytic reaction and to inactivate and precipitate the detergent, TFA (final concentration 0.5 % (v/v)) was added, followed by incubation for 45 min at 37 °C. To remove all insoluble material, samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. All samples were analyzed as tryptic peptides, resolved by high-resolution liquid chromatography (U3000 Thermo Scientific) prior to tandem mass spectrometry. The Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) system was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The peptide mixture was trapped onto a Symmetry C18 precolumn (180 µm id, 20 mm long, 5 µm particles) (Waters Corporation) over 3 min, at a flow rate of 25 µL/min in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile /0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Bound peptides were resolved on a nanoAcquity UPLC C18 column (75 µm id, 150 mm long, 3 µm particles) (Waters corporation) at 300 nL/min over a 240 min linear gradient from 3 to 85% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v formic acid, controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions were isolated and sequentially fragmented. Precursors selected were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated by Proteome discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) using default parameters. The peak lists obtained were searched against a database composed of all entries in Uniprot database (www.uniprot.org) for Prochlorococcus strain SS120 (retrieved on May 18, 2015, 1,881 entries) using MASCOT as search engine (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science). Carbamidomethylation was set up as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable, allowing one trypsin missed cleavage, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.01 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the decoy database option in MASCOT.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Prochlorococcus</i> requires the capability to accommodate to environmental changes in order to proliferate in oligotrophic oceans, in particular regarding nitrogen availability. A precise knowledge of the composition and changes in the proteome can yield fundamental insights into such a response. Here we report a detailed proteome analysis of the important model cyanobacterium <i>Prochlorococcus marinus</i> SS120 after treatment with azaserine, an inhibitor of ferredoxin-dependent glutamate synthase (GOGAT), to simulate extreme nitrogen starvation. In total, 1,072 proteins, corresponding to 57% of the theoretical proteome, were identified-the maximum proteome coverage obtained for any <i>Prochlorococcus</i> strain thus far. Spectral intensity, calibrated quantification by the Hi3 method, was obtained for 1,007 proteins. Statistically significant changes (<i>P</i>&#xa0;value of &lt;0.05) were observed for 408 proteins, with the majority of proteins (92.4%) downregulated after 8&#xa0;h of treatment. There was a strong decrease in ribosomal proteins upon azaserine addition, while many transporters were increased. The regulatory proteins P<sub>II</sub> and PipX were decreased, and the global nitrogen regulator NtcA was upregulated. Furthermore, our data for <i>Prochlorococcus</i> indicate that NtcA also participates in the regulation of photosynthesis. <i>Prochlorococcus</i> responds to the lack of nitrogen by slowing down translation, while inducing photosynthetic cyclic electron flow and biosynthesis of proteins involved in nitrogen uptake and assimilation. <b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Prochlorococcus</i> is the most abundant photosynthetic organism on Earth, contributing significantly to global primary production and playing a prominent role in biogeochemical cycles. Here we study the effects of extreme nitrogen limitation, a feature of the oligotrophic oceans inhabited by this organism. Quantitative proteomics allowed an accurate quantification of the <i>Prochlorococcus</i> proteome, finding three main responses to nitrogen limitation: upregulation of nitrogen assimilation-related proteins, including transporters; downregulation of ribosome proteins; and induction of the photosystem II cyclic electron flow. This suggests that nitrogen limitation affects a range of metabolic processes far wider than initially believed, with the ultimate goal of saving nitrogen and maximizing the nitrogen uptake and assimilation capabilities of the cell.

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, N metabolism, C metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Guadalupe Gomez Baena

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J. Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


