### Accession
PXD033002

### Title
TLR4 activation primes human macrophages for non-canonical caspase-4 inflammasome-induced extracellular vesicle secretion

### Description
Human macrophages secrete extracellular vesicles loaded with numerous immunoregulatory proteins. Here we employed high throughput quantitative proteomics to characterize the modulation of vesicle-mediated protein secretion during non-canonical caspase-4/5-dependent inflammasome activation. We show that human macrophages activate robust caspase-4- dependent extracellular vesicle secretion upon transfection of LPS, and this process is also partially dependent on NLRP-3 and caspase-5. Similar effect occurs with delivery of the LPS with E. coli-derived outer membrane vesicles. Moreover, sensitization of the macrophages through TLR4 prior to LPS transfection dramatically augments the EV-mediated protein secretion. Our data demonstrate that this process differs significantly from ATP-induced vesiculation, and is dependent on autocrine interferon signal associated with TLR4 activation. TLR4 activation preceding the non-canonical inflammasome activation significantly enhances vesicle-mediated secretion of inflammasome components caspase-1, ASC and lytic cell death effectors GSDMD, MLKL and NINJ1, suggesting that inflammatory EV transfer may exert paracrine effects in recipient cells. Moreover, using bioinformatic methods, we identify 15-deoxy-delta-12,14-prostaglandin J2 and parthenolide as inhibitors of caspase-4-mediated inflammation and vesicle secretion, indicating potential new therapeutic potential of these anti-inflammatory drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned cell culture media were cleared from cells and large cell debris by serial centrifugation at 500 g (10 min) and 3000 g (30 min). Then cell-free culture supernatants were concentrated with Amicon 100 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Millipore) and EV were isolated by ultracentrifugation using SW41 rotor (Beckman). Ultracentrifugation was performed at 34,000 rpm (k-factor 180, average rcf 142,000 g) for 2 h. After two ultracentrifugations with intermediate PBS wash, the EV pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of sterile PBS.  For proteomics, the EV sample was mixed with 10 µl 1% ProteaseMax Surfactant (Promega, Madison, WI) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich). Samples were vortexed for 1 minute, heated at 95°C for 5 minutes before sonication for 20 minutes in water bath. Cysteins were reduced with 10mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, Winston Park, Canada) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 20 min at room temperature, and proteins were digested by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were purified and concentrated using C18 microcolumns (C18 Empore Extraction Disk, Varian, St. Paul, MN). The peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Easy nLC1000 connected to a QExactive HF, Thermo) using a 60 minute separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008) for protein identification and label-free quantification. Parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Database search was done against Uniprot human (version Sept 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Interferon, Caspase-4, Macrophages, Non-canonical inflammasome

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


