### Accession
PXD033863

### Title
Sox9 directs divergent epigenomic states in brain tumor subtypes

### Description
Epigenetic dysregulation is a universal feature of cancer that results in altered patterns of gene expression that drive malignancy. Brain tumors exhibit subtype-specific epigenetic alterations, however the molecular mechanisms responsible for these diverse epigenetic states remain unclear. Here we show that the developmental transcription factor Sox9 differentially regulates epigenomic states in high-grade glioma (HGG) and ependymoma (EPN). These contrasting roles for Sox9 correspond with protein interactions with histone deacetylating complexes in HGG, and association with the Rela oncofusion in EPN. Together, our studies demonstrate how epigenomic states are differentially regulated in distinct subtypes of brain tumors, while revealing divergent roles for Sox9 in HGG and EPN tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissue was collected, and nuclear extracts were prepared that was further subjected to immunoprecipitation with Sox9. The eluted proteins were run on a gel and in-gel digested with trypsin, followed by loading onto a mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using Proteome Discoverer and Mascot algorithm and quantification was done with label-free iBAQ approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription, High grade glioma, Epigenetics, Histone, Ependymoma

### Affiliations
Baylor College of Medicine
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy Department of Neurosurgery Baylor College of Medicine  Houston, Texas, USA

### Submitter
Antrix Jain

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Deneen
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy Department of Neurosurgery Baylor College of Medicine  Houston, Texas, USA


