### Accession
PXD021368

### Title
Isolation and characterization of multi-protein complexes enriched in the K-Cl co-transporter 2 from brain plasma membranes

### Description
Kcc2 plays a critical role in determining the efficacy of synaptic inhibition, however, the cellular mechanism neurons use to regulate its membrane trafficking, stability and activity are ill-defined. To address these issues, we used affinity purification to isolate stable multi-protein complexes of Kcc2 from the plasma membrane of murine forebrain. We resolved these using Blue-native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) coupled to LC-MS/MS and label-free quantification. Purified Kcc2 migrated as distinct molecular species of 300, 600 and 800 kDa following BN-PAGE. In excess of 90% coverage of the soluble N- and C-termini of Kcc2 was obtained. In total we identified 246 proteins significantly associated with Kcc2. The 300kDa species largely contained Kcc2, which is consistent with a dimeric quaternary structure for this transporter. The 600 and 800 kDa species represented stable multi-protein complexes of Kcc2. We identified a set of novel structural, ion transporting, immune related and signaling protein interactors, that are present at both excitatory and inhibitory synapses, consistent with the proposed localization of Kcc2. These included spectrins, C1qa/b/c and the IP3 receptor. We also identified interactors more directly associated with phosphorylation; Akap5, Akap13 and Lmtk3. Finally, we used LC-MS/MS on the same purified endogenous plasma membrane Kcc2 to detect phosphorylation sites. We detected 11 sites with high confidence, including known and novel sites. Collectively our experiments demonstrate that Kcc2 is associated with components of the neuronal cytoskeleton and signaling molecules that may act to regulate transporter membrane trafficking, stability, and activity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein G Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) were washed 3 times with phosphate buffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20 (PBS-Tween). The beads were resuspended in PBS-Tween and incubated overnight at 4C with antibodies for the target protein at an experimentally predetermined bead:antibody ratio (Figure S1). The antibody was crosslinked onto the beads by washing twice with 0.2M triethanolamine (pH 8.2) (TEA), and then incubated for 30 minutes with 40mM dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) in TEA at room temperature. The beads were transferred to 50mM Tris (pH7.5) and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes.  The beads were then washed 3 times with PBS-Tween and resuspended in solubilized plasma membranes in ice cold Triton lysis buffer, supplemented with mini cOmplete protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP. The immunoprecipitation reaction was incubated overnight at 4C. The beads were then washed 3 times with PBS-Tween and eluted either with 2x sample buffer (for SDS-PAGE) or soft elution buffer (0.2% (w/V) SDS, 0.1% (V/V) Tween-20, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 8.0) (Antrobus and Borner, 2011) (for BN-PAGE). Excised gel bands were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and subjected to modified in-gel trypsin digestion, as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Briefly, gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 minutes and then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and incubated for 45 minutes at 4ºC.  The excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution.  Samples were then incubated at 37ºC overnight.  Peptides were extracted by washing with 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hour).  The samples were stored at 4ºC until analysis. Before analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng and Gygi, 2001). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco, CA, USA) onto the column. A gradient was formed between solvent A (97.5% water, 2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), and increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 2.5% water and 0.1% formic acid). Acquisition time was 16-79 minutes. As each peptide was eluted, they were subjected to NanoSpray ionization (NSI) and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA).  MS1 was set at 70k, with a scan range of m/z 85-2000, charge-state screening parameters +2 to +5, using a centroid acquisition mode, with a precursor ion isolation window of 2 m/z and 35% normalized collision energy. Eluting peptides were detected and the most intense were isolated using the Top 10 scan mode and fragmented by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). MS2 ions were analyzed by an Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a resolution of 17.5k and the dynamic exclusion settings; 30 second repeat duration, 60 second exclusion duration, n=1, 10ppm mass width, to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using the MSGF+ (Kim and Pevzner, 2014). Raw mzXML files were used to search the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (last modified May 4th 2020, containing 21989 sequences) also containing the Thermo list of common contaminants. The search was carried out using settings for high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometers, tryptic digestion, no limit to enzyme missed cleavages, 20ppm precursor mass tolerance, charge states of +2 to +5, minimum and maximum peptide lengths of 6 to 40 amino acids in length respectively, and a fixed modification of standard amino acids with C+57. For phosphopetide detection a variable modification of 79.9663 mass units to serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included in the database searches.  Phosphorylation assignments were determined by the A score algorithm (Beausoleil et al., 2006). Peptide identification was scored by MSGF+ Q- (PSM-level target-decoy approach) and E- (expected number of peptides in a random database) scores. These were used for quality control in the initial protein screening process (Kim et al., 2008b). The resulting mzID files from the spectral searches were combined with mzXML files using the MSnbase package in R (accessed July 20th 2020), and used to calculate peptide counts and the quantitative measurement; spectral index normalized to global intensity (SIGI). This has previously been shown to be an effective measurement for label-free protein quantification and to normalize replicate data well (Griffin et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kcc2, Interactome, Proteome

### Affiliations
Tufts University

### Submitter
Joshua Smalley

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Moss
Tufts University


