### Accession
PXD037561

### Title
The claudin-like apicomplexan microneme protein is essential for Plasmodium berghei sporozoite infectivity in the mosquito and mammalian hosts

### Description
Here we characterize the function of a microneme protein expressed both in merozoites and sporozoites, the claudin-like protein CLAMP. We used a conditional genome editing strategy in a rodent malaria model to generate CLAMP-deficient sporozoites. In the absence of CLAMP, sporozoites failed to invade mosquito salivary glands and mammalian hepatocytes, and showed defects in gliding motility and microneme secretion. Our data establish that CLAMP plays an essential role across Plasmodium invasive stages, and might represent a potential target for transmission-blocking antimalarial strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly dissected untreated clampcKO sporozoites were lysed. After centrifugation supernatants were preclearing overnight. Precleared lysates were subjected to CLAMP-Flag immunoprecipitation using Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel. PbGFP parasites with untagged proteins were used as a control and treated in the same way. After washes, proteins on beads were directly eluted in Laemmli buffer. After centrifugation, supernatants were collected for further analysis. Samples were loaded on a polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) for short migration (5 mm). Lanes containing the samples were then cut into small pieces and submitted to trypsin digestion. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces, desalted by StageTips and analysed by LC-MS/MS system (nanoElute coupled to a timsTOF PRO mass spectrometer, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic files (mgf) were generated using Data Analysis 5.1 (Bruker) and processed with X!Tandem pipeline version 0.2.36 (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline) using databases from UniProt or PlasmoDB. The databases used were: Contaminants_20160129 containing a list of common contaminants, Anopheles_stephensi_UP.fasta (Date 09/2018, number of entries: 11,767) and PlasmoDB_PB_39_PbergheiANKA (Date 09/2018, number entered: 5,076). The search parameters were : maximum 1 missed cleavage allowed, Cys-CAM as fixed modification, Met-Ox and acetyl N-term as variable modifications. MS mass error tolerances were adapted to instrument. MS1 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. MS2 mass error tolerance were set to 25 ppm. Protein lists were filtered (FDR < 1% at peptide and protein level, minimum 1 peptide per protein).

### Publication Abstract
Invasion of host cells by apicomplexan parasites such as Toxoplasma and Plasmodium spp requires the sequential secretion of the parasite apical organelles, the micronemes and the rhoptries. The claudin-like apicomplexan microneme protein (CLAMP) is a conserved protein that plays an essential role during invasion by Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites and in Plasmodium falciparum asexual blood stages. CLAMP is also expressed in Plasmodium sporozoites, the mosquito-transmitted forms of the malaria parasite, but its role in this stage is still unknown. CLAMP is essential for Plasmodium blood stage growth and is refractory to conventional gene deletion. To circumvent this obstacle and study the function of CLAMP in sporozoites, we used a conditional genome editing strategy based on the dimerisable Cre recombinase in the rodent malaria model parasite P. berghei. We successfully deleted clamp gene in P. berghei transmission stages and analyzed the functional consequences on sporozoite infectivity. In mosquitoes, sporozoite development and egress from oocysts was not affected in conditional mutants. However, invasion of the mosquito salivary glands was dramatically reduced upon deletion of clamp gene. In addition, CLAMP-deficient sporozoites were impaired in cell traversal and productive invasion of mammalian hepatocytes. This severe phenotype was associated with major defects in gliding motility and with reduced shedding of the sporozoite adhesin TRAP. Expansion microscopy revealed partial colocalization of CLAMP and TRAP in a subset of micronemes, and a distinct accumulation of CLAMP at the apical tip of sporozoites. Collectively, these results demonstrate that CLAMP is essential across invasive stages of the malaria parasite, and support a role of the protein upstream of host cell invasion, possibly by regulating the secretion or function of adhesins in Plasmodium sporozoites.

### Keywords
Plasmodium; malaria; sporozoites; conditional mutagenesis; clamp

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, UMS PASS, Plateforme Post-génomique de la Pitié Salpêtrière (P3S), 75013, Paris, France

### Submitter
Soumia HAMADA

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, UMS PASS, Plateforme Post-génomique de la Pitié Salpêtrière (P3S), 75013, Paris, France


