### Accession
PXD046452

### Title
Computational prediction and experimental validation identify functionally conserved lncRNAs from zebrafish to human

### Description
Functional studies of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have long been hindered by a lack of methods to assess their evolution. Here, we present lncHOME (lncRNA Homology Explorer), a computational pipeline that identifies a unique coPARSE-lncRNA class with conserved genomic locations and patterns of RNA binding protein (RBP) binding sites. Remarkably, several hundred human coPARSE-lncRNAs can be evolutionarily traced to zebrafish. Using CRISPR-Cas12a knockout and rescue assays, we found that knocking out many human coPARSE-lncRNAs led to cell proliferation defects that were rescued by predicted zebrafish homologs. Knocking down the coPARSE-lncRNAs in zebrafish embryos caused severe developmental delays that were rescued by human homologs. Moreover, we verified that human, mouse, and zebrafish coPARSE-lncRNA homologs tend to bind similar RBPs with their conserved fuctions relying on specific RBP binding sites. Overall, our study demonstrates a comprehensive approach for studying functional conservation of lncRNAs and implicates numerous lncRNAs in regulating cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
The in vitro RNA pull-down assay was performed. Briefly, 100 pmol purified biotinylated RNA of candidate coPARSE lncRNAs or luciferase fragment control was refolded and incubated with the lysate from 20 million human HeLa cells, mouse v6.5 cell or 2500 zebrafish embryos at 4 °C for 2 hours. Pre-washed Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 beads (Invitrogen) were then added into the mixture and incubated at 4 °C for 45 minutes.  After series of washing, pull-down proteins were eluted in 15 μl elution buffer (1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 1 M NaCl) and were subjected for mass-spectrometry or western blotting analysis. The protein samples were analyzed by 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by Fast Silver Stain Kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins were recovered from the bands in 2-3 split fragments per lane and each fragment was independently subjected to further mass spectrometry analysis (performed by Tsinghua University Phoenix Center using LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer). Aliquots of 5 µL analytes were loaded into an autosampler for LC-MS/MS analysis with nanoelectrospray ionization (electrospray voltage:2400v). They were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.250 µl/min with a Thermo-Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 4.5 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (300-1600 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by top-speed MS/MS scans at 35% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the human, mouse, and zebrafish protein sequences from UniProt using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. FDR was determined based on PSMs when searched against the reverse, decoy database. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Functional studies of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been hindered by the lack of methods to assess their evolution. Here we present lncRNA Homology Explorer (lncHOME), a computational pipeline that identifies a unique class of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) with conserved genomic locations and patterns of RNA-binding protein (RBP) binding sites (coPARSE-lncRNAs). Remarkably, several hundred human coPARSE-lncRNAs can be evolutionarily traced to zebrafish. Using CRISPR-Cas12a knockout and rescue assays, we found that knocking out many human coPARSE-lncRNAs led to cell proliferation defects, which were subsequently rescued by predicted zebrafish homologs. Knocking down coPARSE-lncRNAs in zebrafish embryos caused severe developmental delays that were rescued by human homologs. Furthermore, we verified that human, mouse and zebrafish coPARSE-lncRNA homologs tend to bind similar RBPs with their conserved functions relying on specific RBP-binding sites. Overall, our study demonstrates a comprehensive approach for studying the functional conservation of lncRNAs and implicates numerous lncRNAs in regulating vertebrate physiology.

### Keywords
Human, Rbp, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Wenze Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Qiangfeng Cliff Zhang
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.


