### Accession
PXD010849

### Title
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) production activates unconventional secretion of antioxidant proteins

### Description
Signal-sequence-lacking superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) is secreted upon nutrient starvation, but the physiological relevance of this secretion is unclear. We now report that secreted SOD1 is functionally active. In addition, a secretome analysis has revealed number of other secreted cytoplasmic antioxidant enzymes, including both thioredoxins, (Trx1 and Trx2), and the peroxiredoxin Ahp1. Our data reveal that starvation triggers increased mitochondrial activity, leading to increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Inhibiting mitochondrial activity or ROS, inhibited secretion of the antioxidants. We suggest elevated ROS that evade cytoplasmic antioxidants, can permeate across the plasma membrane to the extracellular space. Cells secrete antioxidants to prevent ROS-mediated damage to the extracellular space. These findings thus provide an understanding of why cells secrete signal sequence lacking proteins like SOD1 and the larger family of antioxidants.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were inoculated at a density of 0.003-0.006 OD600/mL in SC medium at 25C. The following day, when cells had reached OD600 of 0.4-0.7 equal numbers of cells (16 OD600 units) were harvested, washed twice in sterile water, resuspended in 1.6 mL of 2% potassium acetate and incubated for 2.5 hours. When growing cells were to be analyzed 16 OD600 units were directly harvested. The cell wall extraction buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.4, 2% sorbitol) was always prepared fresh before use and kept on ice. To ensure no loss of cells and to avoid cell contamination in the extracted buffer, 2mL tubes were siliconized (Sigmacote) prior to collection. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000xg for 3 minutes at 4C, medium or potassium acetate was removed and 1.6 mL of cold extraction buffer was added. Cells were resuspended gently by inversion and incubated on ice for 10 minutes, after which they were centrifuged as before, 3000xg for 3 minutes at 4C, and 1.3 mL of extraction buffer was removed to ensure no cell contamination. . For preparation of cell wall extracts for mass spec. analysis, no BSA carrier protein was added and the proteins were precipitated with acetone and not TCA. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (27 nmols, 1 h, 37°C) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (54 nmol, 30 min, 25 ºC). The resulting protein extract was first diluted 1/3 with 200 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with 0.9 µg LysC (Wako, cat # 129-02541) overnight at 37ºC and then diluted 1/2 and digested with 0.9 µg of trypsin (Promega, cat # V5113) for eight hours at 37˚C. Finally, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixes were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column at a flow rate of 1.5-2 μl/min using a wash-volume of 4 times the injection volume, and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top ten most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.  Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science (Perkins et al., 1999)) were used for peptide identification. Samples were searched against a S. cerevisiae database (version February 2014) containing a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR < 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Unconventional secretion, Ros, Antioxidant

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
Center for Genomic Regulation, 08003 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Amy Curwin
Center for Genomic Regulation, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


