### Accession
PXD015943

### Title
Chemical phosphoproteomics reveals kinase network topologies associated to genotypes and phenotypes of cancer cells.

### Description
We compare the in vitro specificity profiles of several kinase inhibitors with their effects on cellular phosphoproteomes. For this aim, we developed an algorithm which utilizes information on kinase inhibitor selectivity to determine the most probable kinase(s) acting upstream of phosphorylation sites present in phosphoproteomics data obtained from cancer cells treated with kinase inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer. This concentration was reduced to 2 M with 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis-HLB cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot. Label-free quantification was performed using Pescal, a in-house developed software that uses extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all the peptides identified in at least one sample across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how oncogenic mutations rewire regulatory-protein networks is important for rationalizing the mechanisms of oncogenesis and for individualizing anticancer treatments. We report a chemical phosphoproteomics method to elucidate the topology of kinase-signaling networks in mammalian cells. We identified &gt;6,000 protein phosphorylation sites that can be used to infer &gt;1,500 kinase-kinase interactions and devised algorithms that can reconstruct kinase network topologies from these phosphoproteomics data. Application of our methods to primary acute myeloid leukemia and breast cancer tumors quantified the relationship between kinase expression and activity, and enabled the identification of hitherto unknown kinase network topologies associated with drug-resistant phenotypes or specific genetic mutations. Using orthogonal methods we validated that PIK3CA wild-type cells adopt MAPK-dependent circuitries in breast cancer cells and that the kinase TTK is important in acute myeloid leukemia. Our phosphoproteomic signatures of network circuitry can identify kinase topologies associated with both phenotypes and genotypes of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kinase signaling networks, Kinase inhibitors, Bioinformatics, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Salamanca
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Maruan Hijazi

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Cutillas
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London


