### Accession
PXD025576

### Title
Characterizing the role of OCIAD1 in the proteolytic processing of holocytochrome c1 and CIII2 assembly

### Description
To characterize the nature of the cytochrome c1 (CYC1) processivity defect in native CIII2 assemblies we identified CYC1 peptides using mass spectrometry analysis of blue native (BN)-PAGE. Gel slices ranging from ~600-900kDa and containing CIII2 assemblies were excised from U2OS control cells, U2OS OCIAD1 knockdown cells, and U2OS OCIAD1 knockdown cells rescued with wildtype OCIAD1. Gel slices were then digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria from U2OS cells of the indicated OCIAD1 background were solubilized with digitonin at a 4g/g detergent/protein ratio and 100µg of solubilized mitochondrial protein was resolved by BN-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the gel was fixed with 40% methanol/10% acetic acid, destained in 8% acetic acid, and gel slices (2mm x 7mm) were excised along the entire lane using disposable gel cutter grids (The Gel Company, San Francisco, CA, cat# MEE2-7-25). Ten gel slices ranging from ~600-900kDa were collected in 100µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) in a 96-well plate and destained/dehydrated with successive 5 min washes with 100µl of the following solutions (3 washes each): 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 25% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 75% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were then reduced with 50µl of 10mM TCEP for 30 min at 37oC, gel slices were dehydrated again with three washes with 100% acetonitrile, and alkylated with 15mM 2-chloroacetamide in the dark for 20 min. Gel slices were dehydrated again and washed for 5 min with 100µl of the following solutions (2 washes each): 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 25% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), 75% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) and four washes with 100% acetonitrile. Gel slices were air-dried before overnight ProteaseMax-aided. In short, dried gel pieces were rehydrated in 50µl of 12 ng/µl LysC/Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), 0.01% ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega, Madison, WI, cat# V2071) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) for 20 min on ice and overlaid with 50µl of 0.01% ProteaseMAX surfactant in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Proteins were digested overnight at 37oC. The peptide-containing solution was collected in 1.5ml eppendorf tubes and 100µl of 75% acetonitrile, 1% TFA in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) was added to each gel slice to elute remaining peptides. Both eluates were pooled and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator before LC-MS/MS on a Bruker TimsTof Pro mass spectrometer. Peptides were directly loaded on a Ionoptiks (Parkville, Victoria, Australia) 75µm x 25cm 1.6µm C18 Aurora column with Captive Spray emitter. Peptides were separated using a Bruker Nano-elute nUPLC at 400nl/min with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) and the following gradient conditions: 2% solvent B to 35% solvent B over 30min. Runs were acquired in diaPASEF mode with an acquisition scheme consisting of four 25 m/z precursor windows per 100ms TIMS scan. Sixteen TIMS scans, creating 64 total windows, layered the doubly and triply charged peptides on the m/z and ion mobility plane. Precursor windows began at 400 m/z and continued to 1200 m/z. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of ion mobility from 63 eV at 1/K0=1.5 Vs cm−2 to 17 eV at 1/K0=0.55 Vs cm−2.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed similarly with DIA-NN (version 1.7.13 beta 1) using the following settings (Protease: Trypsin/P, Missed cleavages: 1, Variable modifications: 1, Peptide length range: 7-30, Precursor m/z range: 300-1800, Fragment ion m/z range: 200-1800, Precursor FDR: 1, MS1 mass accuracy: 10ppm, MS2 mass accuracy: 10ppm). The N-term M excision, C carbamidomethylation, and M oxidation options were enabled and all other parameters were set to default. In short, we generated a deep learning-based predicted library from the Uniprot human reference proteome (UP000005640, one protein per gene) supplemented with N-terminal truncated CYC1 isoforms and a list of common contaminants. This large library was used to process all raw files from the gel slices analytical runs and generate a second and more optimized spectral library that includes ion mobility data. This new highly optimized spectral library was finally used to re-analyze all raw files.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Immp2l, Complex iii, Cleavage, Cytochrome c1, Ociad1, Processivity

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Maxence Le Vasseur

### Lab Head
Dr Jodi Nunnari
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA


