### Accession
PXD000780

### Title
Bacillus pumilus exponential phase

### Description
Cytoplasmic and membrane proteome of cells growing in minimal and complex media

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic protein: cells were disrupted by sonication, extract was centrifuged, supernatant corresponded to cytosolic protein; determination of protein concentration using RotiNanoquant, 1D gel, cut into 10 pieces, digested with trypsin overnight, nanoHPLC, measurement in OrbiTrap Membrane protein: cells were disrupted by sonication, extract was centrifuged and afterwards ultra-centrifuged, pellet homogenized in high salt buffer and ultra-centrifuged, pellet homogenized in sodium carbonate and ultra-centrifuged, pellet washed with TEAB buffer and ultra-centrifuged, membrane proteins from the pellet dissolved in SDS sample buffer; 1D gel, cut into 10 pieces, digested with trypsin overnight, nanoHPLC, measurement in OrbiTrap (membrane protein extraction protocol detailed in Eymann et al 2004, Proteomics 4: 2849-2876)

### Data Protocol
Search with sorcerer, database Bacillus pumilus Jo2, analysis with scaffold, no quantification

### Publication Abstract
Members of the species Bacillus pumilus get more and more in focus of the biotechnological industry as potential new production strains. Based on exoproteome analysis, B. pumilus strain Jo2, possessing a high secretion capability, was chosen for an omics-based investigation. The proteome and metabolome of B. pumilus cells growing either in minimal or complex medium was analyzed. In total, 1542 proteins were identified in growing B. pumilus cells, among them 1182 cytosolic proteins, 297 membrane and lipoproteins and 63 secreted proteins. This accounts for about 43% of the 3616 proteins encoded in the B. pumilus Jo2 genome sequence. By using GC-MS, IP-LC/MS and H NMR methods numerous metabolites were analyzed and assigned to reconstructed metabolic pathways. In the genome sequence a functional secretion system including the components of the Sec- and Tat-secretion machinery was found. Analysis of the exoproteome revealed secretion of about 70 proteins with predicted secretion signals. In addition, selected production-relevant genome features such as restriction modification systems and NRPS clusters of B. pumilus Jo2 are discussed.

### Keywords
Membrane proteome, Cytoplasmic proteome, Bacillus pumilus

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, University Greifswald
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Birgit Voigt

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hecker
Institute of Microbiology, University Greifswald


