### Accession
PXD018934

### Title
New mode of methanogenesis observed in the coal degrading methanogen Methermicoccus shengliensis

### Description
Methane-generating Archaea drive the final step in anaerobic organic compound mineralization and dictate the carbon flow of Earth’s diverse anaerobic ecosystems. Although such Archaea were presumed to be restricted to life on simple compounds like H2, acetate or methanol, an archaeon, Methermicoccus shengliensis, was recently found to convert methoxylated aromatic compounds to methane. Methoxylated aromatic compounds as component of lignin and coal are present in most subsurface sediments. Despite the significance and novelty of this outstanding archaeon its metabolism has not yet been explored. In this study, transcriptomics and proteomics reveal that M. shengliensis uses a demethoxylation system that is more related to that from acetogenic bacteria than to the methyl transferase system used for methylotrophic methanogenesis. It activates methoxy-groups using tetrahydromethanopterin as the carrier, a mechanism distinct from conventional methanogenic methyl-transfer systems dependent on Coenzyme M.

### Sample Protocol
After cultivation of M. shengliensis in medium with either 150 mM MeOH or 10 mM Trimethoxybenzoate (TMB) as substrate (Samples from methanol cultures: P17, P18, P19 and P24; samples from TMB cultures: P20, P42, P43 and P44), cells were harvested anaerobically in the exponential phase (OD600nm 0.2 – 0.4) and pellets were freeze-dried. The freeze-dried cell material was lysed by bead beating in the presence of TEAB buffer, B-PER buffer and sodium deoxycholate, followed by TCA precipitation. Proteins were digested in solution and subsequently desalted using C18 microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Quadruplicate measurements were analysed using MaxQuant using the LFQ feature. Protein and peptide FDR were set to 1%. Subsequent data analysis was performed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Methane-generating archaea drive the final step in anaerobic organic compound mineralization and dictate the carbon flow of Earth's diverse anoxic ecosystems in the absence of inorganic electron acceptors. Although such Archaea were presumed to be restricted to life on simple compounds like hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>), acetate or methanol, an archaeon, Methermicoccus shengliensis, was recently found to convert methoxylated aromatic compounds to methane. Methoxylated aromatic compounds are important components of lignin and coal, and are present in most subsurface sediments. Despite the novelty of such a methoxydotrophic archaeon its metabolism has not yet been explored. In this study, transcriptomics and proteomics reveal that under methoxydotrophic growth M. shengliensis expresses an O-demethylation/methyltransferase system related to the one used by acetogenic bacteria. Enzymatic assays provide evidence for a two step-mechanisms in which the methyl-group from the methoxy compound is (1) transferred on cobalamin and (2) further transferred on the C<sub>1</sub>-carrier tetrahydromethanopterin, a mechanism distinct from conventional methanogenic methyl-transfer systems which use coenzyme M as final acceptor. We further hypothesize that this likely leads to an atypical use of the methanogenesis pathway that derives cellular energy from methyl transfer (Mtr) rather than electron transfer (F<sub>420</sub>H<sub>2</sub> re-oxidation) as found for methylotrophic methanogenesis.

### Keywords
Methanogen, Methyl transfer, Methoxylated aromatic compounds, Demethoxylation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Denmark
Radboud University

### Submitter
Julia Kurth

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Denmark


