### Accession
PXD010946

### Title
Hypoxia-induced changes in SUMO conjugation affect transcriptional regulation under low oxygen

### Description
Recent data support that sumoylation, the covalent attachment of the Small Ubiquitin-related MOdifier (SUMO) to proteins, is involved in the activation of the hypoxic response and the ensuing signalling cascade. To gain insights into differences of the SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 proteome of HeLa cells under normoxia and cells grown for 48 h under hypoxic conditions, we employed endogenous SUMO-immunoprecipitation in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry (SILAC).

### Sample Protocol
For performing quantitative proteomic experiments HeLa cells were differentially labelled using SILAC. Briefly, cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium lacking L-lysine and L-arginine, which were replaced with stable isotope (SILAC) forms (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Medium was supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal calf serum (FCS). Two independent SILAC experiments were performed. The 1st SILAC experiment compared unlabelled cells growing in normoxia (Lys0 and Arg0) with labelled cells growing for 48hours under 1% hypoxia T (4,4,5,5-D4-lysine, Lys4, and 13C6-arginine, Arg6). The 2nd SILAC experiment compared labelled cells growing in normoxia (4,4,5,5-D4-lysine, Lys4, and 13C6-arginine, Arg6) with unlabelled cells growing for 48hours under 1% hypoxia (Lys0 and Arg0). Cells were grown in 150-mm-diameter dishes and 30 dishes were used per SILAC condition. 200 mg of total mixed HeLa protein lysates from cells growing in normoxia and hypoxia (see above) were used for the SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3 IPs. Endogenous SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3 conjugates immunoprecipitation was described previously (Becker et al, 2013). Eluted proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid and resuspended to 50μl before analysis by Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen, NuPAGE 10% Bis-tris). 30 mg of the input protein lysate was also analysed by Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE. The lanes containing SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3 –purified proteins and the input sample lanes were sliced into twenty-three sections before undergoing in-gel tryptic digestion. For the anti-HA non denaturing Immunoprecipitation the following procedure was followed: Briefly, HeLa cells were washed with cold PBS 24 h after transfection and lysed (20 min, 4 °C) in buffer containing 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 50 mM glycerolphosphate, and 10 mM Na3VO4. After centrifugation, the sample volume was adjusted to 800 l with lysis buffer and samples were incubated for 3 h at 4 °C with 1 l of anti-HA antibody. 20 l of Protein A-Sepharose (Amersham Biosciences) bead slurry was added and incubation continued for 16 h at 4 °C under gentle shaking. Beads were collected by centrifugation, washed 3 times with lysis buffer, and bound proteins were eluted by SDS sample buffer. Proteins were separated by one-dimensional SDS–PAGE (4–12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris Gel, Invitrogen) and the entire lane of the Coomassie blue-stained gel was cut into 23 slices. All slices were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 55 min at 56°C, alkylated with 55 mM IAA for 20 min at 26°C and digested with modified trypsin (Serva) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were injected into a C18 precolumn (2.5 cm, 360 μm o.d., 150 μm i.d., Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 5 μm, C18-AQ, Dr Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min. Bound peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 capillary column (15 cm, 360 μm o.d., 75 μm i.d., Reprosil-Pur 120 Å, 3 μm, C18-AQ, Dr Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, with a gradient from 7.5 to 37.5% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 50 min using an Agilent 1100 nano-flow LC system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 30 000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 5 × 105. The eight most intense ions were sequentially isolated for CID MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Ions with single and unrecognized charge states were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The Raw Data was analysed with Maxquant 1.3.0.5 and Uniprot_human_270812 database.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia occurs in pathological conditions, such as cancer, as a result of the imbalance between oxygen supply and consumption by proliferating cells. HIFs are critical molecular mediators of the physiological response to hypoxia but also regulate multiple steps of carcinogenesis including tumor progression and metastasis. Recent data support that sumoylation, the covalent attachment of the Small Ubiquitin-related MOdifier (SUMO) to proteins, is involved in the activation of the hypoxic response and the ensuing signaling cascade. To gain insights into differences of the SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 proteome of HeLa cells under normoxia and cells grown for 48 h under hypoxic conditions, we employed endogenous SUMO-immunoprecipitation in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry (SILAC). The group of proteins whose abundance was increased both in the total proteome and in the SUMO IPs from hypoxic conditions was enriched in enzymes linked to the hypoxic response. In contrast, proteins whose SUMOylation status changed without concomitant change in abundance were predominantly transcriptions factors or transcription regulators. Particularly interesting was transcription factor TFAP2A (Activating enhancer binding Protein 2 alpha), whose sumoylation decreased on hypoxia. TFAP2A is known to interact with HIF-1 and we provide evidence that deSUMOylation of TFAP2A enhances the transcriptional activity of HIF-1 under hypoxic conditions. Overall, these results support the notion that SUMO-regulated signaling pathways contribute at many distinct levels to the cellular response to low oxygen.

### Keywords
Sumo, Hypoxia, Silac, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry  Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry  Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


