### Accession
PXD001585

### Title
Phosphodiesterase 9A Controls Nitric-oxide Independent cGMP and Hypertrophic Heart Disease

### Description
Rat neonatal cardiac myocytes were treated with PDE5 and PDE9 inhibitor in the presence and absence of L-NAME.

### Sample Protocol
Rat Neonatal Ventricular myocytes were lysed with 8M Urea, 0.5% SDS and digested with a trypcis/Lys-C mixture.  Digested peptides were enriched by TiO2 and desalted on Oasis HLB micro-elution plates.  Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer equpied with an Easy-nanoLC 1000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using the Sorcerer Sequest algoright and post processed using Scaffold 4.3.4. Phosphosite assignment was carried out using Scaffold PTM v2.1.3. Phosphosites were quantified by spectral counts for sites with localization probability above 90%

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is a second messenger molecule that transduces nitric-oxide- and natriuretic-peptide-coupled signalling, stimulating phosphorylation changes by protein kinase G. Enhancing cGMP synthesis or blocking its degradation by phosphodiesterase type 5A (PDE5A) protects against cardiovascular disease. However, cGMP stimulation alone is limited by counter-adaptions including PDE upregulation. Furthermore, although PDE5A regulates nitric-oxide-generated cGMP, nitric oxide signalling is often depressed by heart disease. PDEs controlling natriuretic-peptide-coupled cGMP remain uncertain. Here we show that cGMP-selective PDE9A (refs 7, 8) is expressed in the mammalian heart, including humans, and is upregulated by hypertrophy and cardiac failure. PDE9A regulates natriuretic-peptide- rather than nitric-oxide-stimulated cGMP in heart myocytes and muscle, and its genetic or selective pharmacological inhibition protects against pathological responses to neurohormones, and sustained pressure-overload stress. PDE9A inhibition reverses pre-established heart disease independent of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity, whereas PDE5A inhibition requires active NOS. Transcription factor activation and phosphoproteome analyses of myocytes with each PDE selectively inhibited reveals substantial differential targeting, with phosphorylation changes from PDE5A inhibition being more sensitive to NOS activation. Thus, unlike PDE5A, PDE9A can regulate cGMP signalling independent of the nitric oxide pathway, and its role in stress-induced heart disease suggests potential as a therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Cyclic gmp, Cgmp, Pde9, Pkg, Phosphodiesterase

### Affiliations
Cedar Sinai Medical Center
The Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions  Department of Medicine, Cardiology Division Baltimore, MD, USA

### Submitter
Ronald Holewinski

### Lab Head
Dr David A Kass
The Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions  Department of Medicine, Cardiology Division Baltimore, MD, USA


