### Accession
PXD047499

### Title
Doa10/MARCH6 architecture interconnects E3 ligase activity with lipid-binding transmembrane channel to regulate SQLE

### Description
Transmembrane E3 ligases play crucial roles in homeostasis. Much protein and organelle quality control, and metabolic regulation, are determined by ER-resident MARCH6 E3 ligases, including Doa10 in yeast. Here, we present Doa10/MARCH6 structural analysis by cryo-EM and AlphaFold predictions, and a structure-based mutagenesis campaign. The majority of MARCH6/Doa10 adopts a unique circular structure within the membrane. This channel is established by a lipid-binding scaffold, gated by a flexible helical bundle. The ubiquitylation active site is positioned over the channel by connections between the cytosolic E3 ligase RING domain and the membrane-spanning scaffold and gate.  Assaying 95 MARCH6 variants for effects on stability of the well-characterized substrate SQLE, which regulates cholesterol levels, revealed crucial roles of the gated channel and RING domain consistent with AlphaFold-models of substrate-engaged and ubiquitylation complexes. SQLE degradation further depends on connections between the channel and RING domain, and lipid binding sites, revealing how interconnected MARCH6/Doa10 elements could orchestrate metabolic signals, substrate binding, and E3 ligase activity.

### Sample Protocol
We compared the total proteome of MARCH6WT cells with cells expressing MARCH6Y96V. For this K562 UCOE-SFFV-Zim3-dCas9-P2A-hygro cells with a MARCH6 knockdown were rescued with MARCH6WT or MARCH6Y96V as described above. The cells were grown at 37°C for 48 h before a total of two million cells were harvested with centrifugation at 300 x g and washed with PBS. The cell pellet wasflash-frozen and stored at -80°C. Three biological replicates were prepared for mass spectrometry. The frozen pellet was resuspended in 300 µL of SDC buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 40 nmM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP; PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) and incubated at 95 °C for 2 min followed by sonification for 10 mins at 4°C. Parts of the samples (50%) were incubated once more at 95 °C for 2 min followed by sonification for 10 mins at 4°C. These aliquots were diluted 1:2 with MS grade water (VWR) and supplemented with 1 µg of LysC and 3 µg of  trypsin (Promega) for digestion at 37°C overnight. The peptides were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and purified using SCX StageTips. Samples were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Desalted peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 µm; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 50°C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were separated by two buffers, buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1 formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), at 250 nL/min. A gradient of buffer B from 2%-30% over 120 min followed by 30%-60% over 10 min and then to 95% over 5 min was used. Afterwards, buffer B concentration of 95% was maintained for another 5 min. A data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z = 200) was used, and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected for fragmentation at higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5, respectively, within a maximum injection time of 100 and 60 ms for MS and MS2 scans, respectively, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform82 (version 2.2.0.0) with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the reviewed human Uniprot database (downloaded in August 2021) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The Perseus software package version 2.0.9.0 was used for the data analysis83. Protein intensities were log2-transformed and filtered to make sure that identified proteins showed expression in all biological triplicates of at least one condition. The missing values were subsequently replaced by random numbers that were drawn from a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8). For volcano plots, we used permutation-based FDR, which was set to 0.05 in conjunction with an s0-parameter of 0.1 to determine the significance.

### Publication Abstract
Transmembrane E3 ligases play crucial roles in homeostasis. Much protein and organelle quality control, and metabolic regulation, are determined by ER-resident MARCH6 E3 ligases, including Doa10 in yeast. Here, we present Doa10/MARCH6 structural analysis by cryo-EM and AlphaFold predictions, and a structure-based mutagenesis campaign. The majority of Doa10/MARCH6 adopts a unique circular structure within the membrane. This channel is established by a lipid-binding scaffold, and gated by a flexible helical bundle. The ubiquitylation active site is positioned over the channel by connections between the cytosolic E3 ligase RING domain and the membrane-spanning scaffold and gate. Here, by assaying 95 MARCH6 variants for effects on stability of the well-characterized substrate SQLE, which regulates cholesterol levels, we reveal crucial roles of the gated channel and RING domain consistent with AlphaFold-models of substrate-engaged and ubiquitylation complexes. SQLE degradation further depends on connections between the channel and RING domain, and lipid binding sites, revealing how interconnected Doa10/MARCH6 elements could orchestrate metabolic signals, substrate binding, and E3 ligase activity.

### Keywords
Sqle, March6, Ubiquitylation, E3 ubiquitin ligases, Cryo-em, Doa10, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Department of Molecular Machines and Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Brenda A. Schulman
Department of Molecular Machines and Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


