### Accession
PXD008186

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of maize (Zea may L.) seedlings under rice black-streaked dwarf virus infection

### Description
Maize rough dwarf disease (MRDD) is a severe disease that has been occurring frequently in southern China and many other Asian countries. MRDD is caused by the infection of Rice black streaked dwarf virus (RBSDV) and leads to significant economic losses in maize production. To well understand the destructive effects of RBSDV infection on maize growth, comparative proteomic analysis of maize seedlings under RBSDV infection was performed using an integrated approach involving LC-MS/MS and TMT labeling. Our study identified 7615 maize proteins, of which 6319 proteins were quantified. A total of 116 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified, including 35 up- and 81 down-regulated proteins under RBSDV infection. Enrichment analysis showed that the DEPs were most strongly associated with Cyanoamino acid metabolism, protein processing in ER, and ribosome-related pathways. Two sulfur metabolism-related proteins were significantly reduced, indicating that sulfur may participate in the resistance against RBSDV infection. Furthermore, 15 DEPs involved in six metabolic pathways were identified in maize under RBSDV infection. Our data revealed that the responses of maize to RBSDV infection were controlled by various metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Maize, Zea mays L. inbred line B73, seeds were surface washed, soaked in clean H2O for 2 h, and then germinated in an incubator at 28oC overnight. Seedlings were grown in a greenhouse with a photoperiod of 16 h light/8 h dark, relative humidity of 58%, and light intensity of 120 μmolm−2s−1. The liquid Hoagland media at pH 5.8 was used as nutrient solution. Two-week-old seedlings at the third leaf stage were used for RBSDV inoculation. Adult planthoppers were obtained from wheat seedlings in open areas in spring 2015, in Zhengzhou, China. These adult planthoppers were transferred to a growth cabinet and the growth conditions were set as 26±2°C with a 14 h light to 10 h dark photoperiod and relative humidity of 68%. Newly hatched first instar nymphs were collected by cage after three weeks. Fresh wheat seedlings were used to rear these nymphs every three days. Adult planthoppers were allowed to lay eggs on wheat seedlings for 2 d to generate nymphs at similar development stage. The presence of RBSDV in wheat seedlings were confirmed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ID-ELISA) [19]. RBSDV inoculation was performed as in our previous work [11]. Briefly, viruliferous planthoppers were obtained from instar nymphs for 5 h and were released to maize seedlings (100 planthoppers for each seedling) for a 3-day acquisition access period. The planthoppers were transferred to new wheat seedlings for an incubation period of 25 d in a greenhouse. Then, about 10 viruliferous adult planthoppers for each seedling were put on maize seedlings for a 6-day inoculation access period. A separated group of non-inoculated seedlings was prepared under the same conditions to be used as a control group. Total RNAs were isolated from maize seedlings using a RNeasy plant mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to its protocol. DNA contamination in total RNAs was removed by DNase I application (Sangon, Shanghai, China). Based on the S6 segment of RBSDV, two primers: TCAGCAAAAGGTAAAGGAACG (P1) and AGAGCTCTTCTAGTTATTGCG (P2), were designed for qRT-PCR. The PCR products were used as standard. The standard DNA solution was serially diluted 10-fold to obtain a gradient of DNA concentrations for standard curve generation. For RBSDV copy number determination, the Ct value was compared with the values on the standard curve.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against the Maize SwissProt database using Andromeda with integrated MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) with default parameters. The maximum allowable mass error was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Dalton for fragment ions. Carbamido-methylation on Cys was selected as invariable modification and oxidation on Met was set as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for the identification of peptides and proteins were specified at lower than 1% and the minimum length of peptide was seven amino acids. A TMT-6-plex kit was used for quantification of the resulting peptides. The quantitative level of peptide was measured according to its ion signal intensity ratio in the secondary spectrum.  For Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, a reference proteome was derived from the UniProt-GPA database. IDs of all identified proteins were converted to the UniProt IDs, and the proteins were mapped onto the reference proteome. The unmatched proteins were searched and annotated by software InterProScan with the sequence alignment method. All proteins were grouped into three major categories: biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions.     For pathway annotation, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) online tool was used to describe each identified protein’s metabolic classification. All identified proteins were mapped on the KEGG metabolic pathways by the KEGG online service software “KEGG mapper” and annotated by KEGG online software “KAAS”. Wolfpsort was applied to predict the subcellular localization of each identified protein.

### Publication Abstract
Maize rough dwarf disease (MRDD) is a viral disease and causes great yield loss. To better understand the effects of MRDD on plant growth and metabolism, comparative proteomic analysis of leaves from virus-infected and normal plants was performed. In order to eliminate the interference of Ribulose-1, 5-bisphosphate carboxylase with low-abundance proteins, total proteins were pre-fractionated by 15% PEG and the proteins from supernatant and precipitated fractions were analyzed by 2-DE, subsequently. Out of approximately 1200 protein spots detected, less than 2% of the spots on the gels were overlapping between the fractions of precipitation and supernatant. We identified 91 differentially accumulated proteins that belong to multiple metabolic/biochemical pathways in plants. Further analysis of these identified proteins indicated that MRDD resulted in dramatic changes in the fundamental metabolism, including glycolysis and starch metabolism, and eventually the significant differences in morphology and development between virus-infected and normal plants. Moreover, MRDD occurrence increased the demands for G-proteins, antioxidant enzymes, lipoxygenases and UDP-glucosyltransferase BX9, which may play important roles in response of plant against virus infection. The results also suggested that MRDD is a complicated disease controlled by multigene participating in different pathways.

### Keywords
Maize rough dwarf disease; rice black streaked dwarf virus; differentially expressed proteins; metabolism; maize

### Affiliations
Henan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Zhengzhou, China
PTM

### Submitter
zhang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Shuanggui Tie
Henan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Zhengzhou, China


