### Accession
PXD025780

### Title
Proteomics characterization of extracellular vesicles derived from fermented food industry by-product: looking for new potential delivery vectors

### Description
In the last decade, the interest in extracellular vesicles (EVs) as safe and biocompatible nano-transporters has risen dramatically, as these nanoparticles can be used to increase the delivery efficiency rate and reduce secondary effects. However, the difficulty for its obtention in large quantities represents a major drawback for its utilization. Also, EVs are currently mainly derived from immortalized cell lines, which may arise safety problems when administered to humans. Hence, the shift from cell lines to safer EVs sources would suppose a step ahead for its use as delivery vectors in the biotechnology and biomedical research fields. Here, we provide proteomics characterization of EVs isolated by molecular weight cut-off filtration (MWCO) from four different fermented food industry by-products (FFIBPs), including: i) yogurt whey (named as milk in the raw data files), symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast (SCOBY) from kombucha fermented tea (named as Com in the raw data files), wine pomace (named as Wine in the raw data files) and brewer spend yeast (named as beer in the raw data files).This proteomics characterization will provide key information about composition of by-product derived EVs (BP-EV) uncovering a safe and sustainable EVs source  with potential as functional EVs delivery vectors.

### Sample Protocol
Four different FFIBP were used as sources of EVs. FFIBP were pre-processed: Brewer spend yeast (~15 mL) was centrifuged at 10,000 × g, 30 min at 5˚C obtaining BP1; Whey from plain yogurt was obtained by centrifugation of commercial yogurt (~25 mL) at 10,000 x g, 30 min at 5˚C of plain; BP3 and BP4 were obtained by manual homogenization in 15 mL of PBS, using a glass Dounce homogenizer, of 3g of SCOBY and wine pomace, respectively.   BP-EVs were isolated by MWCO:  Briefly, after first centrifugation of 4 mL of BP, following manufacturer's instructions, the filter (Vivaspin PES 300 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin-filters) was washed with 10 mL of PBS and centrifuged again.   Proteomics sample processing:  In-solution digestion of BP-derived EVs proteomes MWCO enriched BP-EVs were dissolved for denaturalization of proteins in 16 M urea prepared in 100 mM ABB. After 20 minutes of incubation at room temperature, samples were diluted with HPLC water to 8 M urea. BP- EVs constituent proteins were then digested as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, lysed BP-EVs proteomes were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 30˚C for 3h and alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide for 1h at room temperature protected from the light. Trypsin digestion was subsequently performed overnight at 37 ˚C adding a 20 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin per sample. Trypsin digestion was quenched by addition of a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid. Tryptic digested samples were desalted using g C18 Sep-pack cartridge. Elution was performed using 1 mL of 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. Eluates were dried in the vacuum concentrator and stored at -20 ˚C till further proteomics analysis.   Liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry of BP-EV proteomes:  Dessalted BP-EVs peptidomes were resuspended in 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis by using a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker Daltonics, MA, USA) at 300 nl/min and ran using a 60 min linear gradient of 3–45% ACN. The nanoElute liquid chromatograph was on-line coupled to a state-of-the-art timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, MA, USA) using parallel accumulation - serial fragmentation (PASEF) data acquisition (Meier et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis: Analysis of BP-EVs proteomes was carried out using PEAKS Studio X with a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da. For proteins identification in-house databases for every BP were created combining the existent proteome available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) from all possible organisms present in the sample based on existing literature. Carbamidomethyl of Cys was set as fixed modification for database search. PTM algorithm available in PEAKS Studio software was used for protein post-translational modifications identification. FDR &lt; 1% was established for protein identification and trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Molecular weight cut-off, Nanovectors, Evs, Circular economy, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Nanotransporters, Food-derived vesicles, Food industry by-products

### Affiliations
IMDEA-Food Research Institute +Pec Proteomics Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid,  28049, Spain Email: aida.serra@imdea.org Tel: (+34) 917278100
IMDEA-Food Research Institute, +Pec Proteomics, Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC, Old Cantoblanco Hospital, 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid, 28049, Spain.  

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Aida Serra, PhD.
IMDEA-Food Research Institute +Pec Proteomics Campus of International Excellence UAM+CSIC 8 Crta. Canto Blanco, Madrid,  28049, Spain Email: aida.serra@imdea.org Tel: (+34) 917278100


