### Accession
PXD017575

### Title
HDX-MS analysis of Lipin in the presence and absence of anionic membranes

### Description
HDX-MS analysis of Lipin binding to anionic membranes

### Sample Protocol
Protein was digested using an online pepsin column, peptides were seperated using an UPLC C18 column and peptides were analyzed on a Bruker Impact HD QTOF.

### Data Protocol
MSMS searching was done with PEAKS7, with deuterium incorporate carried out using HDEXaminer software.

### Publication Abstract
Lipin/Pah phosphatidic acid phosphatases (PAPs) generate diacylglycerol to regulate triglyceride synthesis and cellular signaling. Inactivating mutations cause rhabdomyolysis, autoinflammatory disease, and aberrant fat storage. Disease-mutations cluster within the conserved N-Lip and C-Lip regions that are separated by 500-residues in humans. To understand how the N-Lip and C-Lip combine for PAP function, we determined crystal structures of Tetrahymena thermophila Pah2 (Tt Pah2) that directly fuses the N-Lip and C-Lip. Tt Pah2 adopts a two-domain architecture where the N-Lip combines with part of the C-Lip to form an immunoglobulin-like domain and the remaining C-Lip forms a HAD-like catalytic domain. An N-Lip C-Lip fusion of mouse lipin-2 is catalytically active, which suggests mammalian lipins function with the same domain architecture as Tt Pah2. HDX-MS identifies an N-terminal amphipathic helix essential for membrane association. Disease-mutations disrupt catalysis or destabilize the protein fold. This illustrates mechanisms for lipin/Pah PAP function, membrane association, and lipin-related pathologies.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Lipin

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Victoria
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
Department of Biochemistry, University of Victoria


