### Accession
PXD032027

### Title
HPLC-MS datasets of LINP1 RNA pulldown samples in A431 cells

### Description
We performed LINP1 RNA pulldown followed by HPLC-MS analysis to identify LINP1-interacting proteins in A431 cells. With high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS), the binding protein of LINP1 from RNA pull down was detected by removing non-specific protein which were binding with EGFP.

### Sample Protocol
Working with the HPLC 1. Putting the sample solution into the syringe.  Take out a syringe, .22-.4 µm filter, and the needle box from the right hand drawer.  The needle will need to be cleaned with AcN.  Take the syringe out of its package and place a needle on the syringe.  Then put some AcN into a small beaker.  Take the syringe and needle and draw some AcN into the needle and squirt back out into the sink.  Do this a few times.  Now the needle is ready for the sample.  There are two ways of getting the sample solution into the syringe.  One way is to take the back out of the syringe and pouring the sample solution into the syringe.  The back of the syringe is then placed back in the tube with a little bit of the sample solution coming out the needle.  Another way of getting the sample solution into the syringe is to carefully suck all of the sample solution into the syringe via needle.  After the sample solution is in the syringe, there will be air in the syringe with the sample solution.  Turn the syringe upside down with the needle in the air and gently push all the air out. Now the syringe is ready. 2. Turn on the graphing machine.  There is a graphing machine on top of the HPLC that graphs what is coming out of the HPLC.  Take the marker out of the holder and take off the black lid and place back in the holder with the maker on the paper.  To turn on the graphing machine flip the two bottom switches, one is in its own box and the other is above a knob. 3. Putting the sample solution into the HPLC.  The HPLC should have beeped at you by now, telling you that it is ready for the sample.  Take the needle off of the syringe while the needle is in the air.  A filter will go on to the syringe and then the needle will go on to the filter.  The needle of the syringe will go into the port-6.  The port-6 is the part of the HPLC that has a lot of tubing going in and out of the machine.  One of the tubes is a brown tube that is coiled into a circle a lot of times and that is right next to where the sample is going to go in at. There should be a part that sticks out that does not have a tube going in or out, place the needle into that part until the needle cannot go in anymore.  Start pressing on the back of the syringe until all the sample is in the machine.  Then click okay.  Mark on the chart recorder where the injection was.   4. Adjusting the computer chart.  In the window with the chart click display.  In the display menu click real time.  Then again in the display menu click options.  In the chart range section make the length of the chart 10 minutes.  This will make the chart show the last 10 minutes of the run. 5. Collecting peaks.  The HPLC should run for 5 minutes before any peaks show up.   Make sure the computer graph is in real time other wise the peaks will not show because the graph is showing an image from another run.  After the 5 minutes, some peaks might show up or might not.  There should be a graph on the screen that also shows what is coming out of the HPLC.  Most of the time the paper graph will be the one that is followed because it show what it happening before the one on the screen is.  If the marker on the paper graph starts to go up really fast then a peak is going through.  To collect the peak take a 15 mL or 50 mL test tube with lid and place under the tube that is going into the waste container until the peak starts to go down.  The peak should go to the top of the paper graph when you collect if but it is okay to collect the bigger peaks if it is a run that has not been done before. 6. Print out computer graph.  In the graph window go to file and click print to print the graph.  Each run should have a graph printed. 7. Put on to the lyophilizer.  See lyophilizer directions.

### Data Protocol
1. Obtain the original data: according to the results measured by different machines, the original data format is different, more common. WIFF and RAW. Open it with the relevant software and you can see each sample, and the chromatograms and mass spectrograms of each sample; 2. Pretreatment: The WIFF format data is taken as an example, including extraction of primary and secondary mass spectrometry information, peak alignment, removal of isotope peak, peak area normalization, and RSD screening; 3. Multivariate statistical analysis: Principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) 4. Differential screening: firstly, according to VIP>1, and then according to p-value<0.05, the differential metabolites were screened out. If the selected differential metabolites were still more, the screening could be carried out according to Fold Change. 5. Material qualitative: it can be divided into second-level qualitative and first-level qualitative, which can be through self-built database and public database such as Metlin. First-level qualitative has HMDB database, etc. 6. Bioinformatics analysis: KeGG pathway analysis, cluster heat map, volcano map, bubble map, etc.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human  a431 cells hplc-ms

### Affiliations
china
Southern Medical University, No. 1023-1063, Shatai South Road, Baiyun District, Guangzhou

### Submitter
xiaoting Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoting Liang
Southern Medical University, No. 1023-1063, Shatai South Road, Baiyun District, Guangzhou


