### Accession
PXD014285

### Title
The global response of Pseudomonas putida to a complex lignolysate

### Description
In this work, we developed processes using ionic liquids to obtain size-defined soluble aromatic-rich streams from sorghum biomass to assess their biocompatibility with P. putida. Growth was unexpectedly higher than that observed on a main aromatic compound. Subsequently, proteomics and metabolomics analysis revealed that BCD liquor contains additional carbon sources except aromatics. Our comparative proteomic analysis first revealed significant up-regulation of a diverse set of proteins in P. putida grown in the complex lignolysate to understand their function and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein were extracted from cell pellets of various cultural conditions, and their concentration were determined by BioRad DC assays. 50 ug protein were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to standard trypsin digestion procedure. Twenty (20) μg of peptides were separated and analyzed by using an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled to an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system

### Data Protocol
The acquired proteomic data were exported as mgf files and searched against the latest Pseudomonas putida KT2440 protein database with Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 4.3.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The normalized spectra count of identified proteins were exported for relative quantitative analysis and selecting target genes which expression were significantly altered between experimental groups. In addition, clusters of orthologous groups of proteins (COG) annotations of our proteomes were subjected to classification using RPS-BLAST program on COG database

### Publication Abstract
There is strong interest in the valorization of lignin to produce valuable products; however, its structural complexity has been a conversion bottleneck. Chemical pretreatment liberates lignin-derived soluble fractions that may be upgraded by bioconversion. Cholinium ionic liquid pretreatment of sorghum produced soluble, aromatic-rich fractions that were converted by Pseudomonas putida (P.&#x2005;putida), a promising host for aromatic bioconversion. Growth studies and mutational analysis demonstrated that P.&#x2005;putida growth on these fractions was dependent on aromatic monomers but unknown factors also contributed. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses indicated that these unknown factors were amino acids and residual ionic liquid; the oligomeric aromatic fraction derived from lignin was not converted. A cholinium catabolic pathway was identified, and the deletion of the pathway stopped the ability of P.&#x2005;putida to grow on cholinium ionic liquid. This work demonstrates that aromatic-rich fractions obtained through pretreatment contain multiple substrates; conversion strategies should account for this complexity.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lignin valorization, Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J.Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


