### Accession
PXD001124

### Title
Tissue proteomics of splenic marginal zone lymphoma

### Description
Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is a rare chronic B lymphoproliferative disease, whose molecular pathogenesis is still not well established. For the first time a proteomic approach was undertaken to analyse the protein profiles of SMZL tissue. Western blot, immunohistochemical analysis and functional data mining were also performed in order to validate results, classify proteins, and explore their potential relationships. We demonstrated that SMZL is characterized by modulation of proteins related to energetic metabolism and apoptosis pathways. We also reported specific proteins (such as biliverdin reductase A, manganese superoxide dismutase, beta-2 microglobulin, growth factor receptor-bound protein 2, acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32 family member A, and SET nuclear oncogene) directly involved in NF-kBand BCR pathways, as well as in chromatin remodelling and cytoskeleton. Our findings shed new light on SMZL pathogenesis and provide a basis for the future development of novel biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
10-μm-thick tissue sections were cut from samples (20 slices for each biopsy) by using a cryostat, and then placed in 400 μl of 2-DE buffer containing 7 M urea (Bio-Rad), 2 M thiourea (Sigma), 3% w/v CHAPS (Sigma), 20 mM Tris (Sigma), and 1x Complete, Mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche) and stored at -80 ° C until analysis. Aftre sonication and protein precipitation the samples were seprated by 2D-PAGE. Each gel was prepared with 800 μg of proteins mixed with 450 μl of 2-DE buffer. The first dimension separation was performed in 17 cm, pH 3–10 non-linear IPG, the second dimensional separation was done using 10-20%T 2,6%C gradient SDS-PAGE. After 2-DE, the proteins were detected by the pure ruthenium chelate RuBPS.  Digitized gel images were used to estimate the expression of different proteins in each analytical gel using PDQuest software (Bio-Rad, version 7.3). Spots selected for identification were carefully cut out from 2-D stained gels and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Peptides from 5 μl of each sample were then separated by reversed phase nano-HPLC-Chip technology (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) online-coupled with a 3D ion trap mass spectrometer (model Esquire 6000, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).  The chip was composed of a Zorbax 300SB-C18 (43 mm × 75 um, with a 5 m particle size) analytical column and a Zorbax 300SB-C18 (40 nL, 5um) enrichment column.

### Data Protocol
The complete nanoHPLC Chip Ion Trap system was fully controlled by ChemStation (Agilent Technologies) and EsquireControl (Bruker Daltonics) softwares. The scan range used was from 300 to 1800 m/z. For tandem MS experiments, the system was operated with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. The three most abundant peptides of each m/z were selected to be further isolated and fragmented. The MS/MS scanning was performed in the normal resolution mode at a scan rate of 13.000 m/z per second. A total of five scans were averaged to obtain an MS/MS spectrum. The peak lists were submitted to MASCOT (version 2.4.01) search engine (http:/www.matrixsciences.com) and searched against all entries of the NCBInr database (38032689 sequences; 13525028931 residues). The following parameters were set: trypsin digestion, up to one missed cleavage; fixed and variable modifications: propionamide (Cys) and oxidation (Met), respectively; peptide and fragment tolerances: ± 0.9 Da and ± 0.9 Da, respectively, and peptide charges: +1, +2 and +3. For protein identification, at least two peptides were considered. Only significant hits, as identified by the MASCOT probability analysis (p < 0.05) were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is a rare chronic B lymphoproliferative disease, whose molecular pathogenesis has still not been well established. For the first time, a proteomic approach was undertaken to analyse the protein profiles of SMZL tissue. 1D and 2D Western blot, immunohistochemical analysis, and functional data mining were also performed in order to validate results, investigate protein species specific regulation, classify proteins, and explore their potential relationships. We demonstrated that SMZL is characterized by modulation of protein species related to energetic metabolism and apoptosis pathways. We also reported specific protein species (such as biliverdin reductase A, manganese superoxide dismutase, beta-2 microglobulin, growth factor receptor-bound protein 2, acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32 family member A, and Set nuclear oncogene) directly involved in NF-kB and BCR pathways, as well as in chromatin remodelling and cytoskeleton. Our findings shed new light on SMZL pathogenesis and provide a basis for the future development of novel biomarkers. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD001124.

### Keywords
Tissue proteomics, Lymphocytes, Splenic marginal zone lymphoma

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Lab Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona Strada le Grazie 15, 37134 Verona, Italy
Department of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Daniela Cecconi

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Cecconi
Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics Lab Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona Strada le Grazie 15, 37134 Verona, Italy


