### Accession
PXD008219

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum Kelch13, Eps15 and Clathrin HC interactomes obtained using a dimerisation-induced quantitative BioID (DiQ-BioID)

### Description
In order to identify Kelch13 interaction partners in living P. falciparum parasites, we established a new type of BioID we termed dimerisation-induced quantitative BioID (DiQ-BioID) that takes advantage of the FKBP-FRB heterodimerisation system. For DiQ-BioID the target is endogenously tagged with FKBP. The promiscuous biotin ligase BirA* is fused with FRB and expressed in the cells expressing the FKBP tagged target. Upon addition of the dimerising ligand (rapalog) BirA*-FRB is recruited onto the FKBP fused target. In the presence of biotin this results in the biotinylation of the target and its interactors whereas in the control the cellular background is biotinylated. As matched parasite cultures (identical cultures grown with and without rapalog) are used, quantitative mass spectrometry was employed to identify specific interaction partners (or compartment neighbors). This was done for Kelch13 as a bait, for one of the so identified hits (Eps15) in reciprocal DiQ-BioID experiments and for the clathrin heavy chain as a negative control (a protein that like Kelch13 and Eps15 is found in foci in the cells but does not co-localise with these targets).

### Sample Protocol
For DiQ-BioID the parasite cultures were split, and one half grown with rapalog (FRB-BirA* on the target) and the other half without (control) for 20 hours in the presence of 20 mM biotin. Thereafter the parasites were released from the infected red blood cells using saponin, washed with PBS and lysed using RIPA buffer. Biotinylated proteins were captured on streptavidin beads and washed stringently followed by on-bead digestion in TEAB buffer using TCEP for reduction, MMTS for alkylation and Trypsin/LysC for digestion. Trypsinized samples were labelled using “light” and “heavy” di-methyl labels under label-swap conditions, after which H/L-sample pools were cleaned over C18 stage-tips. ~42% of the sample was separated over a 30cm C18-reverse phase column, eluted over a 94min gradient (5.6% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid - 25.6% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and directly injected into a QExactive mass spectrometer were data was acquired in TOP10 data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled for 20sec. Resolution for MS was set at 70.000 at m/z = 400 and for MS/MS at 17.5000.  Di-methyllabels were used as follows: forward reactions (experiment 1 and 3) where the “heavy” label was used on the rapalog-treated and the “light” label on the control sample and reverse reactions (experiment 2 and 4) where the “light” label was used on the rapalog-treated and the “heavy” label on the control sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processes using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) set to default parameters unless indicated. Multiplicity was set at 2, with an added mass of 28.03Da (“light”-) or 36.08Da (“heavy”-label) to all lysine residues and peptide N-termini. Trypsin/P was set as the specific digestion mode with maximum 2 missed cleavages and a mass of 45.99Da (MMTS) was set as fixed modification of cysteine residues. Match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled with default parameters and iBAQ values were calculated. Mass spectra were compared to peptide masses from the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 annotated proteome (PlasmoDB release 33) with the entire human proteome included in the contaminants list using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Default search settings (mass tolerance at 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions) were enabled, and peptides and proteins were accepted with an 0.01 FDR cut-off. Protein quantification required minimally two “unique + razor” peptide-ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Artemisinin and its derivatives (ARTs) are the frontline drugs against malaria, but resistance is jeopardizing their effectiveness. ART resistance is mediated by mutations in the parasite's Kelch13 protein, but Kelch13 function and its role in resistance remain unclear. In this study, we identified proteins located at a Kelch13-defined compartment. Inactivation of eight of these proteins, including Kelch13, rendered parasites resistant to ART, revealing a pathway critical for resistance. Functional analysis showed that these proteins are required for endocytosis of hemoglobin from the host cell. Parasites with inactivated Kelch13 or a resistance-conferring Kelch13 mutation displayed reduced hemoglobin endocytosis. ARTs are activated by degradation products of hemoglobin. Hence, reduced activity of Kelch13 and its interactors diminishes hemoglobin endocytosis and thereby ART activation, resulting in parasite resistance.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Artemisinin resistance, Vesicle trafficking, Kelch13, Dimerisation-induced quantitative bioid (diq-bioid), Clathrin hc, Eps15

### Affiliations
Parasitology Section Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74 20359 Hamburg Germany
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud University, Nijmegen
The Netherlands

### Submitter
Wieteke Hoeijmakers

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Spielmann
Parasitology Section Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine Bernhard-Nocht-Str. 74 20359 Hamburg Germany


