### Accession
PXD025592

### Title
Integrated physiological and comparative proteomics analysis of contrasting genotypes of pearl millet reveals underlying salt-responsive mechanisms

### Description
Salinity stress poses a significant risk to agricultural yield and productivity. Therefore, elucidation of plant salt-response mechanisms has become essential to identify stress-tolerance genes. In the present study, two pearl millet genotypes with contrasting salt-tolerance showed differential morpho-physiological and proteomic responses under 150 mM NaCl, and the genotype IC 325825 could withstand salt-stress better than IP 17224. The salt-tolerance potential of IC 325825 was associated with its ability to maintain ionic, osmotic balance and membrane integrity under stress. The IC 325825 exhibited better growth under salinity as compared to IP 17224 due to higher expression of C4 photosynthesis enzymes, efficient antioxidant system, and lower Na+/K+ ratio. Comparative proteomics analysis revealed greater metabolic perturbation in IP 17224 under salinity, in contrast to IC 325825 that harbored pro-active stress-responsive machinery, allowing its survival and better adaptability under salt-stress. The differentially expressed proteins were in-silico characterized for their functions, subcellular-localization, pathway/ interaction analysis, and relative transcript levels. This study has provided novel insights into salinity stress adaptive mechanisms in pearl millet, demonstrating the power of proteomics-based approaches. The critical proteins identified in the present study could be further explored as potential objects for increasing salt-tolerance in sensitive crop plants.

### Sample Protocol
Coomassie brilliant blue stained protein spots were cut out and ‘in-gel’ digested as described by [35]. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 0.02 µg µl−1 trypsin according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Proteomics grade, Sigma, USA), and resulting peptides were dried under vacuum centrifugation at 4°C using speed vac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were prepared by the ‘dried droplet method’ using α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) as matrix and applied onto an AnchorChip™ target plate (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany). The plate was loaded in an UltrafleXtreme™ III mass spectrometer (Bruker), and analyses were performed in positive reflector mode using an Nd: YAG laser at 355 nm. Spectra were acquired on a mass range of 700–4000 Da using FLEXCONTROL 3.0 (Bruker). Masses were automatically annotated using FLEXANALYSIS 3.0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the generated data was performed by searching MS/MS Ion Search against the Swissprot database using online Mascot search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com/). Peptide mass tolerance of ± 1.2 Da and fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.6 Da was set and maximum missed cleavages allowed was one. Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications were considered. The probability score calculated at p < 0.05 was used as the criteria for correct identification of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Salinity stress poses a significant risk to plant development and agricultural yield. Therefore, elucidation of stress-response mechanisms has become essential to identify salt-tolerance genes in plants. In the present study, two genotypes of pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum L.) with contrasting tolerance for salinity exhibited differential morpho-physiological and proteomic responses under 150&#x2009;mM NaCl. The genotype IC 325825 was shown to withstand the stress better than IP 17224. The salt-tolerance potential of IC 325825 was associated with its ability to maintain intracellular osmotic, ionic, and redox homeostasis and membrane integrity under stress. The IC 325825 genotype exhibited a higher abundance of C4 photosynthesis enzymes, efficient enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant system, and lower Na<sup>+</sup> /K<sup>+</sup> ratio compared with IP 17224. Comparative proteomics analysis revealed greater metabolic perturbation in IP 17224 under salinity, in contrast to IC 325825 that harbored pro-active stress-responsive machinery, allowing its survival and better adaptability under salt stress. The differentially abundant proteins were in silico characterized for their functions, subcellular-localization, associated pathways, and protein-protein interaction. These proteins were mainly involved in photosynthesis/response to light stimulus, carbohydrate and energy metabolism, and stress responses. Proteomics data were validated through expression profiling of the selected genes, revealing a poor correlation between protein abundance and their relative transcript levels. This study has provided novel insights into salt adaptive mechanisms in P. glaucum, demonstrating the power of proteomics-based approaches. The critical proteins identified in the present study could be further explored as potential objects for engineering stress tolerance in salt-sensitive major crops.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomics; contrasting genotype; differential protein expression; pearl millet; salinity tolerance; stress signaling

### Affiliations
Department of Botany (UGC- Centre of Advance Study),
J.N.V. University-New Campus,
Jodhpur (Raj.)- 342001
Plant Functional Genomics Lab, Biotechnology Unit, Department of Botany (UGC-Centre of Advance Study), Jai Narain Vyas University, Jodhpur, 342001, India

### Submitter
Shweta Jha

### Lab Head
Dr Shweta Jha
Plant Functional Genomics Lab, Biotechnology Unit, Department of Botany (UGC-Centre of Advance Study), Jai Narain Vyas University, Jodhpur, 342001, India


