### Accession
PXD040193

### Title
Whole cell proteome of U-2 OS cells with NPM1 and NPM1c overexpression

### Description
The nucleolar scaffold protein NPM1 acts as a multifunctional regulator of cellular homeostasis, genome integrity, and stress response. NPM1 mutations, known as NPM1c variants that promote its aberrant cytoplasmic localization, are the most frequent genetic alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A hallmark of AML cells is their dependency on elevated autophagic flux. In order to identify the proteome changes upon NPM1 and NPM1c overexpression, we performed TMT-labeled mass spectrometry analysis of whole cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
U-2 OS cells expressing doxycycline‐inducible Flag-NPM1wt or Flag-NPM1c were scraped in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µg/ml Aprotinin, 2 µg/ml Leupeptin, 1 µg/ml Pepstatin A, pH 8.5). The samples were prepared as four replicates as described in Demel et al. (2022). In brief: 50 µg of Methanol-Chloroform precipitated proteins were digested with Trypsin and LysC. For isobaric labeling 10 µg of desalted peptides were supplemented with 25 µg of the respective TMTpro™ 16plex reagent (Thermo). The samples were tested for sufficient labeling efficiency and pooled by adjustment to the TMT intensity signal from the test shot. The pooled sample was desalted by SepPak (tC18, 50mg, Waters) and peptides were fractionated using high-pH liquid-chromatography on a micro-flow HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLC, Thermo Scientific). For that, 45 µg of pooled and purified TMT labelled peptides resuspended in Solvent A (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 5%ACN) were separated on a C18 column (XSelect CSH, 1mm x 150 mm, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 3-60% Solvent B (5mM ammonium-bicarbonate, 90% ACN) over 65 minutes at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Eluting peptides were collected every 43 seconds from minute 2 for 69 minutes into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis. Tryptic peptides of the whole cell proteome were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B). Assuming equal amounts in each fraction, 400 ng of peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% Buffer B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 90% Buffer B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. A synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top Speed” with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 50 % and analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 100-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 86 ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated. All spectra were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data of the proteomes was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Acquired MS2-spectra were searched against the human reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (17-April-2022; “One Sequence Per Gene”, 20509 sequences) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries from MaxQuant’s “contaminants.fasta”) using SequestHT, allowing a precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da after recalibration of mass errors using the Spectra RC-node applying default settings. In addition to standard dynamic (Oxidation on methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini) and static (Carbamidomethylation on cysteins) modifications, TMTpro-labelling of N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. False discovery rates were controlled using Percolator (< 1% FDR on PSM level). Only high and medium confident proteins (combined q-value <0.05) were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Homo sapiens (human), Cell-culture, Lc-msms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)

Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt (Main)

### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Srefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Theodor-Stern-Kai 7 60590 Frankfurt (Main)


