### Accession
PXD014475

### Title
Proteins present in tears from control, MCI and Alzheimer disease patients

### Description
we investigated tear fluid as a novel source of disease-specific protein biomarkers for Alzheimer disease (AD) development using samples from patients suffering from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD. Tear protein content was evaluated via liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
100 µl of tear samples were mix with sample buffer (4x) boiled two min and 50 µl were then applied onto 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). Then run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, excised, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), and placed in 0.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The gel pieces were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), were reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in darkness) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) as described by Shevchenko et al. with minor modifications. The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. The dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 60 ng/µl trypsin at 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio. The tubes were kept in ice for 2 h and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies) until the mass spectrometric analysis. Reverse phase-liquid chromatography RP-LC-MS/MS analysis (Dynamic Exclusion Mode): The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 180-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 135 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 180 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 seconds periods.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific) and PEAKs 8.5 software. Database search was performed against Uniprot_Homo_sapiens_SwissProt. The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation and Ser-Thr-Tyr Phosphorylation. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by a progressive loss of neurons and cognitive functions. Therefore, early diagnosis of AD is critical. The development of practical and non-invasive diagnostic tests for AD remains, however, an unmet need. In the present proof-of-concept study we investigated tear fluid as a novel source of disease-specific protein and microRNA-based biomarkers for AD development using samples from patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD. Tear protein content was evaluated via liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and microRNA content was profiled using a genome-wide high-throughput PCR-based platform. These complementary approaches identified enrichment of specific proteins and microRNAs in tear fluid of AD patients. In particular, we identified elongation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) as a unique protein present only in AD samples. Total microRNA abundance was found to be higher in tears from AD patients. Among individual microRNAs, microRNA-200b-5p was identified as a potential biomarker for AD with elevated levels present in AD tear fluid samples compared to controls. Our study suggests that tears may be a useful novel source of biomarkers for AD and that the identification and verification of biomarkers within tears may allow for the development of a non-invasive and cost-effective diagnostic test for AD.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Tears

### Affiliations
Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa
3Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM). c/Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Cantoblanco., 28049, Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Felix Hernandez

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Hernandez
3Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" (CSIC-UAM). c/Nicolás Cabrera 1, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Cantoblanco., 28049, Madrid, Spain.


