### Accession
PXD006537

### Title
Large Cohort Proteomics Profiling of Human Brain Cortex

### Description
LC-MS/MS profiling of mid frontal or inferior temporal cortex from ROS, MAP and KRONOSII cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, labeled with O18, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using SIPPER (Stable Isotope Probing Protein Extraction Resources software), PubMed ID 24467184

### Publication Abstract
Our hypothesis is that changes in gene and protein expression are crucial to the development of late-onset Alzheimer&amp;rsquo;s disease. Previously we examined how DNA alleles control downstream expression of RNA transcripts and how those relationships are changed in late-onset Alzheimer&amp;rsquo;s disease. We have now examined how proteins are incorporated into networks in two separate series and evaluated our outputs in two different cell lines. Our pipeline included the following steps: (i) predicting expression quantitative trait loci; (ii) determining differential expression; (iii) analysing networks of transcript and peptide relationships; and (iv) validating effects in two separate cell lines. We performed all our analysis in two separate brain series to validate effects. Our two series included 345 samples in the first set (177 controls, 168 cases; age range 65&amp;ndash;105; 58&amp;percnt; female; KRONOSII cohort) and 409 samples in the replicate set (153 controls, 141 cases, 115 mild cognitive impairment; age range 66&amp;ndash;107; 63&amp;percnt; female; RUSH cohort). Our top target is heat shock protein family A member 2 (HSPA2), which was identified as a key driver in our two datasets. HSPA2 was validated in two cell lines, with overexpression driving further elevation of amyloid-&amp;beta;40 and amyloid-&amp;beta;42 levels in APP mutant cells, as well as significant elevation of microtubule associated protein tau and phosphorylated-tau in a modified neuroglioma line. This work further demonstrates that studying changes in gene and protein expression is crucial to understanding late onset disease and further nominates HSPA2 as a specific key regulator of late-onset Alzheimer&amp;rsquo;s disease processes.10.1093/brain/awy215_video1awy215media15824729224001.

### Keywords
Brain, Brainome, O18-labeling, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Vlad Petyuk
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


