### Accession
PXD010559

### Title
Proteome of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei liver stage merosomes

### Description
We use the Plasmodium berghei rodent model to characterize the proteome of the final phase of liver stage development, the merosomes, packets of hepatic merozoites that bud from the host hepatocyte to initiate the blood stage of malaria. Plasmodium berghei WT ANKA strain was used to infect HepG2 hepatoma cells. Samples were fractionated by strong cation exchange, and nano-LC Orbitrap mass spectrometry was used to perform untargeted proteomic profiling of 3 biological replicates. Data was processed using MaxQuant and LFQ. Additional searches were performed to identify peptides from cleaved acetylated PEXELs (protein export elements) to identify proteins putatively exported to the host hepatocyte during liver stage development.

### Sample Protocol
Culture supernatants from infected HepG2 cells were collected at 65 hrs post infection and pooled into a 15 ml tube. Merosomes and detached cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 2000 x g for 5 mins at 4°C and the supernatant was removed. The pellet was washed twice in 10 ml of Hank’s Buffered Saline Solution. Samples were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 9 M Urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5). Protein lysate was reduced by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol with incubation at 56oC for 20 mins, and then alkylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubating at RT in the dark for 20 mins. Proteins were digested by adding sequencing grade trypsin at 37oC on for 16 hrs. Resulting peptides were fractionated using in-stage tip strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. Briefly, the SCX stage tip was prepared using 20 mm syringe plunger from SCX disc in 200 µl pipette tip. The SCX stage tip was activated by adding 100% acetonitrile with centrifugation at 1000 x g for 2 mins. The acidified peptide digest was loaded onto the tip and then washed twice with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid with centrifugation. Freshly prepared elution buffers were added sequentially, and each eluent was collected in a new tube by centrifugation at 400 x g for 2 mins. Fractions 1 to 5 were eluted by adding buffer containing X mM ammonium acetate, 20% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid, where “X” was 50 mM, 75 mM, 125 mM, 200 mM and 300 mM, respectively. The sixth fraction was eluted by adding 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. The vacuum dried peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using data-dependent acquisition method with 2hr run time.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was searched using MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1 ) Andromeda search engine against a combined database of P. berghei ANKA (PlasmoDB v26), Human (NextProt Release 2016), Bovine (NCBI RefSeq release 104) and A. stephensi (VectorBase v2.1) and common contaminant proteins. The search was set up by creating three replicate experiments with six SCX fractions for each, allowing for matching between runs within each experiment and between replicates. Tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were considered, and peptide lengths were set to a minimum of 7 and maximum of 25 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of Met, deamidation of Gln or Asn, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, or Tyr, and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. First search peptide precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and main search tolerance to 4.5 ppm, with a maximum charge of 7 allowed. MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. For peptide spectral matches (PSMs), peptides, and proteins, a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 was applied. The FDR was calculated using target-decoy search. Label free quantification (LFQ) was carried out by enabling LFQ within the MaxQuant software suite with a minimum of 1 ratio count for pair-wise comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
The pre-erythrocytic liver stage of the malaria parasite, comprising sporozoites and the liver stages into which they develop, remains one of the least understood parts of the lifecycle, in part owing to the low numbers of parasites. Nonetheless, it is recognized as an important target for antimalarial drugs and vaccines. Here we provide the first proteomic analysis of merosomes, which define the final phase of the liver stage and are responsible for initiating the blood stage of infection. We identify a total of 1879 parasite proteins, and a core set of 1188 proteins quantitatively detected in every biological replicate, providing an extensive picture of the protein repertoire of this stage. This unique data set will allow us to explore key questions about the biology of merosomes and hepatic merozoites.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Proteomics, Merosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205


