### Accession
PXD008654

### Title
Proteomic profiling of paired interstitial fluids revealed dysregulated pathways and salivary NID1 as a biomarker of oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Patients with oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) are frequently first diagnosed at an advanced stage, leading to poor prognosis and high mortality rate. Early detection of OSCC using body fluid-accessible biomarkers may help improve the prognosis and survival rate of OSCC patients. As tumor interstitial fluid (TIF) is a proximal fluid enriched with cancer-related proteins, it is therefore a valuable reservoir suitable for the discovery of cancer biomarkers as well as dysregulated biological pathways in tumor microenvironment. Thus, we harvested and analyzed the paired tumor (TIF) and adjacent noncancerous (NIF) interstitial fluids from ten OSCC patients using one-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with the nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS) approach and label-free spectral counting method. The results showed that 113 proteins were up-regulated in at least six OSCC TIFs compared to their respective NIFs, and that the aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis was statistically enriched in TIFs by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). The enrichment of aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis in OSCC was verified that four members (IARS, KARS, WARS, and YARS) were revealed to be elevated in OSCC by IHC (n = 12). Among the 113 up-regulated proteins, two candidates (NID1 and SERPINH1) were selected based on an integrated bioinformatics analysis and verified that the salivary NID1 levels were significantly higher in OSCC patients (n = 48) compared to health (n = 51) and OPMD individuals (n = 53). Moreover, the IHC results (n = 222) showed that the expression of NID1 was higher in OSCC compared to adjacent noncancerous epithelium and correlated with pathological T, N, and overall stage as well as survivals of OSCC patients. These results collectively indicate that the analysis of TIF is help to understand the tumor microenvironment, and that salivary NID1 is a potentially useful biomarker for the OSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Paired TIFs and NIFs from Cancerous and Noncancerous Tissues To collect tumor (TIF) and adjacent noncancerous (NIF) interstitial fluid, the paired cancerous and adjacent noncancerous tissue samples (5 x 5 x 5 mm3) were harvested by the oncologist during the operation and transferred immediately to lab for processing. After weighting the harvested samples, the live tissues were washed with ice-cold PBS to remove blood on tissue surface, and were dissected into 1−3 mm3 pieces by scalpels. The samples were shifted to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and further washed by ice-cold PBS until the supernatant was clear. To collect interstitial proteins, samples were incubated with 600 μL PBS for 1 hour in a humidified incubator at 37oC containing 5% CO2. After centrifuging at 8000 × g for 15 min at 4oC to remove the unsolved pellet, the supernatants were immediately treated with a protease inhibitor mixture (2 μL/mL; Sigma-Aldrich), and stored at −80°C without thawing until use. The interstitial fluids were collected prospectively; however, only the samples confirmed by the pathological reports were enrolled into this study.  GeLC−MS/MS Analysis  The concentrations of proteins were determined by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Thirty microgram proteins from ten paired TIF and NIF proteins were separated by 10% SDS−PAGE and then stained by 0.5% Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Amresco Inc., Solon, OH). After destaining by 10% methanol (Mallinckrodt Baker, Phillipsburg, NJ) and 5% acetic acid (Mallinckrodt Baker) until the background became clear, each gel lane was cut into 25 pieces and further separated into two as replicates. Then each piece was dehydrated in acetonitrile (Mallinckrodt Baker) and dried in a SpeedVac. The proteins were reduced with 25 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (Biosynth AG, Staad, Switzerland) at 60oC for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Amersham Biosciences, UK) at room temperature for 30 min. Then, the proteins were digested by trypsin (20 μg/mL; Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37oC, and the digested peptides were extracted by acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac.   To identify proteins, the peptides extracted from each piece were analyzed by a LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, WA) coupled with HPLC. Briefly, the peptide extracts were reconstituted in buffer A (0.1% formic acid; Sigma-Aldrich), loaded across a trap column (Zorbax 300SB−C18, 0.3 × 5 mm, Agilent Technologies, Taiwan) at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/min in buffer A, and separated on a resolving 100 mm analytical C18 column (inner diameter, 75 μm) using a 15 μm tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA). The peptides were eluted with a 60−min gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min.  The LTQ Orbitrap was operated using Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher). A data-dependent mode containing one MS scan, in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000, and 10 MS/MS scans (in the linear ion trap) for the ten most abundant precursor ions was used to acquire data. The m/z scan range for MS scans was set as 350-2000 Da, and the ion signal of (Si(CH3)2O)6H+ at m/z 445.120025 was used as a lock mass for internal calibration. To increase identification coverage, the precursor ions selected for MS/MS analysis were dynamically excluded for 180 s.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Proteins Identification The resulting spectra were analyzed by Mascot (Version 2.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against Swiss-Prot human sequence database (released April 29, 2015, selected for Homo sapiens, 20199 entries) of the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI). The mass tolerances for parent ion and fragment ion were set as 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The oxidation on methionine (+15.99 Da) and carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57 Da) were set as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. Up to one missed cleavage was allowed. We also used the random sequence database to estimate false-positive rates for protein matches. The resulting files were further integrated by Scaffold software (Version 4.2.1, Proteome Software, Portland, OR), which includes PeptideProphet algorithm (26), that aids in the assignment of peptide MS spectra, as well as ProteinProphet algorithm (27), that assigns and groups peptides to a unique protein or a protein family if the peptides are shared among several isoforms. The thresholds for PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet probability were set as 0.95 to ensure an overall false-discovery rate below 0.5%. Furthermore, only proteins with two identified peptides were retained in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) are frequently first diagnosed at an advanced stage, leading to poor prognosis and high mortality rates. Early detection of OSCC using body fluid-accessible biomarkers may improve the prognosis and survival rate of OSCC patients. As tumor interstitial fluid is a proximal fluid enriched with cancer-related proteins, it is a useful reservoir suitable for the discovery of cancer biomarkers and dysregulated biological pathways in tumor microenvironments. Thus, paired interstitial fluids of tumor (TIF) and adjacent noncancerous (NIF) tissues from 10 OSCC patients were harvested and analyzed using one-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS). Using label-free spectral counting-based quantification, 113 proteins were found to be up-regulated in the TIFs compared with the NIFs. The gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that the differentially expressed TIF proteins were highly associated with aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis pathway. The elevated levels of 4 proteins (IARS, KARS, WARS, and YARS) involved in the aminoacyl tRNA biosynthesis were verified in the OSCC tissues with immunohistochemistry (IHC). In addition, nidogen-1 (NID1) was selected for verification as an OSCC biomarker. Salivary level of NID1 in OSCC patients (<i>n</i> = 48) was significantly higher than that in the healthy individuals (<i>n</i> = 51) and subjects with oral potentially malignant disorder (OPMD; <i>n</i> = 53). IHC analysis showed that NID1 level in OSCC tissues was increased compared with adjacent noncancerous epithelium (<i>n</i> = 222). Importantly, the elevated NID1 level was correlated with the advanced stages of OSCC, as well as the poor survival of OSCC patients. Collectively, the results suggested that TIF analysis facilitates understanding of the OSCC microenvironment and that salivary NID1 may be a useful biomarker for OSCC.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma, Nidogen-1, Tumor interstitial fluid, Saliva, Aminoacyl trna biosynthesis

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Chih-Ching Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Chih-Ching Wu
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taiwan


