### Accession
PXD014481

### Title
Lineage-specific Protein Interactomes of the Hox Transcription Factor Ubx revealed by Close-Proximity Protein Biotinylation

### Description
Cell type diversity is controlled by transcription factors (TFs), which regulate specific yet flexible gene expression programs depending on the cellular environment. However, how sets of TFs work together to promote such diversity with high precision is still unknown. We used the Hox TF Ultrabithorax (Ubx) as a model because of its essential functions in multiple cell types. Assuming that functional diversity emerges from specifc protein interactions in different cell types, we explored Ubx protein interactomes in three different tissue lineages in vivo. Using proximity dependent Biotin IDentification (BioID) in Drosophila embryos, we find that Ubx interacts with largely non-overlapping sets of proteins in each tissue lineage. Intriguingly, this specificity does not primarily result from Ubx binding to proteins with lineage-restricted functions. Instead, Ubx interacts in a lineage-specific manner with ubiquitously expressed subunits of proteins complexes controlling general aspects of gene expression, like chromatin remodelling or RNA processing. Thus, our work reveals that cell type-specific protein interaction networks not necessarily involve cell type-specific partners and that the function of key TFs may extend to the control over the entire realm of gene expression, including splicing and translation. These findings challenge two central dogmas in cell lineage specification, namely the strong reliance on differential RNA expression as a measure for specificity determinants and the enhancer-centric approach to understand gene regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin beads were resuspended in 14µl of ammonium bicarbonate 50mM and proteins were subjected to reduction with 1µl DTT (100µM) at 60°C for 15min followed by alkylation with 1µl of Iodoacetamide (IAA 200mM) for 45min at room temperature in the dark. Protein digestion was performed on beads with a Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega, V5071) at 37°C for 14 hours. Peptides were de-salted using the SP3 protocol as previously described (Rafiee et al. 2016; C. S. Hughes et al. 2014; Christopher S. Hughes et al. 2019). Peptides were loaded on a trap column (PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap 2cm x 100µm) and separated over a 50cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75µm x 2µm) using a 70min linear gradient of acetonitrile from 6 to 40% (Thermo EasynLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed on a Tri-Hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data dependent acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. The MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Each experiment included nlsGFP, UbxWT and UbxN51A samples and was performed for four independent biological replicates. Raw data were analyzed using Maxquant free software including the Andromeda search Engine (Cox et al. 2014; Tyanova et al. 2015; Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016). Peptide identification was performed using Uniprot database of Drosophila melanogaster (canonical and isoform). Default parameters of Maxquant were used with the following modifications: digestion by Trypsin/P and LysC, lysine biotinylation as variable modification (methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation), cytosine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Instrument set Orbitrap (with precursor tolerance 20ppm, MS tolerance 0.5Da), match between runs option was activated, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ calculated. LFQ and iBAQ value are presented in supplementary tables 1-3. Protein enrichment was calculated using the LFQ Log2 ratio (WT/GFP, WT/N51A, N51A/GFP) and normalized on the median value. For each ratio, distribution (90%) and corresponding standard deviations (SD) were calculated to define the proteins significantly enriched (ratio>Confidence Interval defined as median ±2 SD). Proteins significantly enriched in at least 2 replicates were considered biologically relevant and used for further analysis (supplementary table 4-6). Enriched proteins from the different ratio (WT/GFP, WT/N51A, N51A/GFP) were then compared to discriminate proteins enriched in the chromatin fraction (WT/N51A+WT/GFP), from the one enriched more generally in the nucleus (WT/GFP, N51A/GFP) and the one enriched more freely in the nucleoplasm (N51A/GFP, WT excluded. For proteome analysis, Perseus free software was used to generate dot-plot (Pearson, Valid pair value) and clustering visualization (Tyanova et al. 2016), based on LFQ log10 value of protein expressed after Perseus canonical filtering (Reverse, Potential Contaminant, Only identified by site) and replacement of missing values. Functional networks of Ubx interactome were generated with STRING software (von Mering 2004), based on 0.150 interaction score of experimental evidence and database and pathway co-occurrence. Visualization of networks was built with Cytoscape free software (Shannon 2003). For GO-Term annotations and overrepresented GO-Term analysis was performed with the web-tools PANTHER using Fisher test and FDR correction. Comparison of Ubx and Tin (Jin et al. 2013) and Ubx and Grh (Nevil et al. 2017) genomic profile was done as described in Domsch et al. 2018. The subsequent motif searches on defined regions of 1kb were performed with the web-tools AME of the MEME-suite with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors (TFs) control cell fates by precisely orchestrating gene expression. However, how individual TFs promote transcriptional diversity remains unclear. Here, we use the Hox TF Ultrabithorax (Ubx) as a model to explore how a single TF specifies multiple cell types. Using proximity-dependent Biotin IDentification in Drosophila, we identify Ubx interactomes in three embryonic tissues. We find that Ubx interacts with largely non-overlapping sets of proteins with few having tissue-specific RNA expression. Instead most interactors are active in many cell types, controlling gene expression from chromatin regulation to the initiation of translation. Genetic interaction assays in vivo confirm that they act strictly lineage- and process-specific. Thus, functional specificity of Ubx seems to play out at several regulatory levels and to result from the controlled restriction of the interaction potential by the cellular environment. Thereby, it challenges long-standing assumptions such as differential RNA expression as determinant for protein complexes.

### Keywords
Transcription, Interactome, Close-proximity partners, Drosophila, Interaction, Ppi, Ubx, Bioid, Hox, Close-proximity biotinylation, Ultrabithorax, Proteomics, Development

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University, Center for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg, Department of Developmental Biology, Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Lohmann
Heidelberg University, Center for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg, Department of Developmental Biology, Heidelberg, Germany


