### Accession
PXD034829

### Title
Intestinal epithelial c-Maf expression determines enterocyte differentiation and nutrient uptake

### Description
The primary function of the small intestine (SI) is to absorb nutrients to maintain whole body energy homeostasis. Enterocytes are the major epithelial cell type facilitating nutrient sensing and uptake. However, the molecular regulators governing enterocytes have remained undefined. In this project, we studied the role of the transcription factor c-Maf for the differentiation and function of SI enterocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Intestinal epithelial cell pellets were washed twice with cold PBS (50 µl) without disturbing the pellet. Cells were resuspended in 100 µl RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor and shaken at RT for 15 min (Eppendorf thermomixer) at 600 rpm. Mouse liver was homogenized in M-Tubes (Milieniy Biotec 130-093-236) with 5ml RIPA buffer and protease inhibitor in a GentleMacs instrument. 40 µl from the cell lysate plus 35 µl RIPA and 75 µl from tissue lysate were transferred to AFA-TUBE TPX 8-Strips (PN 520292) with caps (PN 500639). Samples were treated in a Covaris LE220Rsc to shear DNA (Temperature 20°C, Duty Factor 25% and Plate Definition Dithering 1 mm Y-dither @ 20 mm/s; peak power 350, 300 seconds duration, 2 repeats).  The protein concentration was determined (Pierce Protein Assay Kit, 23225), and a volume corresponding to 25 µg was transferred to a TwinTec plate (Eppendorf), topped up to 50 µl with RIPA before SP3 protein digestion on a Beckmann Biomek i7 workstation as previously described with one-step reduction and alkylation (Muller et al., 2020, PMID: 32129943). Briefly, 16.6 μl of reduction and alkylation buffer (40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200mM ABC, 4% SDS) was added and the samples were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein was bound to paramagnetic beads (1:1 mix of GE Healthcare, PN 45152105050250, 65152105050250) at a bead to protein ratio of 10:1 (w/w) with ACN at a final concentration of 50%. The samples were incubated for 18 min before placing on a magnetic rack for 3 min to pull down the beads with protein. The supernatant was discarded and the sample washed twice with 80% ETOH and once with 100% ACN before reconstitution in 35µl 100mM ABC. Trypsin/LysC (Promega V5072) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and the samples incubated at 37°C for 17h (Benchmark Scientific Incu-Mixer MP4). The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide concentration was determined (Pierce 23290), samples transferred to a new plate and frozen at -80 °C until analysis by LC-MS/MS without further conditioning or clean-up.

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation was accomplished in a 100-minute water to acetonitrile gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (Pierce, 85178) in LC-MS-grade water; solvent B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLnanoHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. 1.25 µg of peptides were concentrated on a trap column (PepMap C18, 5 mm x 300 μm x 5 μm, 100Ǻ, Thermo Fisher Scientific, buffer containing 2:98 (v/v) acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, flow rate of 20 μl/min) for 3 min and separated on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 μm; 100 Å; 75μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, gradient flow rate 200nl ) in a linear gradient from 5-28% buffer B in 63 min followed by 28-95% B in 2min and washing for 5 min with 95 % buffer B before equilibration for 20 min with initial conditions flow 300nl. The Orbitrap worked in centroid mode with a duty cycle consisted of one MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution with maximum injection time 300 ms and 3e6 AGC target followed by 40 variable MS2 scans using an 0.5Th overlapping window pattern.  The window length started with 25 MS2 scans a 12.5 Da; followed by seven windows with 25 Da and eight windows at 62.5 Da. Precursor MS spectra (m/z 378-1370) were analyzed at 17,500 resolution after 110 ms accumulation of ions to a 3e6 target value in centroid mode. The background ions m/z 391.2843 and 445.1200 were used as lock mass. MS Source settings were as follows: spray voltage 2.0 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature at 275°C; normalized HCD collision energy 27%.  The raw data was processed using DIA-NN 1.8 (PMID: 31768060, https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN) with the ion mobility module for diaPASEF (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.08.434385v1). MS2 and MS1 mass accuracies were both set to 15 ppm, and scan window to 11. DIA-NN was run in library-free mode with standard settings (fasta digest and deep learning-based spectra, RT and IMs prediction) using the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (Mouse-RefProteome_UP000000589_10090, downloaded on 2022-05-18) annotations (PMID: 33237286) and the match-between-runs (MBR) option.

### Publication Abstract
The primary function of the small intestine (SI) is to absorb nutrients to maintain whole-body energy homeostasis. Enterocytes are the major epithelial cell type facilitating nutrient sensing and uptake. However, the molecular regulators governing enterocytes have remained undefined. Here, we identify c-Maf as an enterocyte-specific transcription factor within the SI epithelium. c-Maf expression was determined by opposing Noggin/BMP signals and overlapped with the zonated enrichment of nutrient transporters in the mid-villus region. Functionally, enterocytes required c-Maf to appropriately differentiate along the villus axis. Specifically, gene programs controlling carbohydrate and protein absorption were c-Maf-dependent. Consequently, epithelial cell-specific c-Maf deletion resulted in impaired enterocyte maturation and nutrient uptake, including defects in the adaptation to different nutrient availability. Concomitantly, intraepithelial lymphocytes were less abundant, while commensal epithelial cell-attaching SFB overgrew in a c-Maf-deficient environment, highlighting the close interdependence between the intestinal epithelium, immune system, and microbiota. Collectively, our data identified c-Maf as a key regulator of SI enterocyte differentiation and function, essential for nutrient, immune, and microbial homeostasis.

### Keywords
Enterocytes, Nutrient  uptake, Transcriptional regulation, Differentiation, C-maf

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Neumann
Department of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany


