### Accession
PXD034441

### Title
Subtyping Lewy body disorders using proteomics

### Description
Lewy body disorders (LBD), characterized by the deposition of misfolded α-synuclein (α-Syn), are clinically heterogeneous. We hypothesized that this heterogeneity might reflect α-Syn molecular diversity, between both patients and different brain regions. Using an ultra-sensitive assay, we evaluated α-Syn seeding from 30 LBD patients with different clinical phenotypes and disease durations. Interestingly, α-Syn from patients with rapid disease progression (<3 years) had a higher nigral seeding capacity than the rest of the patients included. We performed a proteomic-wide profiling of the substantia nigra from 5 high and 5 low seeder patients. The proteomic data suggests a significant disruption in mitochondrial function and lipid metabolism in high seeder cases compared to the low seeders.

### Sample Protocol
Using a 4-mm tissue punch, a microdissection of the SN from 10 LBD patients was performed. Samples were homogenized in modified RIPA buffer (2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH8). Protein extraction was performed by mechanical disruption using 1.6mm stainless steel beads in a Bullet Blender (NextAdvance, Troy, NY). Samples were incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes and clarified by centrifugation. Tissue extracts were subjected to TCA precipitation. Washed protein pellets were solubilized in 800 μl of urea buffer (8M urea, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH8, 1X Roche complete protease inhibitor). Protein quantitation was performed using Qubit fluorometry (Invitrogen). 50μg of lysate from each sample was reduced with 14mM dithiothreitol at 25°C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 14mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 45 minutes in the dark. Then, samples were digested with 2.5μg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. The digest was cooled to 25°C and terminated with 5 μl of formic acid and desalted using solid phase extraction on a Waters Oasis HLB solid phase extraction plate. Eluted samples were frozen and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Germany). The MaxQuant output was further processed using the Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0). Proteins with a cut-off threshold value higher than 1.33 or lower than 0.77 were considered as differential expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Lewy body disorders (LBD), characterized by the deposition of misfolded &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-Syn), are clinically heterogeneous. Although the distribution of &#x3b1;-Syn correlates with the predominant clinical features, the burden of pathology does not fully explain the observed variability in clinical presentation and rate of disease progression. We hypothesized that this heterogeneity might reflect &#x3b1;-Syn molecular diversity, between both patients and different brain regions. Using an ultra-sensitive assay, we evaluated &#x3b1;-Syn seeding in 8 brain regions from 30 LBD patients with different clinical phenotypes and disease durations. Comparing seeding across the clinical phenotypes revealed that hippocampal &#x3b1;-Syn from patients with a cognitive-predominant phenotype had significantly higher seeding capacity than that derived from patients with a motor-predominant phenotype, whose nigral-derived &#x3b1;-Syn in turn had higher seeding capacity than that from cognitive-predominant patients. Interestingly, &#x3b1;-Syn from patients with rapid disease progression (&lt;&#x2009;3&#xa0;years&#xa0;to development of advanced disease) had&#xa0;the highest nigral seeding capacity of all&#xa0;the patients included. To validate these findings and explore factors underlying seeding heterogeneity, we performed in vitro toxicity assays, and detailed neuropathological and biochemical examinations. Furthermore, and for the first time, we performed a proteomic-wide profiling of the substantia nigra from 5 high seeder and 5 low seeder patients. The proteomic data suggests a significant disruption in mitochondrial function and lipid metabolism in high seeder cases compared to the low seeders. These observations suggest that distinct molecular populations of &#x3b1;-Syn may contribute to heterogeneity in phenotypes and progression rates in LBD and imply that effective therapeutic strategies might need to be directed at an ensemble of differently misfolded &#x3b1;-Syn species, with the relative contribution of their differing impacts accounting for heterogeneity in the neurodegenerative process.

### Keywords
Human, Substantia nigra, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases
University of Toronto
University of Toronto | U of T · Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Ivan Martinez-Valbuena

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Martinez
University of Toronto | U of T · Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases


