### Accession
PXD013168

### Title
Escherichia coli can adapt its protein translocation machinery for enhanced periplasmic recombinant protein production

### Description
Recently, we engineered a tunable rhamnose promoter-based setup for the production of recombinant proteins in E. coli. This setup enabled us to show that being able to precisely set the production rate of a secretory recombinant protein is critical to enhance protein production yields in the periplasm. It is assumed that precisely setting the production rate of a secretory recombinant protein is required to harmonize its production rate with the protein translocation capacity of the cell. Here, using proteome analysis we show that enhancing periplasmic production of human Growth Hormone (hGH) using the tunable rhamnose promoter-based setup is accompanied by increased accumulation levels of at least three key players in protein translocation; the peripheral motor of the Sec-translocon SecA, leader peptidase (LepB) and the cytoplasmic membrane protein integrase/chaperone YidC. Thus, enhancing periplasmic hGH production leads to increased Sec-translocon capacity, increased capacity to cleave signal peptides from secretory proteins and an increased capacity of an alternative membrane protein biogenesis pathway, which frees up Sec-translocon capacity for protein secretion. When cells with enhanced periplasmic hGH production yields were harvested and subsequently cultured in the absence of inducer, SecA, LepB and YidC levels went down again. This indicates that when using the tunable rhamnose-promoter system to enhance the production of a protein in the periplasm, E. coli can adapt its protein translocation machinery for enhanced recombinant protein production in the periplasm.

### Sample Protocol
Each pellet was solubilized in 600 µl lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7, 2% SDS) and the protein concentration was determined by the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins (30 μg) were separated via 1D SDS-PAGE and the entire gel lanes were cut into ten pieces each and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) overnight. Peptides were purified using ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore). Samples were concentrated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -70 °C. Shortly before MS analysis samples were dissolved in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid

### Data Protocol
For LC−MS/MS analyses of 1D gel samples, in-house self-packed columns were prepared and used with an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo). The peptides were loaded onto the column by the LC system with 10 μL of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min without trapping. The peptides were subsequently eluted using a nonlinear 100 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with a LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo). After a survey scan at a resolution of 30 000 in the Orbitrap with activated lockmass correction, the five most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were not selected for MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with normalized collision energy of 35, and the fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap. The MS/MS spectra of cytoplasmic samples were searched against a randomized E. coli K12 W3110 UniProt/Swissprot database (Proteome ID: UP000000625, 4,352 entries, version December 2018) with added amino acid sequences of hGH, used signal sequences and common laboratory contaminants using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). Peptide search was performed with the Andromeda search algorithms. The search parameters were set as follows: a minimal peptide length of six, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated and protein identifications with FDR< 1% were considered acceptable. A minimum of two unique peptides was used for relative quantification with the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in the MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, we engineered a tunable rhamnose promoter-based setup for the production of recombinant proteins in <i>E. coli</i>. This setup enabled us to show that being able to precisely set the production rate of a secretory recombinant protein is critical to enhance protein production yields in the periplasm. It is assumed that precisely setting the production rate of a secretory recombinant protein is required to harmonize its production rate with the protein translocation capacity of the cell. Here, using proteome analysis we show that enhancing periplasmic production of human Growth Hormone (hGH) using the tunable rhamnose promoter-based setup is accompanied by increased accumulation levels of at least three key players in protein translocation; the peripheral motor of the Sec-translocon (SecA), leader peptidase (LepB), and the cytoplasmic membrane protein integrase/chaperone (YidC). Thus, enhancing periplasmic hGH production leads to increased Sec-translocon capacity, increased capacity to cleave signal peptides from secretory proteins and an increased capacity of an alternative membrane protein biogenesis pathway, which frees up Sec-translocon capacity for protein secretion. When cells with enhanced periplasmic hGH production yields were harvested and subsequently cultured in the absence of inducer, SecA, LepB, and YidC levels went down again. This indicates that when using the tunable rhamnose-promoter system to enhance the production of a protein in the periplasm, <i>E. coli</i> can adapt its protein translocation machinery for enhanced recombinant protein production in the periplasm.

### Keywords
Recombinant protein production, Protein secretion, E.coli

### Affiliations
Katarzyna Dolata, University of Greifswald Katarzyna Dolata, Katharina Riedel, Institute of Microbiology, Departmentof Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17489 Greifswald ( lab head )
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Katarzyna Dolata

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Dolata
Katarzyna Dolata, University of Greifswald Katarzyna Dolata, Katharina Riedel, Institute of Microbiology, Departmentof Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17489 Greifswald ( lab head )


