### Accession
PXD035181

### Title
Proteome of BaF3-mEpoR cells stimulated with 5 U/ml Epo, 10 ng/ml IL-3 or left untreated

### Description
The proteome of BaF3-mEpoR cells stimulated with 5 U/ml Epo, 10 ng/ml IL-3 or left untreated were analyzed by label free LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
BaF3 cells were retrovirally transduced with hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged murine EpoR (BaF3-mEpoR) as previously described (Becker et al., 2010) and subsequently selected in presence of 1.5 μg/ml puromycin (Sigma) starting 48 hours after transduction. Growth factor depleted BaF3-mEpoR cells were washed three times with RPMI1640 and incubated for 4 h at 37°C in serum free RPMI1640 supplemented with 1 mg/ml BSA (Sigma-Aldrich). Afterwards, cells were washed three times with PBS and re-suspended at a density of 1×10^6 cells/250 µL and subsequently stimulated with Epo (5 U/mL) or IL-3 (10 ng/ml) before lysis at different 5 h after Epo stimulation or left unstimulated.  Cells were lysed in 100 µl of ice-cold 1× RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mg/ml deoxycholate, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 2.5 mM NaF, 1% Nonidet P-40, 100 µg/ml AEBSF, 1 µg/ml aprotinin), homogenized, another 100 µl of 1x RIPA buffer added and rotated for 30 minutes at 4°C. Samples were sonicated for 30 s on ice (amplitude 75%; pulse 0.5 s), centrifuged (13.000 g, 10 min, 4°C) and protein content determined by BCA assay (Thermo). 8 µg of protein from fetal liver lysates was used for tryptic digestion following the Single-Pot Solid Phase Sample Preparation (SP3) method (Hughes et al., Nat Protoc 2019). Briefly, proteins were reduced with TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and carbamidomethylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) by heating to 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein binding to 100 µg each of two kinds of para-magnetic beads (Merck, #GE45152105050250 and #GE65152105050250) was induced by addition of ethanol to a final concentration of 50% and incubation at room temperature for 20 min (600 rpm). Beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol and proteins digested by reconstituting the beads in 100 mM TEAB containing trypsin (Promega) in an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:25. Digestion was performed over-night (~15 hours) at 37°C (600 rpm). The next day, samples were placed on a magnetic rack, the supernatant transferred to a fresh vial and dried in a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.5% acetic acid and fractionated by strong cation-exchange (SCX). STAGE tips, consisting of two layers of SCX material, were prepared by consecutive addition of methanol, 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, 30% acetonitrile/500 mM ammonium acetate/0.5% acetic acid, 30% acetonitrile/20 mM ammonium acetate/0.5% acetic acid, with centrifugation for 3 minutes between every wash. Peptides were loaded, eluted into six fractions with increasing amounts of ammonium acetate (20 mM, 40 mM, 70 mM, 100 mM, 250 mM, 500 mM) and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile and loaded on a 25 cm analytical C-18 reverse phase column (Thermo) and separated over 120 min with a linear gradient of 0-30% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 350 nl/min, with a final 5 min elution of 80% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated with the Xcalibur software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70.000 with a mass range of 350 to 1500 m/z. For MS2 scans, the top 20 precursors were isolated and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 and acquired with a resolution of 17.500.

### Data Protocol
Individual raw files obtained from LC-MS/MS measurements were processed by MaxQuant 1.6.3.3. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot database for mus musculus (#UP000000589). MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, which was used for mass recalibration. For the main Andromeda search precursor and fragment mass were set to an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages and an FDR of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. Peptides shared between two proteins were combined and reported as one protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoietin (Epo) ensures survival and proliferation of colony-forming unit erythroid (CFU-E) progenitor cells and their differentiation to hemoglobin-containing mature erythrocytes. A lack of Epo-induced responses causes embryonic lethality, but mechanisms regulating the dynamic communication of cellular alterations to the organismal level remain unresolved. By time-resolved transcriptomics and proteomics, we show that Epo induces in CFU-E cells a gradual transition from proliferation signature proteins to proteins indicative for differentiation, including heme-synthesis enzymes. In the absence of the Epo receptor (EpoR) in embryos, we observe a lack of hemoglobin in CFU-E cells and massive iron overload of the fetal liver pointing to a miscommunication between liver and placenta. A reduction of iron-sulfur cluster-containing proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation in these embryos leads to a metabolic shift toward glycolysis. This link connecting erythropoiesis with the regulation of iron homeostasis and metabolic reprogramming suggests that balancing these interactions is crucial for protection from iron intoxication and for survival.

### Keywords
Interleukin-3, Baf3, Mouse, Erythropoietin

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


