### Accession
PXD027520

### Title
The Angiostrongylus vasorum excretory/secretory proteome contains putative modulators of the host coagulation

### Description
Angiostrongylus vasorum is a cardiopulmonary nematode of canids and is, among others associated with bleeding disorders in dogs. The pathogenesis of coagulopathies remains unclear. We performed a deep proteomic characterization of sex specific A. vasorum excretory/secretory proteins (ESP) and of cuticular surface proteins, and evaluated the effect of ESP on host coagulation and fibrinolysis in vitro. Proteins were quantified by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry and functionally characterized through gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis. In total, we identified 1069 ESP (944 from female and 959 from male specimens) and 1195 surface proteins (705 and 1135, respectively). Among these, we identified putative modulators of host coagulation, e.g., von Willebrand factor type D domain protein orthologues as well as several proteases, including serine type proteases, protease inhibitors and proteasome subunits. The effect of ESP on dog coagulation and fibrinolysis was evaluated on canine endothelial cells and by rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM). After stimulation with ESP, tissue factor and serpin E1 transcript expression increased. ROTEM revealed minimal interaction of ESP with dog blood and did not influence the onset of fibrinolysis. We thus conclude that Angiostrongylus vasorum ESP and surface proteins do not act alone in the induction of bleeding in dogs. The interaction with the host’s vascular haemostasis is limited. It is likely that coagulopathies in A. vasorum infected dogs are the result of a multifactorial response of the host to this parasitic infection.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite collection:  Live adult A. vasorum specimens were collected from lungs and hearts of foxes. Parasite specimens were transferred into a petri dish and washed in sterile pre-warmed phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Females and males were processed separately. Worms showing motility were transferred to RPMI 1640 medium containing antibiotic-antimycotic solution and gentamicin and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2.   Collection of excretory/secretory proteins (ESP):  Medium from the first 24 h containing female or male adults was discarded to prevent contamination with host proteins. Worms were checked daily for viability. Medium was collected and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min to pellet possible excreted eggs. Medium supernatants were concentrated using an Amicon filtration unit and a 30kD ultrafiltration membrane (Merck Millipore, US). Medium was exchanged with PBS using the same device. ESP quantity was assessed using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).    Preparation of ESP:  ESP were precipitated using a trichloroacetic acid (TCA) procedure (modified protocol by Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were air dried and resuspended in 100 µl 4 % SDS, Tris-HCl 0.1 M, pH = 7.6, 0.1 M DTT and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein content was measured by Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twenty µg protein were processed and digested by filter-aided sample preparation. Samples were then desalted using C18 stage tips and dried to completeness using a speed-vac. Dried samples were resuspended in 3 % ACN/0.1 % formic acid (FA).   Collection and preparation of cuticular surface proteins:  After 24 h incubation in RPMI medium, parasites were washed 3 times in sterile 37 °C PBS. Six replicates of 15 females or 15 males (intact and viable) each were transferred into microcentrifuge tubes containing 200 μl sterile PBS. Five μg MS grade trypsin (PierceTM Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added in each of three replicates from each sex. Three replicates from each sex were incubated without trypsin as controls. Parasites were incubated for one h at 37 °C. Supernatants were collected and male and female specimens were assessed for their integrity. Protein concentration was measured using Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were digested by in solution digestion and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Samples were then dried to completeness using a speed-vac and resuspended in 3 % ACN/0.1 % FA.   LC-MS analysis:  ES and surface peptides were diluted in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA to 1 µg/ml and retention time normalization peptides (iRT, Biognosys) were added (1:20). Data independent analysis (DIA) was performed on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in line with a Acquity UHPLC M-class system (nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column and nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column, Waters). Per sample, 2 μl was loaded and elution done by running a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B over 120 min (Solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized utilizing a nano electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Digital PicoView 565, O/N: DPV-550-565, New Objective, Woburn, MA) and a 10 μm fused-silica spray tip emitter (New Objective, PN ). MS1 scans covering 350-1800 m/z and were recorded in centroid mode with a resolution of 60’000 using positive polarity and automated gain control (AGC) with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 200 ms. Every MS1 scan was followed by 35 DIA scans covering a mass range of 400-1100 m/z in 20 m/z isolation windows. DIA scans were recorded in centroid mode with a resolution of 30’000. The AGC target was set to 1e6 and the maxIT to 55 ms. Isolated precursors were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. Fixed first mass was set to 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut (v. 12 and v. 13; Biognosys) was used for label-free protein quantification. More precisely, a directDIA analysis based on the UniProt proteomes of A. costaricensis and A. cantonensis (UP000050601, UP000035642; accessed: 9th of January 2019) using BGS factory settings was performed. These settings included tryptic specificity, allowing two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed Cysteine modification, and oxidation of Methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Protein groups identified by a single peptide sequence were excluded from analysis. Single hit definition was defined by stripped sequence.  FDR was set to 1% for peptide spectrum matches and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Excretory/secretory, Cuticular surface, Angiostrongylus vasorum

### Affiliations
Veterinary Parasitology Institute of Parasitology University of Zurich Switzerland
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Nina Gillis

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schnyder
Veterinary Parasitology Institute of Parasitology University of Zurich Switzerland


