### Accession
PXD027284

### Title
NK-cell derived extracellular vesicles LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this study we have compared the proteomic profile of extracellular vesicles (EVs) prepared from primary, human NK cells or the human NK cell lines NK-92 and KHYG-1 cultured for 48hrs in serum-free conditions. EVs were harvested from cells either under resting conditions (culture in IL-15) or upon activation (combination of IL-12, IL-15, and IL-18). In addition, primary NK cells were activated in the presence of anti-CD16-coated beads, and EVs harvested after 48hrs. The aim was to compare their ability to target and kill a variety of tumor cell line-derived spheroids

### Sample Protocol
All EVs were isolated by precipitation using Total Exosome Isolation Kit from ThermoFisher. Pelleted EVs were resuspended in PBS, and triplicate samples were processed for MS

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS analyses were submitted to MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 software for peptide/protein identification. Parameters were set as follow: Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and PTY; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to one, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The Uniprot human database was used. Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates

### Publication Abstract
NK cell-based therapies have shown promise for hematological cancer forms, but their use against solid tumors is hampered by their poor ability to infiltrate the tumor. NK cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs) containing cytolytic proteins, indicating that NK-cell derived EVs may have therapeutic potential. In this study, we compared the tumor-targeting potential of EVs derived from either primary NK cells or the NK cell lines NK-92 and KHYG-1 cultured in IL-15 alone or in combination with IL-12 and IL-18. Primary NK cells were also stimulated through the activating receptor CD16. Tumor cell apoptosis was measured using a panel of human colon, melanoma, glioblastoma, prostate, breast, and ovarian tumor cell line spheroids. NK cells or NK-92 cells stimulated with IL-12, IL-15, and IL-18 generated EVs with higher efficiency than EVs from resting cells, although similar amounts of EVs were produced under both conditions. Proteomic analysis indicated similar distribution of cytolytic proteins in EVs from primary NK cells and NK-92, but lower levels in KHYG-1 EVs that translated into poor capacity for KHYG-1 EVs at targeting tumor cell lines. Further, we show that CD16-stimulated NK cells release low amounts of EVs devoid of cytolytic proteins. Importantly, EVs from cytokine-stimulated NK cells penetrate into the spheroid core, and tumor spheroid susceptibility to NK-cell derived EVs was linked to differential expression of the NKG2D ligands MICA/B, which was blocked with an anti-NKG2D antibody. We conclude that EVs from activated primary NK cells or NK-92 cells has the best potential to infiltrate and target solid tumors.

### Keywords
Khyg-1, Nk-92, Il-18, Il-15, Lc-ms/ms, Cd16, Nk cells, Il-12

### Affiliations
Dept of pharmacology Oslo University Hospital Oslo, Norway
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Inngjerdingen
Dept of pharmacology Oslo University Hospital Oslo, Norway


