### Accession
PXD003161

### Title
Protein Lysine Acetylation of Seedling Leaf in Brachypodium distachyon L.

### Description
Using high accuracy nano LC-MS/MS combined with affinity purification, we identified 636 lysine acetylated peptides matched on 353 proteins, and these acetylated proteins were implicated in various molecular functions and basic cellular processes by gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway and domain enrichment analyses.

### Sample Protocol
the seeds were incubated in water for 12 h at room temperature and then transferred to a wet filter paper to germinate in darkness for 24 h (22−25°C). The seeds that germinated uniformly were selected and grown in plastic pots containing Hoagland solution, which was changed every 2 days. In a greenhouse, the experimental conditions included a daily photocycle of 16 h light/8 h dark (26°C/18°C) and 65−75% air humidity. Three biological replicates were performed under the same conditions. The seedling leaves in the three-leaf stage were sampled for each biological replicate and frozen at −80°C for subsequent protein extraction.  To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 26 min, 22% to 35% for 10 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Brachypodium distachyon database (NCBI_B.distachyon_25824 entries_20130320. Fasta) concatenated with reverse decoy database. To increase the accuracy of identified glycoproteins, the limiting conditions were as follows. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation and succinylation are the most crucial protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) involved in the regulation of plant growth and development. In this study, we present the first lysine-acetylation and lysine-succinylation proteome analysis of seedling leaves in Brachypodium distachyon L (Bd). Using high accuracy nano LC-MS/MS combined with affinity purification, we identified a total of 636 lysine-acetylated sites in 353 proteins and 605 lysine-succinylated sites in 262 proteins. These proteins participated in many biology processes, with various molecular functions. In particular, 119 proteins and 115 sites were found to be both acetylated and succinylated, simultaneously. Among the 353 acetylated proteins, 148 had acetylation orthologs in Oryza sativa L., Arabidopsis thaliana, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, and Glycine max L. Among the 262 succinylated proteins, 170 of them were found to have homologous proteins in Oryza sativa L., Escherichia coli, Sacchayromyces cerevisiae, or Homo sapiens. Motif-X analysis of the acetylated and succinylated sites identified two new acetylated motifs (K---K and K-I-K) and twelve significantly enriched succinylated motifs for the first time, which could serve as possible binding loci for future studies in plants. Our comprehensive dataset provides a promising starting point for further functional analysis of acetylation and succinylation in Bd and other plant species.

### Keywords
Lysine acetylation., Leaf, Brachypodium distachyon l.

### Affiliations
Capital normal university
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Proteomics, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Shoumin Zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Proteomics, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, 100048 Beijing, China.


