### Accession
PXD041191

### Title
Determination of the proteome of yeast cells during transition to quiescence

### Description
To identify proteins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae involved in the transition to quiescence in minimal buffered media, we compared the proteome of cells from exponential phase and a few hours after glucose-depletion.

### Sample Protocol
For determination of the proteome of cells from exponential phase (OD600=1) vs cells a few hours post-glucose depletion. 3 biological replicates of cultures of the Sigma1278b strain in minimal, buffered medium1 with 3 % glucose and 20mM ammonium were inoculated, and samples of at least 108 cells were collected at an OD600=1, and 30 h later (OD600=18), washed three times with PBS and stored at -80 oC.  Samples were homogenized in FASP lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTE, 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Protease inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) were added at a final concentration of 3.6% and samples were stored at -80°C until further use. Protein extracts (200 μg/sample) were processed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as described previously [ref: Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:359–362.], with minor modifications [ref: Proteome-based classification of Nonmuscle Invasive Bladder Cancer. Int J Cancer. 2020 Jan 1;146(1):281-294.]. Briefly, buffer exchange was performed in Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter devices (0.5 mL, 30 kDa MWCO; Merck) at 14,000 rcf for 15 min at room temperature. The protein extract was mixed with urea buffer (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged. The concentrate was diluted with urea buffer and centrifugation was repeated. Alkylation of proteins was performed with 0.05M iodoacetamide in urea buffer for 20 min in the dark followed by a centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 10 min at RT. Additional series of washes were conducted with urea buffer (2 times) and ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5, 2 times). Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at RT in the dark, using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14000 rcf for 10 min, lyophilized and stored at –80°C until further use. The peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280nm measurement using a nanodrop instrument. Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled inline with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 Th windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Saccharomyces_cerevisiae_Reference Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot, 6052 proteins entries, downloaded 30/5/2022) using the library free  mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Quiescence is a common cellular state, required for stem cell maintenance and microorganismal survival under stress conditions or starvation. However, the mechanisms promoting quiescence maintenance remain poorly known. Plasma membrane components segregate into distinct microdomains, yet the role of this compartmentalization in quiescence remains unexplored. Here, we show that flavodoxin-like proteins (FLPs), ubiquinone reductases of the yeast eisosome membrane compartment, protect quiescent cells from lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Eisosomes and FLPs expand specifically in respiratory-active quiescent cells, and mutants lacking either show accelerated aging and defective quiescence maintenance and accumulate peroxidized phospholipids with monounsaturated or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). FLPs are essential for the extramitochondrial regeneration of the lipophilic antioxidant ubiquinol. FLPs, alongside the Gpx1/2/3 glutathione peroxidases, prevent iron-driven, PUFA-dependent ferroptotic cell death. Our work describes ferroptosis-protective mechanisms in yeast and introduces plasma membrane compartmentalization as an important factor in the long-term survival of quiescent cells.

### Keywords
Yeast, Sigma1278b, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Quiescence, Glucose depletion

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Microbial Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute of Biosciences and Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research &quot;Demokritos”, 15341 Agia Paraskevi, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Christos Gournas
Microbial Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute of Biosciences and Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research &quot;Demokritos”, 15341 Agia Paraskevi, Greece


