### Accession
PXD011845

### Title
Hdac4 interactome in Huntington's Disease

### Description
Hdac4 has been found to modulate symptoms in Huntington's Disease (HD) mouse models through an uknown mechanism unrelated to any enzymatic activity.  We investigated the protein-protein interactions to gain insight into the role of Hdac4 in HD.

### Sample Protocol
IPs of endogenous Hdac4 were conducted from whole brain and dissected striatum of HD mouse models.  We utilized a Q140 and a Q20 mouse model at 2 and 10 months of age.  Following IP, samples were processed by FASP digestion, fractionated into three fractions by Stagetip, and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched via sequest in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.  Offline mass recalibration and label free quantitation of MS1 peaks were performed using the nodes built in to PD2.2. Summed-abundance based quantitation of interacting proteins was utilized.  Interacting proteins were specificity filtered using SAINT and the bait-normalized MS1 quant values were used for quantitative comparison across conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease (HD) is a monogenic disorder, driven by the expansion of a trinucleotide (CAG) repeat within the huntingtin (Htt) gene and culminating in neuronal degeneration in the brain, predominantly in the striatum and cortex. Histone deacetylase 4 (Hdac4) was previously found to contribute to the disease progression, providing a potential therapeutic target. Hdac4 knockdown reduced accumulation of misfolded Htt protein and improved HD phenotypes. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear, given its independence on deacetylase activity and the predominant cytoplasmic Hdac4 localization in the brain. Here, we undertook a multiomics approach to uncover the function of Hdac4 in the context of HD pathogenesis. We characterized the interactome of endogenous Hdac4 in brains of HD mouse models. Alterations in interactions were investigated in response to Htt polyQ length, comparing mice with normal (Q20) and disease (Q140) Htt, at both pre- and post-symptomatic ages (2 and 10 months, respectively). Parallel analyses for Hdac5, a related class IIa Hdac, highlighted the unique interaction network established by Hdac4. To validate and distinguish interactions specifically enhanced in an HD-vulnerable brain region, we next characterized endogenous Hdac4 interactions in dissected striata from this HD mouse series. Hdac4 associations were polyQ-dependent in the striatum, but not in the whole brain, particularly in symptomatic mice. Hdac5 interactions did not exhibit polyQ dependence. To identify which Hdac4 interactions and functions could participate in HD pathogenesis, we integrated our interactome with proteome and transcriptome data sets generated from the striata. We discovered an overlap in enriched functional classes with the Hdac4 interactome, particularly in vesicular trafficking and synaptic functions, and we further validated the Hdac4 interaction with the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein and SCAR Homolog (WASH) complex. This study expands the knowledge of Hdac4 regulation and functions in HD, adding to the understanding of the molecular underpinning of HD phenotypes.

### Keywords
Striatum, Mouse brain, Hdac5, Ap-ms, Hdac4, Interactome

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


