### Accession
PXD008977

### Title
Proteomes of leaf growing zones in rice genotypes with contrasting drought tolerance

### Description
Plants require a distinctive cohort of enzymes to coordinate division and cell expansion. Proteomic analysis now enables interrogation of immature leaf bases where these processes occur. Hence we investigated proteins in tissues sampled from leaves of a drought-tolerant rice (IAC1131) to provide insights into the effect of soil drying on gene expression when compared with the drought-sensitive Nipponbare. Shoot growth zones were dissected to count dividing cells and extract protein for subsequent Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) quantitative proteomic analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of differentially expressed proteins provided insights into responses of Nipponbare and IAC1131 to drought. Soil drying did not affect the proportion of mitotic cells in IAC1131. More than 800 proteins across most functional categories were up-regulated in drought (and down-regulated on re-watering) in IAC1131, including those involved in organization of the meristem and subsequent cell formation. On the other hand, the proportion of dividing cells in Nipponbare was severely impaired during drought and fewer than 200 proteins responded in abundance when the growing zones underwent a drying cycle. However, those proteins involved in oxidation state and response to external stimuli were more likely to be upregulated by drought, even in Nipponbare.

### Sample Protocol
The drought-sensitive japonica cultivar (Nipponbare) and the drought-tolerant javanica landrace (IAC1131) were used in this study. These lines were co-sown at opposite sides of PVC pots (50-cm deep and 10-cm diameter) in order that soil water status was near-identical for the roots of each genotype and not influenced by developing canopy area and thus transpiration rate. Each pot was lined with heavy-duty plastic bags and filled with 7 kg of fine-textured clay loam as reported earlier. Triplicate pots were grown for each treatment, thus there were 15 pots in total. The experiments were performed in glasshouses set at 28/22°C (day/night) and a 12-h photoperiod. Light intensity exceeded 700 µmol m-2 s-1 throughout the day periods because of supplementary lighting. Seedlings were well watered but not flooded for 40 days. After this period, ‘extreme drought’ stress was imposed by withholding all water for a further 7 days. Severely stressed plants (47 days old) were re-watered to field capacity for three days. A second control group was harvested at the end of the experiment to account for any ontogenetic drift. Preparatory pots were grown in advance to calibrate the rate of imposition of drought, required watering regime and leaf water potentials. Thus, four groups of triplicate samples were collected at 40 days (control 1), 47 days (extreme) and 50 days (recovery and control 2). At each time point, shoots were removed by cutting at the rootshoot junction, surrounding leaf sheathes were removed until no more tissue could be separated from the central cylinder and 10 mm from the base of the youngest leaves was dissected under a stereo microscope followed by immediate freezing at -80°C. Fifty mg of freeze-dried leaf powder was extracted using trichloroacetic acid/acetone. Protein digestion was performed at room temperature overnight using Lys-C, followed by Trypsin for 4 h at 37 °C. TMT labelling was performed on each aliquot with TMTs with respective reporter ions at m/z = 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129c, 130N, 130C and 131, each in 80 µl of ACN. Samples were analysed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files generated by Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and a local MASCOT server (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI Oryza sativa protein database. The MS tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da and Trypsin with one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and 10-plex TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. Search result filters were selected as follows; only peptides with a score >15 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of p = 0.05 were included, and single peptide identifications required a score equal to or above the Mascot identity threshold. The false discovery rate was set to 1% or less in Proteome Discoverer, and estimates of the false discovery rate for the two different rice varieties were based on comparison of one replicate of the control sample versus a second replicates. Protein grouping was enabled such that when a set of peptides in one protein were equal to, or completely contained, within the set of peptides of another protein, the two proteins were contained together in a protein group. Proteins with at least two unique peptides were regarded as confident identifications. Relative quantitation of proteins was achieved by pairwise comparison of TMT reporter ion intensities, for example, the ratio of the labels for each of the treatment replicates (numerator) versus the labels of their corresponding control replicates (denominator). The TMTPrepPro scripts are implemented in the R programming language and are available as an R package, which is accessed in our group through a graphical user interface provided via a local GenePattern server. For this project the ratios to the Control reference from the separate runs for each cultivar were combined and examined for overall quality using hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis. Differentially expressed proteins based on ANOVA comparison of log-transformed ratios were identified and clustered to check that the conditions were well separated. For the pairwise comparisons of interest differentially expressed proteins were identified based on one sample t-tests of log transformed ratios, e.g. Moderate/Control, Extreme/Control. The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric means of the respective ratios. Proteins were considered as differentially expressed if the overall fold changes were greater than 1.5 or less than 0.67, and t-test p-values were less than 0.05. The comparison of available Control/Control ratios was carried out in a similar manner and served as an estimate of the false discovery at this level of the analysis. Gene ontology (GO) information was used to categorize the biological processes of differentially expressed proteins. GO annotations were extracted from the UniProt database and matched to corresponding gene identifiers embedded in the NCBI O. sativa RefSeq database. Proteins were then classified into pathways using available information based on biological process based on biological processes in the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
Plants require a distinctive cohort of enzymes to coordinate cell division and expansion. Proteomic analysis now enables interrogation of immature leaf bases where these processes occur. Hence, proteins in tissues sampled from leaves of a drought-tolerant rice (IAC1131) are investigated to provide insights into the effect of soil drying on gene expression relative to the drought-sensitive genotype Nipponbare. Shoot growth zones are dissected to estimate the proportion of dividing cells and extract protein for subsequent tandem mass tags quantitative proteomic analysis. Gene ontology annotations of differentially expressed proteins provide insights into responses of Nipponbare and IAC1131 to drought. Soil drying does not affect the percentage of mitotic cells in IAC1131. More than 800 proteins across most functional categories increase in drought (and decrease on rewatering) in IAC1131, including proteins involved in "organizing the meristem" and "new cell formation". On the other hand, the percentage of dividing cells in Nipponbare is severely impaired during drought and fewer than 200 proteins respond in abundance when growing zones undergo a drying cycle. Remarkably, the proteomes of the growing zones of each genotype respond in a highly distinctive manner, reflecting their contrasting drought tolerance even at the earliest stages of leaf development.

### Keywords
Growing zone, Abiotic stress, Plant proteomics, Drought stress, Rice

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Yunqi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Paul A. Haynes
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, Australia


