### Accession
PXD000309

### Title
Proteomic portrait of human breast cancer progression identifies novel prognostic markers

### Description
Triplicate analysis of eleven breast cancer cell lines, each separated to 12 offgel fractions. Proteomes were quantified relative to heavy SILAC-labeled MCF7 cells that served as a spike-in standard. In this study, we used system-wide analysis of breast cancer proteomes to identify proteins that are associated with the progression of ER(-) tumors. Our two-step approach included an initial deep analysis of cultured cells that were obtained from tumors of defined breast cancer stages, followed by a validation set using human breast tumors. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry and quantification by Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC), we identified 8,750 proteins and quantified 7,800 of them. A stage-specific signature was extracted and validated by mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. Data analysis: Raw MS files from the LTQ-Orbitrap were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.1.1.9). MS/MS spectra were searched against the decoy IPI-human database version 3.68 containing both forward and reverse protein sequences by the Andromeda search engine. For identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on the protein and on the peptide levels.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death for women in the United States. Of the different subtypes, estrogen receptor-negative (ER(-)) tumors, which are ErbB2+ or triple-negative, carry a relatively poor prognosis. In this study, we used system-wide analysis of breast cancer proteomes to identify proteins that are associated with the progression of ER(-) tumors. Our two-step approach included an initial deep analysis of cultured cells that were obtained from tumors of defined breast cancer stages, followed by a validation set using human breast tumors. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry and quantification by Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC), we identified 8,750 proteins and quantified 7,800 of them. A stage-specific signature was extracted and validated by mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. Overall, the proteomics signature reflected both a global loss of tissue architecture and a number of metabolic changes in the transformed cells. Proteomic analysis also identified high levels of IDH2 and CRABP2 and low levels of SEC14L2 to be prognostic markers for overall breast cancer survival. Together, our findings suggest that global proteomic analysis provides information about the protein changes specific to ER(-) breast tumor progression as well as important prognostic information.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head


