### Accession
PXD018566

### Title
Rewiring of B cell receptor signaling by Epstein-Barr virus LMP2A

### Description
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects human B cells and reprograms them to allow virus replication and persistence. One key viral factor in this process is latent membrane protein 2A (LMP2A), which has been described as a B cell receptor (BCR) mimic promoting malignant transformation. However, how LMP2A signaling contributes to tumorigenesis remains elusive. By systematically comparing LMP2A and BCR signaling using quantitative phosphoproteomics and transcriptome profiling, we identified molecular mechanisms through which LMP2A affects B cell biology. Consistent with previous literature, we found that LMP2A mimics a subset of BCR signaling events, including tyrosine-phosphorylation of the kinase SYK, the calcium initiation complex consisting of BLNK, BTK, PLC2, and its downstream transcription factor NFAT. However, the vast majority of LMP2A-induced signaling events markedly differed from those induced by BCR stimulation. These included differential phosphorylation of kinases, phosphatases, adaptor proteins, transcription factors such as NFB and TCF3, as well as widespread changes in the transcriptional output of LMP2A-expressing B cells. LMP2A affected apoptosis and cell cycle checkpoints by dysregulating the expression of apoptosis regulators such as Bcl-xL and the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma-associated protein (RB1). Accordingly, LMP2A cooperated with drivers of Burkitt lymphoma, overexpressed MYC and an oncogenic cyclin D3 mutant, by counteracting the pro-apoptotic effects of MYC and by further inhibiting RB1 function to promote cell growth. Our results indicate that LMP2A rewires rather than mimics BCR signaling, promoting a signaling output that predisposes EBV-infected B cells to hyperproliferation and eventual malignant transformation.

### Sample Protocol
For protein expression analysis, cell lysates of light-labeled unstimulated LMP2A-KO, medium-labeled unstimulated LMP2A-WT and heavy-labeled LMP2A-KO after 3 hours of BCR stimulation were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio. Extracted proteins were then separated by SDS/PAGE using precast Bis-Tris minigels (NuPAGE Novex 4–12%; Life Technologies) and visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Serva). Each lane was cut into 23  slices, reduced with DTT (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM; Sigma-Aldrich), in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega), extracted, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Protein Digestion and Phosphopeptide Enrichment for Global Phosphoproteomic Analysis, For phosphoproteomic analysis, Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) (Thermo Scientific) and 0.5 M EDTA were added to SILAC-labeled cell lysates. These were then sonicated using Bioruptor and the supernatant was carefully collected after centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min. Protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay, and equal amounts of SILAC-labeled cell lysates were mixed, treated with 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific) and 15 mM IAM for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark for reduction and alkylation, and precipitated with acetone overnight. The precipitate was redissolved in 8 M Urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and then diluted to an urea concentration <1M. Proteins were then digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 (wt/wt) at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, ROTH) to a final concentration of 5‰ .  Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min and desalted on Waters Oasis HLB solid phase extraction columns. The eluted cleared peptides was then evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific). Phosphopeptides were enriched directly from desalted peptides of mixed cell lysates before high pH C18 prefractionation. In brief, digested dried peptides were redissolved in incubation buffer [80% (vol/vol) ACN, 5% (vol/vol) TFA, 5% (vol/vol) glycerol], then incubated with TiO2 beads (10 μm; GL Science) at a 1:8 peptide:bead ratio (wt/wt) with end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 20 min. The peptide concentration was maintained at around 2-5 mg/mL during the incubation. After incubation, all TiO2 beads were loaded onto an empty spin column (5 μm frit; Hoefer Inc.) and washed three times each with incubation buffer, 80% (vol/vol) ACN, 5% (vol/vol) TFA and 60% (vol/vol) ACN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were then eluted with 1% NH4OH (pH ≥10.5) and acidified immediately with 10% (vol/vol) TFA to adjust pH less than 3. The eluate was desalted on a C18 spin column and fractionated using basic reverse phase chromatography on Agilent 1100 Series Capillary LC system. Enriched phosphopeptides was resuspended in 1 μL mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 80% ACN, pH 10) and 49 μL mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium hydroxide in water, pH 10), then injected into a XBridge C18 column (3.5 μm, 150 ×1.0 mm, Waters) and eluted using mobile phase A and B with a gradient (2–5% B, 0–7 min; 5–15% B, 7–27 min; 15–30% B, 27–42 min; 30–50% B, 42–50 min; 50–90% B, 50–51 min; 90–90% B, 51–56.5 min; 90–2% B, 56.5–57 min; 2–2% B, 57–64 min) at a flow rate of 60 μL/min. Peptides were detected at 214 nm, 50 fractions were collected along with the LC separation in a time-based mode from 0 to 64 min and then concatenated into 14 fractions by combining fractions 6, 18, 30, 42; 7, 19, 31, 43, etc (especially, 0-5 min as frac5, 54-64 min as frac14). The combined fractions were then dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at –80 °C. Phosphopeptides Enrichment for pYome Analysis,Antibody-based enrichment for tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides was performed with the Phospho-Tyrosine (P-Tyr-1000) Rabbit mAb Kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Cell lysates from SILAC-labeled unstimulated LMP2A-KO, unstimulated LMP2A-WT and LMP2A-KO after 3 hours of BCR stimulation were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio according to protein concentration and prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Cell Signaling Technology).  Antibody-based enrichment for tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides was performed with the Phospho-Tyrosine (P-Tyr-1000) Rabbit mAb Kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Cell lysates from SILAC-labeled unstimulated LMP2A-KO, unstimulated LMP2A-WT and LMP2A-KO after 3 hours of BCR stimulation were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio according to protein concentration and prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Cell Signaling Technology).

### Data Protocol
Data post-processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.2). After removing all decoy hits and potential contaminant entries, identified phosphosites (p-sites) with localization probability < 0.75 were discarded.  All subsequent analyses were carried out using R v3.6.0 (42) and BioConductor (43) using log2-transformed SILAC ratios for proteins/p-sites. For the total proteome and GPome, only proteins/p-sites detected across all biological replicates were considered. For the LCL pYome, p-site detection in at least four replicates was required. Differential phosphorylation/protein expression analyses were performed using the limma package (v3.42.0). For the total proteome and GPome, statistically significant hits were defined by an absolute log2 fold change ≥ 1 and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value ≤ 1e-3. For the pYome, an absolute log2 fold change ≥ 0.5 and a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value ≤ 1e-2 were used as a cutoff to define significant hits. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed with the ReactomePA package (v1.30.0) (44), using Entrez gene identifiers and Reactome database terms. A Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value ≤ 0.01 was used to define significantly enriched pathways.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Epstein-barr virus, B cell receptor, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Oellerich
Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


