### Accession
PXD037660

### Title
Label free proteomics of oral mucosa tissue to identify potential biomarkers that can flag predilection of precancerous lesions to oral cell carcinoma: A Preliminary study

### Description
Oral squamous cell carcinomas are neoplasms that are mostly preceded by precancerous lesions such as leukoplakia and erythroplakia. It is important for the clinician to know about the predilection and possibility of these precancerous conditions transforming to cancer. This will inturn help to efficiently treat and manage patients. It is therefore important to understand the molecular events that explain the biology of predilection and transformation of precancerous lesions such as erythroplakia and leukoplakia to cancer.    Our study aims to identify potential biomarker proteins in precancerous lesions of leukoplakia and erythroplakia that can flag its transformation to oral cancer.  Four biological replicate clinical phenotypes of healthy control, leukoplakia, erythroplakia, and oral carcinoma were recruited based on clinical screening and histopathological evaluation of buccal mucosa tissue. Differentially expressed proteins were delineated using Label-free quantitative proteomics experiment done on Orbitrap fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer in three technical replicate sets of samples. Raw files were processed using Maxquant version 2.0.1.0. and down stream analysis was done by Perseus version 1.6.15.0. Validation included functional annotation based on biological process and KEGG pathways using ClueGO plug-in of cytoscape. Hierarchical clustering, and principal component analysis were performed using ClustVis tool.  Across control, leukoplakia, and cancer, l- lactate dehydrogenase A chain, plectin, and WD repeat-containing protein 1 were upregulated, whereas thioredoxin 1 and spectrin alpha chain non-erythrocytic 1 were downregulated. Across control, erythroplakia, and cancer, l- lactate dehydrogenase A chain was upregulated whereas aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, peroxiredoxin 1, Heat shock 70 kDa protein 1B, and spectrin alpha chain non-erythrocytic 1 were downregulated. We found proteins involved in leukoplakia were associated with alteration in cytoskeletal reorganization and glycolysis, while in erythroplakia they were associated with alteration in response to oxidative stress and glycolysis across phenotypes. Hierarchical clustering sub-grouped half of precancerous samples under the main branch of control and the remaining half under carcinoma. Similarly, principal component analysis identified segregated clusters of control, precancerous lesions, and cancer but erythroplakia phenotypes particularly overlapped more with cancer cluster.  Label-free proteomics offers a good platform for identification of protein biomarkers that can flag premalignant conditions that could become malignant. Qualitative and quantitative protein signatures across control, precancer and cancer phenotypes explain the possible functional outcomes that dictate malignant transformation to oral carcinoma. The observations place the previously observed clinical findings of erythroplakia having more predilection for cancer, in the right perspective.

### Sample Protocol
Buccal mucosa tissue samples were minced and the proteins were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 2M thiourea, and 4% 3-[(3-Cocamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS). The tissue was homogenized by a hand-held homogenizer followed by ultrasonication in a water bath at 45 Hz frequency and 90 W power for 20 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected. Detergents and lipids were removed from extracted protein using a 2D clean-up kit as per the manufacturer’s protocol. The pellet was reconstituted in 8 M urea/ 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8). Protein concentration was estimated using Bradford assay. 20 µg of protein from each sample was reduced with 25 Mm DTT for 30min at 37 °C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20min in dark at room temperature. The reaction was diluted with three volumes of 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8). Trypsin(Mass spectrometry grade, Promega, USA) reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonatein a 1:20 ratio was added and incubated at 37℃ for 16h. Subsequently, the reaction was quenched by 10% TFA in Ambic. Peptides were desalted using C18 zip tips (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) of 0.6µl bed volume following the manufacturer’s protocol. The desalted peptides were lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation. Before the LCMS/MS run, the desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) FA in LCMS/MS grade water (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), quantified as per the Scopes method, and for all the samples the peptide concentration was normalized as 0.1 μg/μl. Four biological and three technical replicates were run on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with ultra-pressure EASY-nLC 1200 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0 and tandem mass spectra were searched with the Andromeda search algorithm against the Uniprot reviewed human database (FASTA files downloaded in June 2021).22 Searches were performed with full tryptic specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavages, precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 7 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da forfragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches were made against a target-decoy human reference proteome database downloaded from Uniprot. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both for peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Proteins were quantified and normalized using MaxLFQwith a label-free quantification (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 2. LFQ intensities were calculated using the match between runs feature, and MS/MS spectra were required for LFQ comparisons.  The downstream proteins and statistical analyses were performed with Perseus software version 1.6.15.0

### Publication Abstract
Oral squamous cell carcinomas are mostly preceded by precancerous lesions such as leukoplakia and erythroplakia. Our study is aimed at identifying potential biomarker proteins in precancerous lesions of leukoplakia and erythroplakia that can flag their transformation to oral cancer. Four biological replicate samples from clinical phenotypes of healthy control, leukoplakia, erythroplakia, and oral carcinoma were annotated based on clinical screening and histopathological evaluation of buccal mucosa tissue. Differentially expressed proteins were delineated using a label-free quantitative proteomic experiment done on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer in three technical replicate sets of samples. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0, and downstream analysis was done via Perseus version 1.6.15.0. Validation included functional annotation based on biological processes and pathways using the ClueGO plug-in of Cytoscape. Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis were performed using the ClustVis tool. Across control, leukoplakia, and cancer, L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain, plectin, and WD repeat-containing protein 1 were upregulated, whereas thioredoxin 1 and spectrin alpha chain, nonerythrocytic 1 were downregulated. Across control, erythroplakia, and cancer, L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain was upregulated whereas aldehyde dehydrogenase 2, peroxiredoxin 1, heat shock 70&#x2009;kDa protein 1B, and spectrin alpha chain, nonerythrocytic 1 were downregulated. We found that proteins involved in leukoplakia were associated with alteration in cytoskeletal disruption and glycolysis, while in erythroplakia, they were associated with alteration in response to oxidative stress and glycolysis across phenotypes. Hierarchical clustering subgrouped half of precancerous samples under the main branch of the control and the remaining half under carcinoma. Similarly, principal component analysis identified segregated clusters of control, precancerous lesions, and cancer, but erythroplakia phenotypes, in particular, overlapped more with the cancer cluster. Qualitative and quantitative protein signatures across control, precancer, and cancer phenotypes explain possible functional outcomes that dictate malignant transformation to oral carcinoma.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Malignant transformation, Erythroplakia, Oral squamous cell carcinoma, Leukoplakia, Differentially expressed proteins, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biophysics,All India Institute of MedicalSciences, New Delhi, India
Department of Biophysics
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
New Delhi
India

### Submitter
GURURAO HARIPRASAD

### Lab Head
Dr Hariprasad G
Department of Biophysics,All India Institute of MedicalSciences, New Delhi, India


