### Accession
PXD003225

### Title
Differential protein expression profile of papillary thyroid carcinoma with and without lymph node metastasis

### Description
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), the most common form of thyroid carcinomas, is a well-differentiated tumor and accounts for about 80% of all thyroid carcinomas. With the advantage of providing comprehensively analysis of global proteins in samples, proteomics techniques are increasingly applied in the field of identifying novel biomarkers in thyroid cancer. In this study, we conducted a TMT labeling-based quantitative proteomics analysis and bioinformatics analysis to compare the alternation of global proteins in tumor tissues and para-tumor tissues between PTC with LNM and without LNM.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 50-100 mg frozen tissues from each patient were washed twice with cold PBS to eliminate the contamination of blood components. Then, all tissues were grinded in liquid nitrogen until powdery. Following addition of 5 μl lysis buffer (8 M urea in PBS, 1×cocktail, 1 mM PMSF ) per milligram tissues, the samples were incubated at 4℃ for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min. Then, the supernatant were collected. Thereafter, the protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit. Then, proteins of each group were pooled. Follwing incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 55℃ for 1 hour, 100 μg proteins of each group were incubated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 2 hour at room temperature protected from light. Then, the proteins were digested with trypsin/Lys-C Mix at a protein/protease ratio of 25:1 overnight at 37℃. Subsequently, TMT isobaric labeling reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl of 99.9% acetonitrile) were used to label the four groups according to the manufacturer instructions: TMT-126 for Group 1, TMT-127 for Group 2,TMT-130 for Group 3, and TMT-131 for Group 4. Equal the protein digests of each group were then combined for the subsequent proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software suite 1.4. MS raw data were searched against the reviewed Swiss-prot human FASTA database from UniProt (released on July 18th, 2015) using SEQUEST search engine. The setting parameters were as follows: the static modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT6-plex (K and peptide N terminals), dynamic modification was set as oxidation(methionine, M), precursor mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.02 Da and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Proteins were list as a hit when at least two unique peptides were statistically identified (p < 0.05 with a false discovery rate of 5%) and the scores were 10 or more. Quantification was performed using TMT6-plex with experimental bias set as normalize on protein median.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Proteomics, Thyroid carcinoma

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


