### Accession
PXD026225

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based analysis of the TBC1D4 interactome in human skeletal muscle

### Description
Insulin-stimulated muscle glucose uptake is a key process to alleviate hyperglycemia. This process depends on the redistribution of glucose transporters to the muscle surface membrane following phosphorylation of TBC1D1 and TBC1D4. Genetic evidence from a TBC1D4 loss-of-function mutation in human skeletal muscle is associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, little is known about the potential regulating interactors of TBC1D4 in skeletal muscle. Here, we sought to identify interactors of TBC1D4 in human skeletal muscle by an unbiased proteomics approach. We detected 76 proteins as candidate TBC1D4 interactors, whereof 12 were regulated by insulin stimulation including known proteins involved in glucose metabolism (e.g. 14-3-3 proteins and ACTN4). TBC1D1 also co-precipitated with TBC1D4 and vice versa in both human and mouse skeletal muscle. This interaction was not regulated by insulin or exercise in young healthy lean individuals. In contrast, we observed an altered interaction as well as compromised insulin-stimulated phospho-regulation of the TBC1D1-TBC1D4 complex in muscle of obese individuals with T2D. In conclusion, we provide a list of TBC1D4 interactors in human and mouse skeletal muscle. These protein interactors serve as potential regulators of TBC1D4 function and thus insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Muscles were homogenized in lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 20mM Na-pyrophosphate, 150mM NaCl, 50mM HEPES, 1% NP40, 20mM β-glycerophosphate, 10mM NaF, 2mM PMSF, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 10ug/mL aprotinin, 10ug/mL leupeptin, 2mM sodium orthovanadate, 3mM benzamidine, pH = 7.5) and following centrifugation for 20 min at 16.000 G at 4° supernatants (lysates) were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent analyses as previously described (14). The bicinchoninic acid method was used to determine total protein abundance in muscle lysates. TBC1D4 was immunoprecipitated with a c-terminal anti-TBC1D4 antibody (ab24469, abcam) by Protein G covalent conjugated agarose beads (Millipore, #16-266) from 400ug of human muscle lysate and incubated over-night at 4°. The following day, agarose beads were centrifuged and supernatant collected. Beads were washed twice in lysis buffer, twice in NP-40 buffer (150mM NaCl, glycerol 5%, 0.05% NP40 and 50mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.5) and four times in a NaCl-buffer (150mM NaCl, glycerol 5% and 50mM Tris-HCl pH = 7.5). After the last IP-wash, proteins were on-bead digested by trypsin (0,5ug) in 2M Urea, 1mM DTT and Tris-HCl (pH=8) for 30 minutes and supernatant collected and alkylated by 5mM iodoacetamide and left for overnight digestion at 500RPM at room temperature as described in (15). Tryptic peptides were desalted on 2xC18 stageTips.   Tryptic peptides were separated on a 15 cm column (inner diameter 75um, 1.8um beads) easy nano-flow high-performance-LC (HPLC) system. Peptides were eluted with a 100 minute linear gradient from 2-40% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). The HPLC system was coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source to a Q Exactive™ HFX Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were generated by the data dependent acquisition with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS. Precursor ions were picked using the top-15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the mass range 300-1650 m/z and 60,000 resolutions at m/z 200 with a target of of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Tandem spectra were generated by high collision dissociation (27 normalized collision energy) and analyzed at 15,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer with a target of 1 x 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were quantified in the software MaxQuant v1.6.01 with default parameters (16). These include: minimal peptide length of seven amino acids, a maximum of two miscleavages allowed and a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptide and protein identification. The match-between runs function was applied across replicates to quantify non-identified peptides with similar molecular mass and retention time. The retention time window was set to 30 seconds. The intrinsic MaxQuant search engine Andromeda matched mass spectra against the species specific UniProt sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin-stimulated muscle glucose uptake is a key process in glycemic control. This process depends on the redistribution of glucose transporters to the surface membrane, a process that involves regulatory proteins such as TBC1D1 and TBC1D4. Accordingly, a TBC1D4 loss-of-function mutation in human skeletal muscle is associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes, and observations from carriers of a TBC1D1 variant associate this protein to a severe obesity phenotype. Here, we identified interactors of the endogenous TBC1D4 protein in human skeletal muscle by an unbiased proteomics approach. We detected 76 proteins as candidate TBC1D4 interactors. The binding of 12 of these interactors was regulated by insulin, including proteins known to be involved in glucose metabolism (e.g., 14-3-3 proteins and &#x3b1;-actinin-4 [ACTN4]). TBC1D1 also coprecipitated with TBC1D4 and vice versa in both human and mouse skeletal muscle. This interaction was not regulated by insulin or exercise in young, healthy, lean individuals. Similarly, the exercise- and insulin-regulated phosphorylation of the TBC1D1-TBC1D4 complex was intact. In contrast, we observed an altered interaction as well as compromised insulin-stimulated phosphoregulation of the TBC1D1-TBC1D4 complex in muscle of obese individuals with type 2 diabetes. Altogether, we provide a repository of TBC1D4 interactors in human and mouse skeletal muscle that serve as potential regulators of TBC1D4 function and, thus, insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in human skeletal muscle.

### Keywords
Tbc1d4, Interactome, Lcms, Muscle, Diabetes, Insulin

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul S Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.


