### Accession
PXD013661

### Title
The secretome profiling of a pediatric airway epithelium infected with hRSV identified aberrant apical/basolateral trafficking and novel immune modulating (CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3) and antiviral (CEACAM1) proteins.

### Description
The respiratory epithelium comprises polarized cells at the interface between the environment and airway tissues. Polarized apical and basolateral protein secretions are a feature of airway epithelium homeostasis. Human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is a major human pathogen that primarily targets the respiratory epithelium. However, the consequences of hRSV infection on epithelium secretome polarity and content remain poorly understood. To investigate the hRSV-associated apical and basolateral secretomes, a proteomics approach was combined with an ex-vivo pediatric airway epithelial model (HAE) of hRSV infection. Following infection, a skewing of apical/basolateral abundance ratios was identified for several individual proteins. Novel modulators of neutrophil and lymphocyte activation (CXCL6, CSF3, SECTM1 or CXCL16), and antiviral proteins (BST2 or CEACAM1) were specifically detected upon infection. Importantly, CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3 were also detected in nasopharyngeal aspirates (NPA) from hRSV-infected infants but not healthy controls. Furthermore, the antiviral activity of CEACAM1 against RSV was confirmed in vitro using BEAS-2B cells. hRSV infection disrupted the polarity of the pediatric respiratory epithelial secretome and was associated with immune modulating (CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3) and antiviral (CEACAM1) proteins never linked with this virus before. This study, therefore, provides novel insights into RSV pathogenesis and endogenous antiviral responses in pediatric airway epithelium

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for label-free mass spectrometry Apical (135 µL) and basolateral (180 µL) samples collected at 96 hours post-infection (hpi) from control and hRSV-infected WD-PBEC cultures were prepared for analysis by NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS (LC-MS/MS). Soluble proteins were precipitated by addition of an equal volume of ice-cold 30% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone with incubation at  20°C for 2 h. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min (4⁰C) to pellet proteins (Microfuge 22R centrifuge, Beckman Coulter, High Wycombe, UK). Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold acetone and allowed to air dry. Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters, Elstree, UK). Samples were further processed and analysed by NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS as previously described (24). Samples were heated at 80°C for 10 min, reduced with 3 mM DTT at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min (room temperature) protected from light; all steps were performed with intermittent vortex-mixing. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added (0.2µg) and incubated at 37°C overnight. To remove RapiGest SF, the samples were precipitated using 1 % (v/v) TFA at 37°C for 2 hr and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 1 hr (4°C). The peptide supernatant was desalted using C18 reverse-phase stage tips (Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were desalted and reduced to dryness and re-suspended in 3 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA for analysis by MS. All reagents are supplied by Sigma-Aldrich unless stated otherwise.  NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 9μl /min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 %( v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. The trap column was set in-line an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Scan range was 300 to 2000m/z. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 50ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant software (version1.5.3.3 (25)) with its internal search engine Andromeda (26). Precursor mass and fragment mass were searched with mass tolerance of 4.5 and 20 ppm respectively. All other settings were default. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (methionine) and protein N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (cysteine). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (Trypsin/P), minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two mis-cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. The Andromeda search engine was configured for a database containing human proteins and hRSV (Uniprot release-2015_01, 20226 entries (27)). The software further includes a decoy database as well as common contaminants database to determine the false discovery rate and to exclude false positive hits due to contamination by proteins from different species. For label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis, “multiplicity” was set to one. Matching between runs was enabled. Only unmodified and unique peptides were utilized. Averaged LFQ intensity values were used to calculate protein ratios. Contaminants, keratins and host proteins only identified by unique peptides were excluded. Each protein was characterized by its percentage of sequence coverage, its molecular weight, the number of unique peptides used for identification and its abundance (label-free quantification [LFQ]) in the apical and basolateral samples. Proteins detected in at least 2 donor replicates, with at least two unique peptides per replicate, were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The respiratory epithelium comprises polarized cells at the interface between the environment and airway tissues. Polarized apical and basolateral protein secretions are a feature of airway epithelium homeostasis. Human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is a major human pathogen that primarily targets the respiratory epithelium. However, the consequences of hRSV infection on epithelium secretome polarity and content remain poorly understood. To investigate the hRSV-associated apical and basolateral secretomes, a proteomics approach was combined with an <i>ex vivo</i> pediatric human airway epithelial (HAE) model of hRSV infection (data are available via ProteomeXchange and can be accessed at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/ with identifier PXD013661). Following infection, a skewing of apical/basolateral abundance ratios was identified for several individual proteins. Novel modulators of neutrophil and lymphocyte activation (CXCL6, CSF3, SECTM1 or CXCL16), and antiviral proteins (BST2 or CEACAM1) were detected in infected, but not in uninfected cultures. Importantly, CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3 were also detected in nasopharyngeal aspirates (NPA) from hRSV-infected infants but not healthy controls. Furthermore, the antiviral activity of CEACAM1 against RSV was confirmed <i>in vitro</i> using BEAS-2B cells. hRSV infection disrupted the polarity of the pediatric respiratory epithelial secretome and was associated with immune modulating proteins (CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3) never linked with this virus before. In addition, the antiviral activity of CEACAM1 against hRSV had also never been previously characterized. This study, therefore, provides novel insights into RSV pathogenesis and endogenous antiviral responses in pediatric airway epithelium.

### Keywords
Cxcl6, Ceacam1, Respiratory syncytial virus, Quantitative proteomics, Well-differentiated pediatric bronchial epithelial cells (wd-pbecs), Cxcl16, Secretome directionality, Csf3

### Affiliations
Respiratory and Emerging Viruses group Department of Infection Biology Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Respiratory and Emerging Viruses group Department of Infection Biology Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool


