### Accession
PXD008591

### Title
The Itgb3 Adhesome - Integrin β3 is seen as a key anti-angiogenic target for cancer treatment due to its expression on neovasculature

### Description
Integrin β3 is seen as a key anti-angiogenic target for cancer treatment due to its expression on neovasculature, but the role it plays in the process is complex; whether it is pro- or anti-angiogenic depends on the context in which it is expressed.  To understand precisely β3’s role in regulating integrin adhesion complexes in endothelial cells, we characterised, by mass spectrometry, the β3-dependent adhesome.  We show that depletion of β3-integrin in this cell type leads to changes in microtubule behaviour that control their migration. β3-integrin regulates microtubule stability in endothelial cells through Rcc2/Anxa2 driven control of active Rac1 localisation.  Our findings reveal that angiogenic processes, both in vitro and in vivo, are more sensitive to microtubule targeting agents when β3-integrin levels are reduced.

### Sample Protocol
Focal-adhesion enrichment was carried out as described in Ellison et al.(10.1242/dmm.019927) and Schiller et al.(10.1038/embor.2011.5). A small amount of each focal adhesion sample generated was quality controlled by running a 10% SDS-PAGE gel followed by silver staining (Pierce TM Silver Stain Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific, Cramlington, UK). Good quality samples were then analysed by western blotting or mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was carried out by the Fingerprints Proteomics Facility (Dundee University, Dundee, UK) as per Schiller et al. Peptides were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software using the Andromeda peptide database. To achieve label-free quantitative results, three biological repeats were pooled and each of these pooled samples was analysed via three technical repeats through the spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All mass spec analysis was performed using the Perseus bioinformatics toolbox for MaxQuant. Statistical significance was identified using the Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) method. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was performed using Perseus’ built in tools. KEGG and GO annotations were obtained from the mouse annotations package via Perseus (downloaded 20/06/2015) and used to identify angiogenesis, cytoskeleton and focal adhesion related genes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Microtubules, Cell adhesion, Focal adhesions, Endothelial cells, Cell migration, Vasculature, Cancer, Integrins

### Affiliations
University of East Anglia
Senior Lecturer School of Biological Sciences University Of East Anglia

### Submitter
Samuel Atkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Robinson
Senior Lecturer School of Biological Sciences University Of East Anglia


