### Accession
PXD005486

### Title
Statistical models for the analysis of isobaric Tags multiplexed quantitative proteomics

### Description
ABSTRACT: Mass spectrometry is being used to identify protein biomarkers that can facilitate development of drug treatment.  Mass spectrometry based proteomics results in complex proteomic data that is hierarchical in nature often with small sample size studies. Generalized linear models (GLM) is the most popular approach in proteomics to compare protein abundances between groups. However, GLM does not address all the complexities of proteomics data such as repeated measures and variance heterogeneity.  Linear Models for Microarray Data (LIMMA) and mixed models are two approaches that can address some of these data complexities to provide better statistical estimates.   We compared these three statistical models to demonstrate when each approach is the best.  We evaluated these methods using a dataset of known protein abundances, Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) dataset, and simulated dataset.  We found in general the mixed model findings to be a subset of GLM findings which were a subset of LIMMA findings.  Regardless of peptides/PSM/Fold-change restrictions or FDR, less findings were removed from the mixed model than LIMMA since the mixed model is more likely to identify proteins with a larger fold change.  Although the peptides/PSM restrictions led to less findings (but higher percentage of findings), with combined FDR the findings were the same or had a large overlap with no restriction and FDR findings.  As the percentage of findings were higher with the restrictions this indicated these may be the more reliable proteins.  The conclusion is that the mixed model was the most protective of the type I error with the smaller MSE while LIMMA had the better overall statistical properties.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli DH5 alpha cells cultured overnight in 10 ml LB medium and cells were washed thrice with water. Cell pellet was sonicated at 30% amplitude for 10sec, 10 times using Branson Sonifier in 2 ml of 9M urea in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein concentration was measured using 2D quant kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Twelve human proteins purchased from Genecopoea (Rockville, Maryland, USA) are listed below (Table 1). These 12 proteins were spiked at various concentrations ranging from 0 to 80 picomoles in ten E.coli lysates (70g) (Table 2). The total protein level was brought up to 79.14 micrograms in each sample with bovine serum albumin.  Preparation of 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled peptides  Ten samples as designed in Table 2 were subjected to filter-aided samples preparation (FASP) method (ref: PMID: 19377485) and incubated at 37°C for 12hrs. Peptides were acidified using 0.1% TFA and desalted using Oasis HLB 96-well Plate (Waters, Cat: WAT058951). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled using 10-plex TMT (tandem mass tag) reagents according Manufacturer’s (Thermo Scientific)   protocol (ref: PMID: 27486686). TMT labeled peptides from 10 samples were pooled and dried in a vacuum dryer to remove organic solvent. A total of 12 peptide fractions were prepared using high pH reversed-phase method (ref Expert Rev Proteomics, 2012, 9(2): 129–134 Feng Yang et al). Briefly, the TMT labeled sample was reconstituted in 250 µl of 10 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS system (Thermo Scientist) and fractionated using an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 x 100 mm, 5 µm, 130Å). Peptides were separated by increasing concentration of 90% acetonitrile in 10mM TEABC buffer. Fractions were further concatenated into 12 samples and dried. Peptide samples (~5ug) were re-suspended in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nanoflow electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry analysis  DDA (Data dependent acquisition) MS2 analysis of the TMT labeled peptides was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (www.thermoscientific.com) mass spectrometer interfaced with Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC. Nanoflow liquid chromatography  was carried out using C18 capillary columns, 2 cm enrichment column packed with ReproSil-Pur 120  C18-AQ, 7um particles and 75 µm x 30 cm Picofrit (NewObjective.com) analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur 120  C18-AQ, 2.4 um particles  (www.Dr-Maisch.com). Peptides were separated using solvent gradient consisted of 0.1% formic acid with increasing levels of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over a period of 90 minutes (gradient reaching 25% in 40mins, 32% in 20mins, 50% in 10 mins and 90% in 5 mins). The DDA MS2 workflow contained full FT-MS survey scan, 350-1,550 m/z range and quadrupole isolation mode. The MS2 analysis was carried out in HCD mode using 35% normalized collision energy and top 15 precursors above 5e4 target ions intensity were selected for fragmentation and then excluded from DDA for next 30 seconds. Precursor and the fragment ions were analyzed at 120K and 60K resolution respectively. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and Easy-IC ETD ion was used for constant internal mass calibration.   Same set of samples were also analyzed using synchronous precursor selection (SPS) or multi-notch MS3 method of quantitation (ref: Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 7150−7158).  In DDA-MS3 scan, top-speed MS2 mode with CID fragmentation (CE% 35) and ITMS detection methods were selected. In the next step multi-notch MS3 analysis was carried out using top 10 intense MS2 ions mostly carrying TMT tags. Ten maximum intense MS2 ions were selected for SPS-MS3 fragmentation. 55% normalized collision energy was used in HCD fragmentation. MS Precursor and the MS3 fragment ions were analyzed at 120K and 60K resolution respectively. Easy-IC ETD ion was used for constant internal mass calibration.

### Data Protocol
Sample information, TMT labeling and LC-MS analysis  Detailed method section describing sample preparation, multiplexed isobaric labeling, and LC-MS2 and MS3 mass spectrometry analysis is given in the supporting material section. Background proteome was prepared from E.coli DH5 alpha strain. Twelve proteins encoded by ENO1, ARG1, FABP4, PTGES3, KPNA2, LASP1, HDAC3, KCNIP3, OTUB1, GABARAPL1, GAS7 and EZR were obtained from Genecopoea (Rockville, Maryland, USA) were spiked at  different concentrations ranging from 0 to 80 picomoles in ten E.coli lysates (70g). The total protein level was brought up to ~80 micrograms in each sample with bovine serum albumin. Samples were subjected to filter-aided samples preparation (FASP) method (ref: PMID: 19377485) of digestion followed by 10-plex TMT (tandem mass tag) (Thermo) labeling of peptides according to TMT protocol (ref: PMID: 27486686). A total of 12 peptide fractions were prepared using high pH reversed-phase method followed by second dimension liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Nanoflow LC-MS2 and MS3 analyses were carried out using a nanoflow LC system from Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer for 90minutes. Precursor MS resolution was set at 120000 and scan range of m/z 350-1550 Th with quadrupole isolation (isolation width 1.3 Th). For data dependent MS2 analysis HCD fragmentation method was used at 35% collision energy and resolution of 60000. For data dependent MS3, an initial ion trap CID scans used in MS2 step followed by HCD fragmentation of top ten MS2 fragments using multi-notch MS3 mode (ref:PMID: 24927332) at 60000 resolution. The raw instrument data from MS experiments were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) data analysis pipeline configured with Mascot (v2.5) search engine. Data was processed by de-isotoping and charge state deconvolution using Xtract node in addition to default spectrum selector nodes. The processing step included non-fragment filter node to remove precursor and charge reduced species from MS2 data. The data were searched against 4,149 E.coli Refseq entries, including sequences of 13 spiked proteins. Search parameters including 3 missed trypsin cleavages, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl group on cysteine residue, TMT-10 plex at N-terminus and lysine of peptides were set as fixed modifications. For MS2 experiment the mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses were set at 20 ppm and 0.03Da, respectively. For MS3 experiments, the mass tolerances on precursor and fragment masses were set at 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Percolator PSM Validation node (ref PMID: 19338334) was used for high confidence identification of peptides and protein identification with stringent target FDR cutoff value of 0.01 and PSMs with delta Cn value better than 0.05. Reporter ions for TMT labeled peptides were quantified using the PD quantitation node and peak integration tolerance was set at 20 ppm by considering most confident centroid peaks. Unique peptide spectrum matches with protein information and normalized reporter ion intensity was exported and used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is being used to identify protein biomarkers that can facilitate development of drug treatment. Mass spectrometry-based labeling proteomic experiments result in complex proteomic data that is hierarchical in nature often with small sample size studies. The generalized linear model (GLM) is the most popular approach in proteomics to compare protein abundances between groups. However, GLM does not address all the complexities of proteomics data such as repeated measures and variance heterogeneity. Linear models for microarray data (LIMMA) and mixed models are two approaches that can address some of these data complexities to provide better statistical estimates. We compared these three statistical models (GLM, LIMMA, and mixed models) under two different normalization approaches (quantile normalization and median sweeping) to demonstrate when each approach is the best for tagged proteins. We evaluated these methods using a spiked-in data set of known protein abundances, a systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) data set, and simulated data from multiplexed labeling experiments that use tandem mass tags (TMT). Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005486. We found median sweeping to be a preferred approach of data normalization, and with this normalization approach there was overlap with findings across all methods with GLM being a subset of mixed models. The conclusion is that the mixed model had the best type I error with median sweeping, whereas LIMMA had the better overall statistical properties regardless of normalization approaches.

### Keywords
Statistical models, Biomarkers, Tmt, : proteomics, Mixed models

### Affiliations
Raghothama Chaerkady, Ph.D. Scientist II One MedImmune Way Gaithersburg, MD 20878
MedImmune

### Submitter
Raghothama Chaerkady

### Lab Head
Dr Raghothama Chaerkady
Raghothama Chaerkady, Ph.D. Scientist II One MedImmune Way Gaithersburg, MD 20878


