### Accession
PXD012929

### Title
The Hsp70 Chaperone System Stabilizes a Thermo-sensitive Subproteome

### Description
Stress-inducible molecular chaperones have essential roles in maintaining protein homeostasis, but the extent to which they affect global proteome stability remains unclear. Here, we analyzed the effects of the DnaK (Hsp70) system on protein stability in Escherichia coli using pulse proteolysis combined with quantitative proteomics. We quantified ~1500 soluble proteins and found ~500 of them to be protease-sensitive under normal growth conditions, indicating a high prevalence of conformationally dynamic states. Acute heat stress resulted in unfolding of an additional ~200 proteins, reflected in exposure of otherwise buried hydrophobic regions. Overexpression of the DnaK chaperone system markedly stabilized most thermo-sensitive proteins, including numerous ribosomal proteins as well as large, hetero-oligomeric proteins that frequently contain the evolutionary ancient c.37 fold (P-loop nucleoside triphosphate hydrolases).

### Sample Protocol
The samples were either digested by in-gel digestion protocol or FASP method using trypsin as the protease. The thermolysin degraded peptides from filter devices (cut-off:10kDa) were directly analyzed after pulse proteolysis using thermolysin as the protease.

### Data Protocol
The samples were either digested by in-gel digestion protocol and FASP method using trypsin or thermolysin degraded peptides using thermolysin as the protease (non-specific searching).

### Publication Abstract
Stress-inducible molecular chaperones have essential roles in maintaining protein homeostasis, but the extent to which they affect overall proteome stability remains unclear. Here, we analyze the effects of the DnaK (Hsp70) system on protein stability in Escherichia coli using pulse proteolysis combined with quantitative proteomics. We quantify &#x223c;1,500 soluble proteins and find &#x223c;500 of these to be protease sensitive under normal growth conditions, indicating a high prevalence of conformationally dynamic proteins, forming a metastable subproteome. Acute heat stress results in the unfolding of an additional &#x223c;200 proteins, reflected in the exposure of otherwise buried hydrophobic regions. Overexpression of the DnaK chaperone system markedly stabilizes numerous thermo-sensitive proteins, including multiple ribosomal proteins and large, hetero-oligomeric proteins containing the evolutionarily ancient c.37 fold (P loop nucleoside triphosphate hydrolases). Thus, the Hsp70 system, in addition to its known chaperone functions, has a remarkable capacity to stabilize proteins in their folded states under denaturing stress conditions.

### Keywords
Pulse proteolysis, Proteomics, Protein stability, Chaperones

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Liang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Zhao
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


