### Accession
PXD022044

### Title
Mapping and quantification of phosphorylation sites on protein kinase Akt by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of various Akt species was a cornerstone for elucidating the mechanism of its activation/autoinhibition. By combining intact mass measurements with LC-MS/MS we were able to characterize Akt species comprehensively and relate their biological activity to specific phosphorylation patterns.

### Sample Protocol
Akt1 constructs were co-expressed with human PDK1 in baculovirus-infected Sf9 cells using a pFastBac Dual vector. All constructs were cloned with an N-terminal deca-histidine and Strep-tag II for affinity purification, followed by a TEV cleavage site for tag removal. Further purification was performed by high-resolution MonoQ anion exchange chromatography and SEC. Purity of protein preparations was confirmed by intact mass spectrometry. For phosphomapping the reduced protein was denatured in 4 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The sample was diluted with 50 mM ABC down to 1 M urea and then digested overnight using mass-spec-grade trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C or sequencing-grade endoproteinase GluC (Roche) at 25 °C. For the pepsin (Promega) digest, the protein sample was buffered with 50 mM ABC and after alkylation the protein sample was acidified with 10 mM HCl to a pH < 3, and digested with pepsin for 3 hours at 37 °C. Protease-protein ratio was 1:30 for all digests. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% and the peptides were desalted using custom-made C18 stagetips. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a pre-column for sample loading (PepMapAcclaim C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm) and a C18 analytical column (PepMapAcclaim C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, both Dionex-Thermo Fisher Scientific), applying a linear gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% FA acid; solvent A: 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 230 nl/min over 60 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans were obtained in a scan range of 375–1500 m/z, at a resolution of 60000 at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra recorded at a target value of 1E5 and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16, http://www.maxquant.org/) and searched against a custom database containing the sequences of the Akt1 constructs, as well as all Spodoptera spp. protein sequences available in Uniprot and the Bombyx mori reference proteome (www.uniprot.org) plus the sequences of common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages, C-terminal cleavage to glutamate and aspartate for the GluC digests or unspecific cleavage for pepsin digests. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications—all other parameters were set to default. Results were filtered at a false discovery rate of 10% at the peptide and protein level. Spectra and intensities of phosphorylated Akt1 peptides were validated manually.

### Publication Abstract
The protein kinase Akt is one of the primary effectors of growth factor signaling in the cell. Akt responds specifically to the lipid second messengers phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>] and phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate [PI(3,4)P<sub>2</sub>] via its PH domain, leading to phosphorylation of its activation loop and the hydrophobic motif of its kinase domain, which are critical for activity. We have now determined the crystal structure of Akt1, revealing an autoinhibitory interface between the PH and kinase domains that is often mutated in cancer and overgrowth disorders. This interface persists even after stoichiometric phosphorylation, thereby restricting maximum Akt activity to PI(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>- or PI(3,4)P<sub>2</sub>-containing membranes. Our work helps to resolve the roles of lipids and phosphorylation in the activation of Akt and has wide implications for the spatiotemporal control of Akt and potentially lipid-activated kinase signaling in general.

### Keywords
Akt1, Growth factor signaling, Pip3, Lipid second messengers

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas A. Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria


