### Accession
PXD022702

### Title
Heat-treatments affect protease activities and peptide profiles of ruminants’ milk

### Description
Proteases present in milk are heat-sensitive, and their activities increase or decrease depending on the intensity of the thermal treatment applied. The thermal effects on the protease activity are well-known for bovine milk but poorly understood for ovine and caprine milk. This study aimed to determine the nonspecific and specific protease activities in casein and whey fractions isolated from raw bovine, ovine and caprine milk collected in early lactation, and to determine the effects of low-temperature, long-time (63°C for 30 min) and high-temperature, short-time (85°C for 5 min) treatments on protease activities within each milk fraction.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh raw bovine, ovine and caprine milk samples were collected at early lactation. Raw bovine milk was provided by Dairy 4 Farm, Massey University (Palmerston North, New Zealand), and ovine and caprine milk samples obtained from local dairy farms within 10 km to Palmerston North, New Zealand. Milk heat treatments were carried out in the morning on the same day as collection. For each species, three independent batches of milk were collected over three separate days (i.e. n=3 biological replicates).  Ruminant milk samples were first skimmed at 4,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C to remove the fat. Skim milk samples were then heat-treated at 63°C for 30 min and 85°C for 5 min using a thermostatically controlled water-bath with shaking. These thermal conditions were chosen to represent the conventional pasteurization using Low-Temperature, Long-Time (LTLT; 63°C for 30 min) and High-Temperature, Long-time (HTLT; 85°C for 5 min). The heating was performed in a 150 mL capped sterile bottle, and the temperature was monitored through a thermometer (MS6514, Mastech, China) inserted at the center of the liquid. After holding the milk for the required temperature and time, the milk samples were rapidly cooled down in an ice-water bath until the temperature reached approximately 10°C. Raw and heat-treated samples were aliquoted and frozen at -20°C and analyzed within one week. Raw milk samples were used as controls.  The raw and heat-treated ruminant milk samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine the peptide sequences present. Milk samples (500 µL) were subjected to acid precipitation with HCl (pH 4.5) at room temperature for 1 h. The milk samples were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 25 min at 4°C. An aliquot of whey was taken from the middle of the supernatant. After removing the remaining supernatant, casein (pellet) was obtained. This fractionation method was different from the method used above, as here it was not required to dissociate the enzymes from casein micelles. This fractionation was conducted to be able to identify peptides with low abundance. Casein was dissolved in 100 µL of 5% acetonitrile using ultrasonication. Following centrifugation, at 14,000 × g for 25 min at 4°C, 100 µL of whey and casein fractions were ultrafiltered individually using 10 kDa NanoSep centrifugal ultrafilters (Pall, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). The ultrafiltrates were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid.  Data acquisition: Mass spectrometry was carried out on a nanoflow Ultimate 3,000 UPLC (Dionex) coupled to Impact II mass spectrometer with a CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). For each sample, 1 µL of the sample was loaded on a C18 PepMap100 nano-Trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 micron 100Å) at a flow rate of 3,000 nL/min. The trap column was then switched in line with the analytical column ProntoSIL C18AQ (100 µm ID x 150 mm 3-micron 200Å). The reverse-phase elution gradient was from 2% to 20% to 45% solvent B over 60 min, total 88 min at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. Solvent A was LCMS-grade water with 0.1% formic acid; solvent B was LCMS-grade acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The samples were measured in data-dependent MS/MS mode, where the acquisition speed was 2 Hz in MS and 2-32 Hz in MS/MS mode depending on precursor intensity. Ten precursors were selected in the m/z 150-2200 range, with 1-8 charged peptides selected. The analysis was performed in positive ionization mode with a dynamic exclusion of 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
The PEAKS X Studio data analysis software package (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc) was used to analyze the LC-MS/MS data. The raw data were refined by a built-in algorithm which allows the association of chimeric spectra. The peptides were identified with the following parameters: a precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed, peptides with a length starting at four amino acids long were included, the Uniprot Ovis aries database (v2019.08, 27855 sequences), Uniprot Bos taurus database (v2019.08, 46707 sequences), and Uniprot Capra hircus database (v2019.08, 35307 sequences), were used, no enzyme was specified as a digestive enzyme. Oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY) and deamidation (NQ) were chosen as variable modifications in Peaks DB, and unexpected modifications were accounted for in the Peaks PTM search module. A maximum of 3 post-translational modifications (PTMs) per peptide was permitted. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was made based on decoy-fusion. An FDR of less than 1% with a peptide spectrum hit and a PTM A-score of 100 was considered adequate for confident peptide identification. The peptides identified in each fraction were then compiled for each milk type and heat-treatment combination. When peptides with the same amino acid sequences (i.e. redundant peptides) were identified multiple times in the same sample, it was considered as only one peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases present in milk are heat-sensitive, and their activities increase or decrease depending on the intensity of the thermal treatment applied. The thermal effects on the protease activity are well-known for bovine milk but poorly understood for ovine and caprine milk. This study aimed to determine the non-specific and specific protease activities in casein and whey fractions isolated from raw bovine, ovine, and caprine milk collected in early lactation, and to determine the effects of low-temperature, long-time (63&#xb0;C for 30 min) and high-temperature, short-time (85&#xb0;C for 5 min) treatments on protease activities within each milk fraction. The non-specific protease activities in raw and heat-treated milk samples were determined using the substrate azocasein. Plasmin (the main protease in milk) and plasminogen-derived activities were determined using the chromogenic substrate S-2251 (D-Val-Leu-Lys-pNA dihydrochloride). Peptides were characterized using high-resolution liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry. The activity of all native proteases, shown as non-specific proteases, was similar between raw bovine and caprine milk samples, but lower (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05) than raw ovine milk in the whey fraction. There was no difference (<i>P</i> &gt; 0.05) between the non-specific protease activity of the casein fraction of raw bovine and caprine milk samples; both had higher activity than ovine milk. After 63&#xb0;C/30 min, the non-specific protease activity decreased (44%; <i>P</i> &gt; 0.05) for the bovine casein fraction only. In contrast, the protease activity of the milk heated at 85&#xb0;C/5 min changed depending on the species and fraction. For instance, the activity decreased by 49% for ovine whey fraction, but it increased by 68% for ovine casein fraction. Plasmin and plasminogen were in general inactivated (<i>P</i> &gt; 0.05) when all milk fractions were heated at 85&#xb0;C/5 min. Most of the peptides present in heat-treated milk were derived from &#x3b2;-casein and &#x3b1;<sub>S1</sub>-casein, and they matched the hydrolysis profile of cathepsin D and plasmin. Identified peptides in ruminant milk samples had purported immunomodulatory and inhibitory functions. These findings indicate that the non-specific protease activity in whey and casein fractions differed between ruminant milk species, and specific thermal treatments could be used to retain better protease activity for all ruminant milk species.

### Keywords
Peptidomics, Milk

### Affiliations
Proteins & Metabolites Team, Lincoln Research Centre,  AgResearch Limited, Lincoln, New Zealand
Agresearch

### Submitter
Evelyne Maes

### Lab Head
Dr Evelyne Maes
Proteins & Metabolites Team, Lincoln Research Centre,  AgResearch Limited, Lincoln, New Zealand


