### Accession
PXD015575

### Title
Investigation of Proteomic and Phosphoproteomic Responses to Signaling Network Perturbations Reveals Functional Pathway Organizations in Yeast

### Description
Governance of protein phosphorylation by kinases and phosphatases constitutes an essential regulatory network in eukaryotic cells. Network dysregulation leads to severe consequences and is often a key factor in disease pathogenesis. Previous studies revealed multiple roles for protein phosphorylation and pathway structures in cellular functions from different perspectives. We sought to understand the roles of kinases and phosphatases from a protein homeostasis point of view. Using a streamlined tandem mass tag (SL-TMT) strategy, we systematically measured proteomic and phosphoproteomic responses to perturbations of phosphorylation signaling networks in yeast deletion strains. Ours results emphasize the requirement for protein normalization for more complete interpretation of phosphorylation data. Functional relationships between kinases and phosphatases were characterized at both proteome and phosphoproteome levels in three ways: 1) gene ontology enrichment analysis, 2) ∆gene-∆gene correlation networks and 3) molecule covariance networks. This resource illuminates kinase and phosphatase functions and pathway organizations.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation followed a previously published protocol with minor adjustments (Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018). Briefly, yeast pellets were lysed by bead-beating in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) supplemented with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined with BCA assays. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and then quenched with 10 mM DTT. For each sample, a total of 100 μg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 μl 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Samples were digested by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and then trypsin for 6 h at 37 °C, both at 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. TMT11-plex reagents were reconstituted according to manufacturer’s instructions and then diluted 4 times with acetonitrile. To each digest 40 μl TMT reagent was added for labeling. Each deletion strain was randomly assigned into one of 14 TMT groups. Duplicates of each group increased the number of TMT groups to 28. To check labeling efficiency, 2 μl of each sample was pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 9 μl 5% hydroxylamine. All samples were subsequently pooled into 28 TMT groups with a wild type in each and desalted with 100 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction columns. Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit was used to enrich phosphopeptides from the pooled mixture. Unbound fractions were desalted and then fractionated with basic-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 12 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with in-house software. Raw ﬁles were initially converted to mzXML for processing. Database searching included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance. The wide mass-tolerance window for precursors was chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010). TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.1629 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphoprotein analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007, 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method (Savitski et al., 2015) proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using AScore algorithm (Beausoleil et al., 2006). AScore is a probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation site localization. Specifically, a threshold of 13 corresponded to 95% confidence in site localization. For TMT reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the nearest m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were ﬁltered for a summed signal-to-noise of 200 across all 11 TMT channels and an isolation speciﬁcity of at least 0.5 in the MS1 isolation window. For each protein, the ﬁltered unique peptide TMT values were summed to create non-normalized protein quantiﬁcations.

### Publication Abstract
Governance of protein phosphorylation by kinases and phosphatases constitutes an essential regulatory network in eukaryotic cells. Network dysregulation leads to severe consequences and is often a key factor in disease pathogenesis. Previous studies revealed multiple roles for protein phosphorylation and pathway structures in cellular functions from different perspectives. We seek to understand the roles of kinases and phosphatases from a protein homeostasis point of view. Using a streamlined tandem mass tag (SL-TMT) strategy, we systematically measure proteomic and phosphoproteomic responses to perturbations of phosphorylation signaling networks in yeast deletion strains. Our results emphasize the requirement for protein normalization for more complete interpretation of phosphorylation data. Functional relationships between kinases and phosphatases were characterized at both proteome and phosphoproteome levels in three ways: (1) Gene Ontology enrichment analysis, (2) &#x394;gene-&#x394;gene correlation networks, and (3) molecule covariance networks. This resource illuminates kinase and phosphatase functions and pathway organizations.

### Keywords
Protein regulation network, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphorylation signaling pathway organization, Proteomics, Protein kinases and phosphatases, Streamlined tandem mass tag strategy, Phosphorylation regulation network, Multi-notch ms3

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


