### Accession
PXD002030

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei extracellular vesicles

### Description
This project has the main aim to determine the protein composition of extracellular vesicles released by the African sleep sickness parasite, Trypanosoma brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion: Trypanosoma brucei extracellular vesicle proteins were reduced with dithithreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin (Promega) and desalted in C18 cartrigdes.  Column: Thermo Scientific Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 15 cm, nanoViper C18, 2 µm, 100 Å.  HPLC: RSLC nanoUHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA.  Gradient: Solvent A: 2% ACN/0.1% FA, solvent B: 80% ACN/ 0.1% FA, flow rate: 300 nL/min. Separation: 10 min in solvent A, 10-65 min, 5-40% solvent B; 65-70 min, 40-95% solvent B; and 70-90 min, 95% solvent B.  Mass Spectrometer: Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mass spectrometer setup: Full MS1 scan spectra were collected from 400-2000 m/z range at 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200). Top ten most intense parent ions were submitted to higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with an isolation window of 4.0 m/z and 28% normalized-collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Sequences: T. brucei TREU927 sequences (8776 sequences, downloaded from UniProt on 10/27/2014)  Algorithm: MaxQuant v1.5.0.25  Parameters: Searches were performed in two rounds using the following parameters: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, trypsin digestion with 2 missed cleavage sites allowed, 20 ppm for fragment mass tolerance, and 20 and 4.5 ppm peptide-mass tolerance for first and second search rounds, respectively. Identification false-discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for both peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Intercellular communication between parasites and with host cells provides mechanisms for parasite development, immune evasion, and disease pathology. Bloodstream African trypanosomes produce membranous nanotubes that originate from the flagellar membrane and disassociate into free extracellular vesicles (EVs). Trypanosome EVs contain several flagellar proteins that contribute to virulence, and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense EVs contain the serum resistance-associated protein (SRA) necessary for human infectivity. T. b. rhodesiense EVs transfer SRA to non-human infectious trypanosomes, allowing evasion of human innate immunity. Trypanosome EVs can also fuse with mammalian erythrocytes, resulting in rapid erythrocyte clearance and anemia. These data indicate that trypanosome EVs are organelles mediating non-hereditary virulence factor transfer and causing host erythrocyte remodeling, inducing anemia.

### Keywords
Afriacan sleep sickness, Extracellular vesicles, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Border Biomedical Research Center, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Igor C. Almeida
Border Biomedical Research Center, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso


