### Accession
PXD031604

### Title
Analysis of 20-HETE supplementation in calorically restricted C57Bl6 mice

### Description
Proteomic dataset of 15 murine kidneys of 14-week-old male C57Bl6 mice. Mice were divided into 3 treatment groups four weeks prior to nephrectomy and 5 mice had ad libitum access to food and water, while another 10 mice received 30% food restriction. Calorically restricted mice either received intraperitoneal supplementation of 20-HETE or vehicle (EtOH in sodiumchloride 0.9%) for 8 days on a daily basis prior to nephrectomy. Ad libitum fed mice received vehicle injections for 8 days on a daily basis prior to nephrectomy.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, renal material was homogenized and sonicated in buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg and Mannheim, Deutschland). Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated using iodoacetamide. Then, proteins were digested overnight using trypsin at a 1:100 w/w ratio. Subsequently, peptides were cleaned using StageTips. All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC by a Nanospray Flex source (all Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent).  Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 4-6% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min,  6-30% solvent B within 200.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 28.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27 %. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.  Precursors were dynamically excluded for 40.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
20-hete; caloric restriction, C57bl6, Preconditioning

### Affiliations
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Roman-Ulrich Müller
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


