### Accession
PXD042756

### Title
The IRE1 interactome in human LS174T colon epithelial cells

### Description
Inositol-Requiring Enzyme (IRE)1 is an evolutionarily conserved sensor protein of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Vertebrates express two distinct paralogues: IRE1α (gene name ERN1) and IRE1β (gene name ERN2). Both proteins have a similar overall structure, with a sensor domain positioned in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen, and cytoplasmic kinase and endonuclease domains. For IRE1α, it is well-established that a protein folding chaperone called HSPA5 binds to the ER-luminal domain in conditions when the folding load and capacity are balanced. When unfolded proteins accumulate, HSPA5 is recruited to these unfolded proteins to aid in folding, thereby releasing IRE1α. This initiates a chain reaction of dimerization, trans-autophosphorylation and further oligomerization, resulting in an endonuclease-active IRE1α. Activated IRE1α cleaves an intron from the X-box binding protein 1 mRNA in an unusual cytoplasmic splicing reaction, and the resulting frameshift leads to production of a central UPR transcription factor, XBP1S. In contrast to this, IRE1β is far less extensively characterized. It is expressed solely in mucus-producing cells, more specifically goblet cells. Ectopic expression in other cell types such as Hela cells causes rapid cell death, most likely due to unregulated endonuclease activity. Upon aligning the two IRE1 paralogues, it becomes clear that the luminal domain has the lowest homology between the two paralogues, suggesting differences in how activity of either paralogue is tuned in the ER. In this project, we aimed to characterize and compare the IRE1β and IRE1α interactomes in LS174T cells, a cell line that has retained many goblet cell characteristics, to gain more insights into the regulation and downstream activity of IRE1β in a more relevant cellular background.

### Sample Protocol
A doxycycline-regulated expression system was set up in LS174T cells. First, cells were transduced with the pLenti3.3/TR regulator construct at MOI=4  and stable integration was selected with G418. pLenti6.3-IRE1β-FLAG or pLenti6.3-IRE1α-FLAG was transduced at MOI=2 and stable integration was selected with blasticidin. For AP-MS, LS174T cells were plates in 2x T145 culture dishes/repeat pulldown (a total of 3 repeats was used per condition). Transgene expression was induced using 1µg/ml doxycycline. As control samples, LS174T cells containing the pLenti3.3/TR module, but no IRE1-FLAG transgene, were also treated with doxycycline. After 24H, cells were collected in PBS. Cell pellets were washed in PBS, weighed and lysed in 400µl/100µg cell pellet AP-MS buffer (50mM HEPES-KOH pH8.0, 100mM KCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1mM DTT, 0.5mM PMSF, 0.25mM sodium orthovanadate, 50mM β-glycerophosphate, 10mM NaF and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Cells were subjected to one freeze-thaw cycle after which lysates were cleared by centrifugation (16 000g, 4DC, 20’) and transferred to a new tube where they received BioM2 anti-FLAG (Sigma-Aldrich) loaded Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 (5µl anti-FLAG with 50µl beads per combined set of 2xT145). Samples were incubated with end-over-end rotation at 2°C for two hours. Beads were washed and resuspended in 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Peptides were eluted by on-bead digest with trypsin (750ng/sample overnight at 37°C and an additional 250ng for 3 hours the next day). Samples were then acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid. 2.5µl sample was injected on a Q Exactive hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap analyzer (ThermoScientific).  Samples have following sample names in resulting RAW files: 1A, 1B, 1C are control samples, 2A, 2B, 2C are IRE1a/ERN1 pulldowns, 3A, 3B, 3C are IRE1b/ERN2 pulldowns.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using the Andromeda search engine of the MaxQuant v1.6.3.4. software package and the SwissProt human proteome (versions 08-2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Upr, Ls174t, Ire1

### Affiliations
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology / Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University
Department of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Ghent University
Laboratory for ER stress and inflammation, VIB Inflammation Research Center

### Submitter
Eva Cloots

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology / Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University


