### Accession
PXD035105

### Title
Proteomic analysis of peroxisome-associated PEX5 mutants in Xenopus egg extract.

### Description
This project sought to identify the features in PEX5 required for interaction with the peroxisomal PEX2-PEX10-PEX12 ubiquitin ligase complex. Peroxisomes equilibrated with different PEX5 mutants (i.e., C11A, AH1, AH2) were purified from Xenopus egg extract, solubilized in digitonin, and PEX5-associated material was immunoprecipitated via a C-terminal FLAG tag. PEX5 without a FLAG tag was used as a negative control. PEX5-interacting peroxins were identified by LC-MS/MS at the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates were eluted using FLAG peptide in 0.1 % w/v digitonin, concentrated, and heated in reducing SDS-PAGE sample buffer for 20 min at 60ºC. Samples were then resolved on a 4-20% TGX 18-well gel (Bio-Rad) at 100 V. The gel was fixed overnight in 50 % v/v methanol and 5 % v/v acetic acid, then briefly stained with coomassie, and washed multiple times in ultrapure water. Lanes were cut into three approximately 2-cm sections, and subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., Anal Chem. 1996, 68). Briefly, gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min followed by removal of acetonitrile, then completely dried in a speed-vac. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at 4ºC. After 45 min, excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac for ~1 hr, and stored at 4ºC. For the MS analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5-10 µl of 2.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6-µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng J and Gygi SP. J Mass Spec. 2001, 36). After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of 97.5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Eng et al., J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 1994, 5). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes are ubiquitous organelles whose dysfunction causes fatal human diseases. Most peroxisomal enzymes are imported from the cytosol by the receptor PEX5, which interacts with a docking complex in the peroxisomal membrane and then returns to the cytosol after monoubiquitination by a membrane-embedded ubiquitin ligase. The mechanism by which PEX5 shuttles between cytosol and peroxisomes and releases cargo inside the lumen is unclear. Here, we use Xenopus egg extract to demonstrate that PEX5 accompanies cargo completely into the lumen, utilizing WxxxF/Y motifs near its N terminus that bind a lumenal domain of the docking complex. PEX5 recycling is initiated by an amphipathic helix that binds to the lumenal side of the ubiquitin ligase. The N terminus then emerges in the cytosol for monoubiquitination. Finally, PEX5 is extracted from the lumen, resulting in the unfolding of the receptor and cargo release. Our results reveal the unique mechanism by which PEX5 ferries proteins into peroxisomes.

### Keywords
Pex5, Peroxisome

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Michael Leszek Skowyra

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Abraham Rapoport
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA


