### Accession
PXD040376

### Title
Structure-function analysis of a calcium-independent metacaspase reveals a novel proteolytic pathway for lateral root emergence

### Description
Metacaspases are part of an evolutionarily broad family of multifunctional cysteine proteases, involved in disease and normal development. Despite the extensive study of metacaspases in the two decades since their discovery, the structure-function relationship of metacaspases remains poorly understood. Furthermore, previous studies on their function have been thwarted by the redundancy in gene copy number and potential phenotypic suppression of genetic mutations, especially in plants. Here, we have solved the X-ray crystal structure of an Arabidopsis thaliana type II metacaspase (AtMCA-IIf) that belongs to a particular sub-group that does not require calcium ions for activation. Compared to crystal structures of other metacaspases and caspases, the AtMCA-IIf active site is structurally similar and poses a conundrum for the catalytic mechanism of the cysteine-histidine dyad. To study metacaspase activity in plants, we developed an in vitro chemical screen to identify small molecule metacaspase inhibitors. Several hits with a minimal thioxodihydropyrimidine-dione (TDP) structure were identified, some being specific inhibitors of AtMCA-IIf. We provide a mechanistic basis for inhibition by the TDP-containing compounds through molecular docking onto the AtMCA-IIf crystal structure. Finally, a TDP-containing compound (TDP6) was effective at inhibiting lateral root emergence in vivo, likely through the inhibition of metacaspases that are specifically expressed in the endodermal cells overlaying developing lateral root primordia. In the future, the small compound inhibitors and crystal structure of AtMCA-IIf can be used to study metacaspases in various other species, such as important human pathogens including those causing neglected diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Arabidopsis Columbia-0 (Col-0), AtMCA-IIf T-DNA insertion line (GK-506H04-019739) and AtMCA-IIf overexpression (Vercammen et al., 2006) were overnight gas sterilized with HCl and NaOCl, then sowed on half strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) media and stratified at 4°C in the dark. After 3 days, seeds were transferred to 21°C with a 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod with light intensity of 80-100 µmol m-2 s-1 and left to grow for 3 weeks. Roots were harvested, frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into a fine powder using a mortar and a pestle. To achieve a total protein content of approximately 4 mg, 0.5 g of ground tissue was defrosted in 1 ml buffer of 1% (w/v) CHAPS, 0.5% (w/v) deoxycholate, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 5 mM EDTA and 10% glycerol in PBS at pH 7.5, further containing the suggested amount of protease inhibitors mixture according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche). The sample was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and guanidinium hydrochloride was added to the cleared supernatant to reach a final concentration of 4 M.  For the in vitro COFRADIC analysis, protein extracts were prepared in the AtMCA-IIf optimal activity buffer; 50 mM MES (pH 5.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% (w/v) sucrose, 0.1% (w/v) CHAPS and 10 mM DTT. Four mg of total root protein extract was incubated at 30°C with recombinant AtMCA-IIf for a total duration of one hour; here, every 20 min 10 µg of fresh protease (855 units) was pre-activated in the same optimal activity buffer at room temperature for 15 min and then added to the protein extract (enzyme activity is 57 U/μl and one unit corresponds to the enzyme activity that catalyzes the hydrolysis of 1 µmol VRPR-AMC per min at 30°C). This was repeated twice. The same procedure was used for the control sample, but without adding AtMCA-IIf. Reactions were terminated by adding guanidinium hydrochloride to a final concentration of 4 M. Protein concentration measurements were performed using the DC protein assay (BioRad).

### Data Protocol
Protein extracts were modified for N-terminal COFRADIC analysis as described in Staes et al. (2011), with few modifications. Briefly, in all three analyses, α and ε amines in the KO proteomes were 13C4-butyrylated, while amines of WT, OE or AtMCA-IIf treated-KO proteomes were 12C4-butyrylated. MS/MS-spectra were searched using the MASCOT algorithm against the TAIR protein database release 10. The following search parameters were set. Mass tolerance on peptide precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with MASCOT C13 option set to 1) and that of fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. Allowed peptide charges were 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put on ESI-TRAP. Endoproteinase semi-Arg C/P was used, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Two types of MASCOT searches were performed that differed in the set of variable and fixed modifications. The first type of searches included the variable modifications of pyro-glutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine and the fixed modifications of methionine oxidation to its sulfoxide derivative, S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine and butyrylation (12C4 or 13C4) of lysine and peptide N-termini. The second type of searches differed in that acetylation of peptide N-termini was set as a variable modification. Only peptides with a score higher than the MASCOT identity threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. Finally, Mascot Distiller (version 2.4) was used for peptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Protease, Lateral root, Metacaspase, Atmca-iif

### Affiliations
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Stael
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences


