### Accession
PXD000958

### Title
Silencing RNA-binding protein CELF1 inhibits tumor growth and alters gene expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are important regulators of gene expression, but few have been studied for their role in malignancy.  Using proteo-genomic techniques, we have identified the RBP CELF1 mRNA alternative splicing, translation and turnover targets in oral cancer cells. SILAC and  Mass spectrometry analysis, identified 1322 proteins translationally controlled by CELF1 and many of these altered proteins were implicated in malignancy. Our genomic and proteomic analyses provided a comprehensive view of the CELF1 mRNA regulatory network in oral cancer and suggests that CELF1 is a viable target for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Cells labeld with Light, medium, and Heavy Lys/ARg isotopes were lysed and combined 1:1:1. Three biological replicates were processed.  Samples were then separated on a 1D gel. The extracted peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5–50% buffer B (95% ACN and 0.2% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18-reversed phase column (75 mm ID _ 15 cm) packed in-house with Waters  YMC-ODS C18-AQ 5 mm resin in buffer A (0.2% formic acid/95% water/5% Acetonitrile). A Dionex U3000 nano-LC chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) was on-line coupled to the Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy selecting the fragmentation events based on the precursor abundance in the survey scan (400–1700 Th). The resolution of the survey scan was 60,000 at m/z 400 Th with a target value of 1e6 ions and 1 microscan. Low resolution CID MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 5000 ions in normal CID scan mode. MS/MS acquisition in the linear ion trap was partially carried out in parallel to the survey scan in the Orbitrap analyzer by using the preview mode (first 192 ms of the MS transient). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 100 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was 120 s and early expiration was enabled. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 2 Th.

### Data Protocol
The three triple SILAC experiments were searched and quantitated together as 3 experiments using Maxquant v 1.4.1.2. The Human IPI v3.72 database was used. Static modification of carbomidomethyl on cysteines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation were included.  All protein identifications were determined with a 1% FDR as determined by Maxquant

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-binding protein and mrna translation, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, Celf1, Oral squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina
College of Dental Medicine, Oral Health Sciences, Medical Univeristy of South Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Viswanathan Palanisamy

### Lab Head
Dr Viswanathan Palanisamy
College of Dental Medicine, Oral Health Sciences, Medical Univeristy of South Carolina, USA


