### Accession
PXD002295

### Title
Poor preservation of antibodies in archaeological human bone and dentine

### Description
The growth of proteomics-based methods in archaeology prompted an investigation of the survival of non-collagenous proteins, specifically immunoglobulin G (IgG), in archaeological human bone and dentine. Over a decade ago reports were published on extracted, immunoreactive archaeological IgG, and the variable yields of IgG molecules detected by Western blots of 1D and 2D SDS-PAGE gels. If IgG can indeed be recovered from archaeological skeletal material, it offers remarkable opportunities for exploring the history of disease - for example in applying functional anti-malarial IgGs to study past patterns of malaria. More recently, the field has seen a move away from immunological approaches and towards the use of shotgun proteomics via mass spectrometry. Using previously published techniques, this study attempted to extract and characterize archaeological IgG proteins. In only one extraction method were immunoglobulin derived peptides identified, and these displayed extensive evidence of degradation. The failure to extract immunoglobulins by all but one method, along with observed patterns of protein degradation, suggests that IgG may be an unsuitable target for detecting disease-associated antigens. This research highlights the importance of revisiting previously ‘successful’ biomolecular methodologies using emerging technologies.

### Sample Protocol
Three extraction protocols were used. The first (referred to as ‘P1’) followed a protocol developed by Schmidt-Schultz and Schultz (2004). The second protocol (referred to as ‘P2’) was based on a multi-stage protein extraction from fresh bone in preparation for proteomic analysis (Jiang et al. 2007). A third extraction (P3) was performed on the two St. Helena dentine samples using a modified FASP protocol described by Cappellini et al. (2013) and Warinner et al. (2014), designed for samples of archaeological bone, dentine, and dental calculus. For each P1 and P2 extraction stage, sample supernatants were subjected to thiophilic purification using a Pierce® Thiophilic Adsorption Kit (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer-supplied methodology. PVDF filters were used in sample preparation, since these significantly decrease the incidence of IgG filter-binding compared to cellulose acetate filters (Walsh and Coles 1980). Flow-through fraction and elution absorbance was monitored at 280nm against pure binding buffer using a CamSpec M330 spectrophotometer.  Selected samples from the P1 and P2 extractions displaying the highest post-TAC protein concentration (determined by spectrophotometry) were subjected to 1D SDS-PAGE and subsequent gel band proteomic (nanospray LC-MS/MS) analysis, in order to identify and characterize any surviving IgGs.  Excised gel bands and two in-solution post-TAC eluted samples, CD120.2 and EH156.3 (the latter two samples displaying excellent histological preservation and high post-TAC protein concentration), were chosen for proteomic analysis (nLC-MS/MS). Tryptic digestion of samples was performed using a ProGest robot (Genomic Solutions). 15 μl of each sample fraction of tryptic peptide digest was analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC coupled to a hybrid quadrapole-TOF mass spectrometer (QStar Pulsar i, Applied Biosystems) fitted with a nanospray source (Protana) and a PicoTip silica emitter (New Objective). Each sample was loaded and washed on a Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 mm, 5 x 0.3 mm trap column (Agilent) and online chromatographic separation was achieved over 2 hours on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 capillary column (15 cm x 3.5 x 75 μm) with a linear gradient of 0-40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/minute.   MS-MS data were acquired using 1 second survey scan and 3 x 3 second product ion scans throughout the peptide elution. Only ions with 2+ to 4+ charge state and with TIC > 10 counts were selected for fragmentation. Throughout the chromatographic run the mass spectrometer cycled every 10 seconds between a 1.0 second survey scan (MS peptide parent ion mass) and 3 x 3.0 second MS-MS scans (3 peptides fragmented).  MS/MS analysis on tryptic peptides extracted from the St. Helena samples (P3 extractions), using the FASP based approach, was performed using a Q-Exactive at the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory of the Target Discovery Institute, Oxford. Q-Exactive analysis was performed after UPLC separation on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nUPLC (all Thermo Scientific®) using a gradient of 2-40% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid and a flow rate of 250 nl/min @40°C. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 @200 m/z using an ion target of 3E6 between 380 and 1800 m/z. MS/MS spectra of up to f15 precursor masses at a signal threshold of 1E5 counts and a dynamic exclusion for 7 seconds were acquired at a resolution of 17500 using an ion target of 1E5 and a maximal injection time of 50 ms. Precursor masses were isolated with an isolation window of 1.6 Da and fragmented with 28% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
For P1 and P2 extractions Protein Pilot 2.0.1 (AB Sciex) was used to interrogate the Swissprot or human Trembl sequence databases (both accessed in September 2013) with the acquired mass data. Protein Pilot uses a probability-based (Paragon) algorithm to rank peptide-spectrum and provide protein scores, thus giving an indication of protein match confidence. The threshold for a protein identification is usually either 1.3 (one peptide at 95% confidence) or 2.0 (one peptide at 99% confidence). Additional database searching was performed using Mascot Matrix ScienceTM, version 2.4.01, against all available sequences in SwissProt (accessed March 2015). These searches were performed against a decoy database to generate false discovery rates. Peptide tolerance was 10ppm, and with a semi-tryptic search with up to two missed cleavages. MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. Based on previous observations of ancient proteome modification (Cappellini et al., 2012), the post-translational modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (fixed modification) and acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ), glutamine to pyroglutamate, methionine oxidation and hydroxylation of proline (variable modifications). For P3 extractions raw MS/MS spectra were converted to searchable Mascot generic format using Proteowizard version 3.0.6839 using the 200 most intense peaks in each MS/MS spectrum. MS/MS ion database searching was performed using Mascot against all available sequences in UniProt (accessed November 2014). Searches were performed against a decoy database to generate false discovery rates. Peptide tolerance was 10ppm, and with a semi-tryptic search with up to two missed cleavages. MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 0.07 Da, with the same fixed and variable modifications as above. Mascot searches were filtered using an FDR of 2%, and an ion score cut-off of 25. BLAST was used to verify matches to immunoglobulins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Antibodies, Lc-ms/ms, Immunoglobulin, Bone, Dentine

### Affiliations
BioArCh, University of York, UK
University of York

### Submitter
Jessica Hendy

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, UK


