### Accession
PXD042858

### Title
The structural mechanism of MCIA complex assembly links mitochondrial redox pathways

### Description
The Mitochondrial Complex I Assembly (MCIA) complex is essential for the biogenesis of respiratory Complex I (CI), the first enzyme in the respiratory chain, which has been linked to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis. However, how MCIA facilitates CI assembly, and how it is linked with AD pathogenesis, is poorly understood. Here we report the structural basis of the complex formation between the MCIA subunits ECSIT and ACAD9. ECSIT binding induces a major conformational change in the FAD-binding loop of ACAD9, releasing the FAD cofactor and converting ACAD9 from a fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) enzyme to a CI assembly factor. We provide evidence that ECSIT phosphorylation downregulates its association with ACAD9 and is reduced in neuronal cells upon exposure to amyloid-β (Aβ) oligomers. These findings advance our understanding of the MCIA complex assembly and suggest a possible role for ECSIT in the reprogramming of bioenergetic pathways linked to Aβ toxicity, a hallmark of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Bands corresponding to the protein of interest were cut from the gel and in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega) was performed. Peptide extraction was done by sonication for 15 minutes, followed by centrifugation and supernatant collection. A solution of 50:50 water: acetonitrile, 1 % formic acid was used for a second extraction. The supernatants of both extractions were pooled and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were dissolved in 10 µL of reconstitution buffer (96:4 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry measurements For LC-MS/MS measurement, an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument (Thermo) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) was used. Peptides were concentrated on a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) with a constant flow of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water at 30 µL/min for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters) using a gradient composed of Solvent A (3% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (3% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. The percentage of solvent B was stepwise increased from 2% to 6% in 6 min, to 24% for a further 41 min, to 40% in another 5 min and to 80% in 4 min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to the mass spectrometer using the nanoFlex source equipped with a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (MS Vil). Instrument parameters: spray voltage of 2.4 kV; positive mode; capillary temperature 275°C; Mass range 375-1650 m/z (Full scan) in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000; Fill time 50 ms with a limitation of 4e5 ions. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000, with a fill time of up to 86 ms and a limitation of 2e5 ions (AGC target). A normalised collision energy of 34 was applied (HCD). MS2 data was acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0)42 and searched against the uniprot-proteome UP000000625 (E.coli, 4450 entries, May 2022) database containing the sequence of the protein of interest and common contaminants. The data was searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, acetylation (Protein N-term), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. The default mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra (20 ppm) and for MS/MS spectra (0.5 Da) was used. A maximum number of 3 missed cleavages was allowed. For protein identification, a minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level. Match between runs was used with default parameters

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ecsit phosphorylation, Mitochondrial complex i assembly complex (mcia), Fatty acid oxidation (fao), Cryo-em, Oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos), Amyloid-β

### Affiliations
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
Structural Biology Group, European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France

### Submitter
Jennifer Schwarz

### Lab Head
Dr Montserrat Soler-Lopez
Structural Biology Group, European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France


