### Accession
PXD005273

### Title
STUDY OF THE PLASMA MEMBRANE PROTEOME DYNAMICS REVEALS NOVEL TARGETS OF THE NITROGEN REGULATION IN YEAST

### Description
Yeast cells, to be able to grow on a wide variety of nitrogen sources, regulate the set of nitrogen transporters present at their plasma membrane. Such regulation relies on both transcriptional and post-translational events. While large-scale microarray studies have identified most nitrogen-sensitive genes, nitrogen-induced post-translational regulation has only been studied for very few proteins among which the general amino acid permease Gap1. Adding a preferred nitrogen source to proline-grown cells triggers Gap1 endocytosis and vacuolar degradation in an Rsp5-Bul1/2-dependent manner. Here, we used a large-scale proteomic approach to follow the dynamics of the plasma membrane proteome after addition of a preferred nitrogen source. We identified new targets of the nitrogen regulation and four transporters of poor nitrogen sources—Put4, Opt2, Dal5 and Ptr2—that rapidly decrease in abundance. Although the kinetics is different for each transporter, we found that three of them—Put4, Dal5 and Ptr2— are endocytosed, like Gap1, in an Rsp5-dependent manner and degraded in the vacuole. Finally, we showed that Gap1 stabilization at the plasma membrane, through deletion of Bul proteins, regulates the abundance of Put4, Dal5 and Ptr2.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were harvested at an O.D.600 of 3, which equals 2.107 cells/ml. Plasma membrane enriched fractions were prepared as previously described (Szopinska et al., 2011). Yeast crude membrane extracts were prepared as previously described (Morsomme et al., 2002), except that no dithiothreitol was added. Yeast total cell extracts were prepared as previsously described (De Block et al., 2015), except that cells were resuspended in 200 µl of cold homogenization medium (250 mM sorbitol, 50 mM imidazole, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.5) containing a protease inhibitor mix (1 mM PMSF and 2 µg/ml each of leupeptin, aprotinin, antipain, pepstatin and chymostatin) before breaking. The protein concentration was then determined using Bicinchoninic assay, as previously described (Smith et al., 1985). Purified plasma membranes (20 µg of protein) were solubilized in 50 mM TEAB, 0.1 % Rapigest (Waters), pH 8.0, by sonication for 5 min in a bath sonicator (Bioruptor, Diagenode), and the proteins reduced by incubation for 1 h at 60°C with 25 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, then alkylated with 0.26 M methyl-methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested for 16 h at 37°C using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1/20 and the Rapigest lysed by incubating the protein sample in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 60 min at 37°C. After centrifugation of the sample at 54000 rpm (TLA55, Optima-Beckman) for 45 min at 4°C, the supernatant was centrifuged for 20 min at 54000 rpm (TLA55, Optima-Beckman), then the final supernatant was vacuum dried (Speedvac SC 200, Savant) and iTRAQ labeling performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Applied Biosystems). The samples were labeled with tag 114 for the control, tag 115 for the 10 min sample, tag 116 for the 30 min sample, and tag 117 for the 90 min sample. Before separation, the samples were dissolved in 0.025% TFA and 5% acetonitrile (ACN), then the labeled peptides were mixed together and 12.9 µg of the mixture desalted using a C18 Pep Map 100 pre-column and subjected to reverse phase chromatography on a C18 PepMap100 (LC Packings) analytical column for 180 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient from 8% ACN in water/0.1% TFA to 76% ACN in water/0.085% TFA. The eluted peptides were mixed with alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (2 mg/ml in 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and spotted directly onto a MALDI target using a Probot system (LC Packings Amersham). The spotted plate was analyzed on an Applied Biosystems 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer using a 200 Hz solid state laser operating at 355 nm. MS spectra were obtained using a laser intensity of 3200 and 2000 laser shots per spot in the m/z range of 800 to 4000, while MS/MS spectra were obtained by automatic selection of the 12 most intense precursor ions per spot using a laser intensity of 3800 and 2100 laser shots per precursor. Collision-induced dissociation was performed with an energy of 1 kV with air as the collision gas at a pressure of 1 x 106 Torr. Data were collected using Applied Biosystems 4000 Series Explorer™ software.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The MS/MS data were used to search the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (276 256 sequences Release 54.0 of 24, July 07 from the website http://www.ebi.ac.uk/FTP/) using the  thorough search  option and a S. cerevisiae taxonomy filter. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 0.15 and 0.4 Da, respectively. The  iTRAQ 4plex peptide labeled  or “iTRAQ 8plex peptide labeled” sample types and a  biological modification ID focus  were selected in the analysis method. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme with allowance for a single missed cleavage, and cysteine alkylation by MMTS as a modification. The results were further processed by the Pro Group™ Algorithm to determine the minimal set of justifiable identified proteins. Proteins were annotated based on Saccharomyces Genome Database, Gene Bank, and UniProt Databases.  All reported data were based on 99% confidence for protein identification as determined by ProteinPilot (ProtScore ≥ 2.0). Protein identification confidence was expressed as the “Unused Protein Score”, a measurement of the protein identification confidence taking into account peptides from spectra that have not already been “used” by higher scoring proteins. Quality of identification was assessed by false discovery rate analysis. The FDR analysis provided by ProteinPilot consists of a target-decoy database search. The number of decoy proteins relative to the number of target proteins reported by the search was lower than 1% for each run.  Quantification of relative change  The method for the quantification of relative change is reported in the attached pdf file named "Quantification of relative change method" in order to present clearly the used mathematical formulae.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast cells, to be able to grow on a wide variety of nitrogen sources, regulate the set of nitrogen transporters present at their plasma membrane. Such regulation relies on both transcriptional and post-translational events. Although microarray studies have identified most nitrogen-sensitive genes, nitrogen-induced post-translational regulation has only been studied for very few proteins among which the general amino acid permease Gap1. Adding a preferred nitrogen source to proline-grown cells triggers Gap1 endocytosis and vacuolar degradation in an Rsp5-Bul1/2-dependent manner. Here, we used a proteomic approach to follow the dynamics of the plasma membrane proteome after addition of a preferred nitrogen source. We identified new targets of the nitrogen regulation and four transporters of poor nitrogen sources-Put4, Opt2, Dal5, and Ptr2-that rapidly decrease in abundance. Although the kinetics is different for each transporter, we found that three of them-Put4, Dal5, and Ptr2-are endocytosed, like Gap1, in an Rsp5-dependent manner and degraded in the vacuole. Finally, we showed that Gap1 stabilization at the plasma membrane, through deletion of Bul proteins, regulates the abundance of Put4, Dal5 and Ptr2.

### Keywords
Yeast plasma membrane, Endocytosis, Nitrogen sources, Proteomics, Transporters, Arrestin

### Affiliations
Université catholique de Louvain, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Croix du Sud 4-5, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve
Université Catholique de Louvain La Neuve

### Submitter
Hervé Degand

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Morsomme
Université catholique de Louvain, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Croix du Sud 4-5, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve


