### Accession
PXD014556

### Title
Automated sample preparation with SP3 for low-input clinical proteomics

### Description
High-throughput and streamlined workflows are essential in clinical proteomics for standardized processing of samples originating from a variety of sources, including frozen tissue, FFPE tissue, or blood. To reach this goal, we have implemented single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) on a liquid handling robot for automated processing (autoSP3) of tissue lysates in a 96-well format, performing unbiased protein purification and digestion delivering peptides that can be directly analyzed by LCMS. AutoSP3 eliminates hands-on time and minimizes the risk of error, and we show it reduces the protein quantification variability, and improves longitudinal performance and reproducibility. We demonstrate the distinguishing ability of autoSP3 to process low-input samples, reproducibly quantifying 500-1000 proteins from 100-1000 cells (<100 ng protein). Furthermore we applied it to process a cohort of clinical FFPE pulmonary adenocarcinoma (ADC) samples, and recapitulate their separation into known histological growth patterns based on proteome profiles. Collectively, autoSP3 provides a generic, scalable, and cost-effective pipeline for routine and standardized proteomic sample processing that should enable reproducible proteomics in broad range of clinical and non-clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of ~11.9 million cells were resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM ABC pH 8.5, and 50 μL 25x PIC) and probe sonicated for 5 times 20 seconds at a frequency of 10% using a Branson Sonifier. Cell lysates were kept on ice in-between cycles to avoid overheating. DNA or RNA contaminants were cleaved using 250 Units of Benzonase for 15 minutes at 37°C and 750 rpm. Subsequently, the buffer was adapted to a final concentration of 1% SDS, 100 mM ABC, 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM CAA including protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC)) before incubation for 5 minutes at 95°C CHB-T2-D ThermoQ, Hangzhou BIOER Technologies). Reduced and alkylated proteins were quantified using a BCA assay and stored at -20°C until further use in manual and automated SP3 processing. As a reference, the SP3 protocol was carried out manually as described before (Hughes 2019). In brief, 10 μg of extracted HeLa protein were added to PCR tubes in a total volume of 10 μL lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM ABC pH 8.5). Magnetic beads were prepared by combining 20 μL of both, Sera-Mag Speed Beads A and B (Fisher Scientific, Germany), and wash them one time with 160 μL and two times with 200 μL ddH2O, and re-suspend them in 20 μL ddH2O for a final working concentration of 100 μg/μL. 2 μL of pre-washed magnetic beads as well as 12 μL 100% acetonitrile (ACN) were added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 50% ACN. Protein binding to the beads was allowed for 18 minutes, followed by 2 minutes incubation on a magnetic rack to immobilize beads. The supernatant was removed and beads were washed two times with 200 μL of 80% ethanol (EtOH) and one time with 180 μL of 100% ACN. Beads were resuspended in 15 μL of 100 mM ABC and sonicated for 5 minutes in a water bath. Finally, sequencing-grade trypsin was added in an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:20 (5 μL of 0.1 μg/μL trypsin in ddH2O), and beads were pushed from the tube walls into the solution to ensure efficient digestion. Upon overnight incubation at 37°C and 1000 rpm in a table-top thermomixer, samples were acidified by adding 5 μL of 5% TFA and quickly vortexed.  Beads were immobilized on a magnetic rack and peptides were recovered by transferring the supernatant to new PCR tubes. Samples were acidified by adding 75 μL 0.1% FA to reach a peptide concentration of approximately 1 μg/10 μL. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20 C.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). The search was performed against the human Uniprot database (20170801_Uniprot_home-sapiens_canonical_reviewed; 20214 entries) using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) and oxidation (M) / acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as a fixed and variable modifications, respectively. First and second search peptide tolerance were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm of MaxQuant. LFQ intensities were calculated separately for different parameter groups using a minimum ratio count of 1, and minimum and average number of neighbors of 3 and 6, respectively. MS2 spectra were not required for the LFQ comparison. On top, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated with a log fit enabled. Identification transfer between runs via the matching between runs algorithm was allowed with a match time window of 0.3 minutes. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. All remaining settings were set as default in MaxQuant. LFQ values were extracted from the protein groups table and log2-transformed for further analysis. No additional normalization steps were performed, as the resulting LFQ intensities are normalized by the MaxLFQ procedure. Proteins that were only identified by a modification site, the contaminants, as well as the reversed sequences were removed from the data set. All consecutive steps were performed in Microsoft Excel, Perseus (version 1.6.1.3), and the software environment R (version 3.5.1).

### Publication Abstract
High-throughput and streamlined workflows are essential in clinical proteomics for standardized processing of samples from a variety of sources, including fresh-frozen tissue, FFPE tissue, or blood. To reach this goal, we have implemented single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) on a liquid handling robot for automated processing (autoSP3) of tissue lysates in a 96-well format. AutoSP3 performs unbiased protein purification and digestion, and delivers peptides that can be directly analyzed by LCMS, thereby significantly reducing hands-on time, reducing variability in protein quantification, and improving longitudinal reproducibility. We demonstrate the distinguishing ability of autoSP3 to process low-input samples, reproducibly quantifying 500-1,000 proteins from 100 to 1,000 cells. Furthermore, we applied this approach to a cohort of clinical FFPE pulmonary adenocarcinoma (ADC) samples and recapitulated their separation into known histological growth patterns. Finally, we integrated autoSP3 with AFA ultrasonication for the automated end-to-end sample preparation and LCMS analysis of 96 intact tissue samples. Collectively, this constitutes a generic, scalable, and cost-effective workflow with minimal manual intervention, enabling reproducible tissue proteomics in a broad range of clinical and non-clinical applications.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Automation, Sample preparation, Sp3, Clinical proteomics, Pulmonary adenocarcinoma, Low-input

### Affiliations
DKFZ
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


