### Accession
PXD025786

### Title
Organ specific fibroblast-derived matrix as a tool for understanding breast cancer metastasis

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer has an extremely poor prognosis due to lack of available targeted treatments, especially for metastasis. Metastatic sites frequently include the lymph nodes and the lungs, and during the metastatic process, breast cancer cells must come into contact with the extracellular matrix (ECM) at every step. The ECM provides both structural support and biochemical cues, and cell-ECM interactions can lead to changes in to drug response. Here, we used fibroblast-derived ECM to perform high throughput drug screening of 4T1 breast cancer cells on metastatic organ ECM (lung) and we see that drug response differs to drug inhibition on plastic. The FDM that we are able to produce from different metastatic organs is abundant in, and contains a complex mixture of ECM proteins. We also show differences in ECM composition between the primary site and metastatic sites. Furthermore, we show that global kinase signalling of 4T1 cells on the ECM is relatively unchanged between organs, however we show large changes in signalling compared to plastic. Our study highlights the importance of context when testing drug response in vitro, showing that the consideration of the ECM is critically important.

### Sample Protocol
FDMs were generated in triplicate from the primary lung, lymph and mammary fibroblasts, following which the fibroblasts were lysed to leave behind the ECM. FDMs were washed in PBS, scraped and collected. FDMs were then centrifuged at 8000 x g for 10 minutes. PBS was then removed, and samples were resuspended in 20ul GdCl lysis buffer (6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris, pH 8.5). Samples were then vortexed and boiled at 95C for 5 mins following which they were sonicated using the Bioruptor on maximum energy setting (5 x 30s on/ 30s off). Samples were then centrifuged for 1 minute at 13,000 rpm and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Sample preparation and mass spectrometry was then performed as previously described.  Briefly, after determining protein concentration with Bradford (Sigma), 5ug was taken forward for digestion. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted on in-house packed C18 Stagetips []. For each sample, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the C18 material activated with 40ul of 100% Methanol (HPLC grade, Sigma), then 40ul of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The tips were subsequently equilibrated 2x with 40ul of 1%TFA, 3% Acetonitrile, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100ul of 0.1% formic acid, the peptides were eluted into clean 500ul Eppendorf tubes using 40% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Raw MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 and searched against the mus musculus reference proteome obtained from Uniprot. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled, dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M) and Acety. on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and common contaminants removed, resulting in a final protein matrix of 3,913 proteins identified. For downstream processing, protein identifications with N=3 in at least one group were retained, and missing values imputed using the built-in imputation algorithm in Perseus (v. 1.5.0.9).

### Publication Abstract
During the metastatic process, breast cancer cells must come into contact with the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) at every step. The ECM provides both structural support and biochemical cues, and cell-ECM interactions can lead to changes in drug response. Here, we used fibroblast-derived ECM (FDM) to perform high throughput drug screening of 4T1 breast cancer cells on metastatic organ ECM (lung), and we see that drug response differs from treatment on plastic. The FDMs that we can produce from different organs are abundant in and contains a complex mixture of ECM proteins. We also show differences in ECM composition between the primary site and secondary organ sites. Furthermore, we show that global kinase signalling of 4T1 cells on the ECM is relatively unchanged between organs, while changes in signalling compared to plastic are significant. Our study highlights the importance of context when testing drug response in vitro, showing that consideration of the ECM is critically important.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Matrix, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Copenhagen, Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Copenhagen, Denmark.


