### Accession
PXD014606

### Title
Glioma Proteome explored by LC/MS/MS

### Description
Gliomas are the most frequent and aggressive malignancies of the central nervous system. Gliomas accumulate genetic alterations that cilminate in enhanced activity of receptor tyrosine kinasesand downstream mediators. The genetic alterations (gene amplification/loss) are well characterised, little information is available regarding the changes in the proteome of gliomas of different grades. Therefore, an unbiased quantitative proteomics approach of human gliomas has been undertaken. The proteomics results indicate various up- and downregulation of pathways, in particular downregulation of the endocytic machinery components involved in initiation, formation, and scission of endocytic carriers. Both clathrin-dependent and -independent endocytosis were changed. The reduction of endocytic machinery components causes increased receptor cell surface levels, a prominent phenotype of defective endocytosis. The impaired endocytosis creates a selective advantage in glioma tumour progression due to prolonged receptor tyrosine signalling from the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsy samples were collected from patients undergoing surgical removal of gliomas (patient consent according to the local ethical committee). To match the glioma samples against control tissue, biopsies were collected from patients undergoing surgery for epilepsy. Additional control biopsies were collected for quality control by immunoblotting. Biopsies (25 to 258 mg) were homogenised in 8 M urea/50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0/75 mM NaCl containing protease inhibitors (cOmplete Mini, PMSF), spun at 12,000g for 10 min at 4 degs. Proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT/56 degs), alkylated (50 mM iodo-acetamide, 15 min RT) and passed over a PD-10 column (4 M urea/Tris-HCl, pH8.0/75 mM NaCl). Digestion was with endoproteinase LsyC (1:100 enzyme/protein) for 2 hrs at 37 degs, followed by trypsin (1:100 enzyme/protein) for 2 hrs at 37 degs, followed by a second aliquot of trypsin (1:100 enzyme/protein) at 37 degs overnight. Digestion was stopped with TFA to 1% final concentration and desalting was done on a SepPak cartridge with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetontrile/0.1% TFA and dried for subsequent LC separation. The digests were fractionated into six pools on a Vydac 218TPN column (1x250 mm) with a linear gradient from 0-40% acetontrile in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 4.5. The individual pools were dried and analysed by capillary LC connected to a Thermo Lumos tribrid instrument set to 120,000 resolution for the precursor scan, while peptide fragmentation was was in the LTQ set to do as many fragmentations as possible with 3 secs.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the H. sapiens databank (SwissProt) was searched with ProteomeDiscoverer set to use Mascot and SequestHT search engines (10 ppm precursor, 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance). For each biopsy, three replicates of each fraction with the corresponding replicatates/freactions from the pooled controls were combined into one, biopsy-related search file. The modifications used were: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed, oxidized methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The peptide search matches were filtered to 1% false discovery rate. For relative protein quantification, feature detection with the Minora module form Proteome Discoverer was included into the search algorithm. The output of the Proteome Discoverer was further analysed with the Perseus software to find regulated proteins in the data set.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Endocytosis, Glioma, Glioblastoma, Cancer

### Affiliations
Biozentrum of the University of Basel
Biozentrum of the University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Paul Jenö

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Jenoe
Biozentrum of the University of Basel


