### Accession
PXD024621

### Title
The effect of AKT and AMPK site-specific phosphorylation on TBC1D4 biological activity

### Description
TBC1D4 is a 160 kDa multi-domain containing RabGAP (Rab GTPase-activating protein) and a downstream target of the insulin and contraction-activated kinases AKT and AMPK. While phosphorylation of TBC1D4 has been linked to GLUT4 translocation from storage vesicles (GSVs) to the cell surface, its impact on TBC1D4 enzymatic function is not well understood as previous studies mostly investigated the truncated GAP domain lacking the phosphorylation sites. In the present study, we expressed and purified recombinant full-length TBC1D4 using the baculovirus system. Size exclusion chromatography and co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that full-length TBC1D4 forms oligomers of ~600 kDa. Moreover, full-length TBC1D4 displayed similar substrate specificity but had a markedly higher specific GAP activity towards Rab10 compared to the truncated GAP domain. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we mapped 19 Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in TBC1D4. In vitro phosphorylation with purified kinases, stable isotope-labelled [γ-18O4]ATP and Michaelis-Menten kinetics identified Ser324 (KM ~6 µM) and Thr649. (KM ~25 µM) as preferential sites for AKT whereas four sites, Ser348, Ser577, Ser595 (KM ~10 µM), Ser711 (KM ~79 µM), and Ser764 were found to be preferred targets for AMPK. Phosphorylation of TBC1D4 by AKT or AMPK did not alter the intrinsic RabGAP activity but disrupted interaction with the insulin-regulated aminopeptidase (IRAP), a resident protein of GSV and implicated in GLUT4 traffic. These findings provide evidence that insulin and contraction may regulate TBC1D4 primarily through recruitment of the RabGAP to GLUT4 vesicles.

### Sample Protocol
Mapping of phosphosites in TBC1D4 was conducted by mass spectrometry. Briefly, kinase reactions were separated by SDS-PAGE. Coomassie stained protein bands corresponding to TBC1D4 were excised and subjected to in-gel protein digestion as described previously (29) with minor adaptions as follows: Reduction with DTT was done at 50°C for 15 min and each gel slice were digested with 200 ng LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega, Madison, WI). Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 1% TFA (v/v) and separated by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000, ThermoFisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) using an EASYspray ion source equipped to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped and desalted on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (2 cm length; 164535 ThermoFisher Scientific) and subsequently separated via 1 and 2 hour gradients on 50cm C18-LC columns EASY-Spray™ (ES803A, ThermoFisher Scientific) or µPACᵀᴹ (552503518050, Pharmafluidics). Mass spectra were acquired in data dependent acquisition mode and HCD as well as ETD fragmentation were used. For mass spectrometry analysis peptides were trapped and desalted on an Acclaim PepMap™ C18 column (2 cm length; 164535 ThermoFisher Scientific) and subsequently separated via EASY-Spray™ C18 column (50 cm; ES803A ThermoFisher Scientific) and µPACᵀᴹ (50 cm; 552503518050, Pharmafluidics) using two different gradients: 1. For 90 min LC-MS run, peptides were loaded with a flow rate of 6 µl/min, to the trap column (loading buffer: (0.1% TFA (v/v)). After 4 min, trap column was switched into nano flow (300 nl/min) and peptides were eluted through the separation column with buffer A (0.1% FA (v/v)) using a linear gradient 4-34% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN (v/v)) for 55 min, followed by a 10 min increase to 50% buffer B, a 1 min increase to 90% buffer B and a 10 min wash with buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. 2. For 150 min LC-MS run, the same loading procedure was used, but the linear gradient from 4-34% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN (v/v)) lasts 100 min, followed by a 20 min increase to 50% buffer B, a 1 min increase to 90% buffer B and a 10 min wash with buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Column temperature was set to 40°C. MS data were acquired with data-dependent (DDA) scan methods using an Orbitrap for fullscans (MS1), resolution of 120,000, scan range 350-1600 m/z, AGC target of 4.0e5 and cycle time of 3 seconds.   Filter criteria and scan parameter for MS2 were set as follows: 1. For 90min LC-MS runs precursors with an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 and a charge state from 2-7 were selected for MS2 fragmentation with HCD (higher-energy C-trap dissociation; collision energy 32%). Detection in the Orbitrap was done with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms at 30,000 resolution. 2. For 150min LC-MS runs two fragmentation methods were used. Precursor with an intensity threshold greater than 2.5e4 were selected for MS2. Those with a charge state of 2 were fragmented with HCD (32%) and those with charge states 3-7 with ETD (electron transfer dissociation). Cycle time between two full scans were set to 3 sec and with both fragmentation methods an AGC target of 1e5, a maximum injection time of 150 ms and Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 was set.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed with Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3/2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). HTsequest search was done against protein FASTA files from Mus musculus (SwissProt, TaxID=10090, version 2017-10-25, 25097 sequences and 2020-04, 25264 sequences), a general contaminants list (245 sequences) and the His-tagged TBC1D4 sequence, with 10ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Enzyme was set to trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation as well as phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) or “heavy” phosphorylation (+85.966 Da, transfer of phosphoryl group from[γ-18O4]ATP) of serine, threonine or tyrosine were allowed as variable modifications. The fixed value PSM Validator (max delta Cn: 0.05, minimal XCorr score for charge state: 2+ ≥1.9, 3+ ≥2.3, from 4+ ≥2.6) and the ptmRS-node included in Proteome DiscovererTM were applied. FDR was set to 0.01 (strict). Only high confident peptides and if modified with a site probability of >75% were annotated to proteins within the result file.

### Publication Abstract
TBC1D4 is a 160&#xa0;kDa multidomain Rab GTPase-activating protein (RabGAP) and a downstream target of the insulin- and contraction-activated kinases AKT and AMPK. Phosphorylation of TBC1D4 has been linked to translocation of GLUT4 from storage vesicles (GSVs) to the cell surface. However, its impact on enzymatic activity is not well understood, as previous studies mostly investigated the truncated GAP domain lacking the known phosphorylation sites. In the present study, we expressed and purified recombinant full-length TBC1D4 using a baculovirus system. Size-exclusion chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that full-length TBC1D4 forms oligomers of &#x223c;600&#xa0;kDa. Compared with the truncated GAP domain, full-length TBC1D4 displayed similar substrate specificity, but had a markedly higher specific GAP activity toward Rab10. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we mapped 19 Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in TBC1D4. We determined Michaelis-Menten kinetics using in&#xa0;vitro phosphorylation assays with purified kinases and stable isotope-labeled &#x3b3;-[<sup>18</sup>O<sub>4</sub>]-ATP. These data revealed that Ser<sup>324</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;6&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) and Thr<sup>649</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;25&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) were preferential sites for phosphorylation by AKT, whereas Ser<sup>348</sup>, Ser<sup>577</sup>, Ser<sup>595</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;10&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), Ser<sup>711</sup> (K<sub>M</sub> &#x223c;79&#xa0;&#x3bc;M), and Ser<sup>764</sup> were found to be preferred targets for AMPK. Phosphorylation of TBC1D4 by AKT or AMPK did not alter the intrinsic RabGAP activity, but did disrupt interaction with insulin-regulated aminopeptidase (IRAP), a resident protein of GSVs implicated in GLUT4 trafficking. These findings provide evidence that insulin and contraction may regulate TBC1D4 function primarily by disrupting the recruitment of the RabGAP to GLUT4 vesicles.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tbc1d4, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
German Diabetes Center
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
Prof. Dr. Hadi Al-Hasani Direktor Institut für Klinische Biochemie und Pathobiochemie   Deutsches Diabetes-Zentrum (DDZ) Leibniz-Zentrum für Diabetes-Forschung an der Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Stefan Lehr

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hadi Al-Hasani
Prof. Dr. Hadi Al-Hasani Direktor Institut für Klinische Biochemie und Pathobiochemie   Deutsches Diabetes-Zentrum (DDZ) Leibniz-Zentrum für Diabetes-Forschung an der Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf


