### Accession
PXD029085

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Bacterial Chondronecrosis with Osteomyelitis in Broiler Chickens

### Description
Proteomic analysis was performed on the proximal tibia head from healhty and BCO-affected broiler (meat-type) chickens using Bruker Daltonics amaZon series Mass Spectrometer. This analysis was undertaken to identify key protein signature involved in BCO, a common cause of lameness.

### Sample Protocol
The protein of interest was separated from the gel matrix and sliced to small pieces (~1 mm2) to perform in gel trypsin digestion using a standard protocol available in http://msf.ucsf.edu/protocols.html.  Briefly, gel pieces were de-stained first using 50% ACN in 25mM NH4HCO3 and performed in gel reduction and alkylation of the protein using DTT/IAA. After the reduction and alkylation step, gel pieces were dried completely and swelled with trypsin for 30 min at 4 degrees C followed by incubation at 37 degrees C overnight. Digestion will release all the tryptic pieces in to the solution and this tryptic digests were analyzed using Agilent 1200 series HPLC interfaced to a Bruker Amazon-SL quadrupole ion trap captive spray mass spectrometer capable of performing data dependent LC tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Tryptic peptides were separated at a solvent flow rate of 4 µL/min with 0 to 40 % gradient of 0.1% FA (solvent A) and ACN in 0.1% FA (solvent B) over a 320 minutes period using C18 column (150 x 0.3mm, 3.5 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size, Zorbax SB (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
Bruker Proteinscape bioinformatics suite coupled with MASCOT 2.1 was used to search LC-MS/MS data in Uniprot Gallus database for identification of proteins. For the Mascot search, parent ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.6 Da with fixed modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. There was a 95% confidence limit for identification of proteins and less than 5% false discovery rate (FDR). Simulatneously searching the reverse sequence database calculated the FDR in the Mascot search. Uncharacterized Gallus proteins were entatively identified based on gene sequence similarities.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial Chondronecrosis with Osteomyelitis (BCO) is a specific cause of lameness in commercial fast-growing broiler (meat-type) chickens and represents significant economic, health, and wellbeing burdens. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis remain poorly understood. This study represents the first comprehensive characterization of the proximal tibia proteome from healthy and BCO chickens. Among a total of 547 proteins identified, 222 were differentially expressed (DE) with 158 up- and 64 down-regulated proteins in tibia of BCO vs. normal chickens. Biological function analysis using Ingenuity Pathways showed that the DE proteins were associated with a variety of diseases including cell death, organismal injury, skeletal and muscular disorder, immunological and inflammatory diseases. Canonical pathway and protein-protein interaction network analysis indicated that these DE proteins were involved in stress response, unfolded protein response, ribosomal protein dysfunction, and actin cytoskeleton signaling. Further, we identified proteins involved in bone resorption (osteoclast-stimulating factor 1, OSFT1) and bone structural integrity (collagen alpha-2 (I) chain, COL2A1), as potential key proteins involved in bone attrition. These results provide new insights by identifying key protein candidates involved in BCO and will have significant impact in understanding BCO pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Fhn, Bco

### Affiliations
University of Arkansas
Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA

### Submitter
Sami Dridi

### Lab Head
Dr Sami Dridi
Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA


