### Accession
PXD009853

### Title
The responses of the pulmonary pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus to the neutrophil derived oxidant N- chlorotaurine

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is a pulmonary pathogen to individuals who are immunocompromised (e.g. mylosuppression) and those who display defects in immune equilibrium, commonly observed in the Cystic fibrosis lung and presents itself in the form as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.32 In the latter disease A. fumigatus airborne conidia penetrate the lower airways, germinate and and grow within in thick tenacious CF mucus. A. fumigatus CF colonized individuals can become sensitized to A. fumigatus secreted allergens and eventually develop a type 2 hypersensitivity reaction to AF allergens, toxins and proteases which are readily replenished into the mucus which can directly cause cell damage and peeling at the bronco – epithelium interface. A. fumigatus also induces invasive disease which carries up to 90% mortality. The effect of neutrophil oxidant NCT on A. fumigatus was determined as neutrophils are the first line of cellular defense against A. fumigatus.

### Sample Protocol
Protein (75 μg) was reduced with dithiotreitol (DTT; 200 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 1 M) (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Ireland) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:40, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 spin filters (Medical Supply Company, Ireland) and 1 μg of peptide mix was eluted onto a Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific, U.S.A) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a Biobasic C18 PicofritTM column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 120 min reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL /min. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16; http://maxquant.org/) to  correlate the data against an annotated database derived from the Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 Reference proteome downloaded from Uniprot.  The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-terminals were set as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when more than one unique peptide for each protein was observed.

### Data Protocol
Results processing, statistical analyses and graphics generation were conducted using Perseus v. 1.5.5.3. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and ANOVA of significance and t-tests between the NCT (6.8 mM) and ddH2O treated A. fumigatus hyphal proteomics was performed using a p-value of 0.05 and significance was determined using FDR correction (Benjamini-Hochberg). Proteins that had non-existent values (indicative of absence or very low abundance in a sample) were included in the study only when they were completely absent from one group and present in at least two of the three replicates in the second group (referred to as qualitatively differentially abundant proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Petroleum hydrocarbons reach the deep-sea following natural and anthropogenic factors. The process by which they enter deep-sea microbial food webs and impact the biogeochemical cycling of carbon and other elements is unclear. Hydrostatic pressure (HP) is a distinctive parameter of the deep sea, although rarely investigated. Whether HP alone affects the assembly and activity of oil-degrading communities remains to be resolved. Here we have demonstrated that hydrocarbon degradation in deep-sea microbial communities is lower at native HP (10&#x2009;MPa, about 1000&#x2009;m below sea surface level) than at ambient pressure. In long-term enrichments, increased HP selectively inhibited obligate hydrocarbon-degraders and downregulated the expression of beta-oxidation-related proteins (i.e., the main hydrocarbon-degradation pathway) resulting in low cell growth and CO<sub>2</sub> production. Short-term experiments with HP-adapted synthetic communities confirmed this data, revealing a HP-dependent accumulation of citrate and dihydroxyacetone. Citrate accumulation suggests rates of aerobic oxidation of fatty acids in the TCA cycle were reduced. Dihydroxyacetone is connected to citrate through glycerol metabolism and glycolysis, both upregulated with increased HP. High degradation rates by obligate hydrocarbon-degraders may thus be unfavourable at increased HP, explaining their selective suppression. Through lab-scale cultivation, the present study is the first to highlight a link between impaired cell metabolism and microbial community assembly in hydrocarbon degradation at high HP. Overall, this data indicate that hydrocarbons fate differs substantially in surface waters as compared to deep-sea environments, with in situ low temperature and limited nutrients availability expected to further prolong hydrocarbons persistence at deep sea.

### Keywords
Aspergillus fumigatus nct n-chlorotaurine proteomics infection lung cystic fibrosis abpa

### Affiliations
Medical Mycology Unit, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.
Maynooth University

### Submitter
Gerard Sheehan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Unit, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


