### Accession
PXD011078

### Title
The Bloom’s syndrome helicase BLM functions as a homodimer within the Bloom’s complex

### Description
Homologous recombination (HR) is an essential and highly regulated cellular process. Unintended HR in somatic cells is potentially deleterious; it can result in translocations and/or somatic cell loss of heterozygosity.  This is suppressed by the BLM protein in combination with topoisomerase III, RMI1 and RMI2 in a hetero-tetrameric complex (the ‘Bloom’s complex’). To understand how the activities of BLM helicase and topoisomerase III are coupled, we purified the four-subunit complex. Chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry revealed a unique architecture that couples helicase and topoisomerase domains.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking was performed as previously described (Leitner et al., MCP, 2012; Leitner et al., PNAS, 2014). Crosslinked samples were digested with endo-lysC and trypsin, fractionated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and SEC fractions were analysed by DDA-LC-MS/MS. The LTQ Obritrap Velos Pro was used for mass analyses with both CID and HCD fragmentation modes.  Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by using CID fragmentation was searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.1. xQuest search parameters that differ from the default settings were as follows: minimum of 4 residues per peptide chain, charge states of +2 to +8 were considered, precursor mass tolerance ±15 ppm, oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification and up to two were allowed, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, enzyme specificity was trypsin up to two missed cleavages were allowed, search was done in ion-tag mode. Data generated using HCD fragmentation was searched using pLINK 1 (Yang et al., Nat Methods, 2012). pLINK search parameters that differ from the default settings were as follows: precursor mass tolerance ±15 ppm, product-ion mass tolerance ±20 ppm, variable modifications of oxidation (M) and carbamidomethyl (C), enzyme specificity was trypsin up to two missed cleavages per chain (excluding the site of crosslinking) The protein database used for searching consisted of all the components of the Bloom’s complex (BLM, TOP3A, RMI1, RMI2), the MBP-tag used for purification, and the top 20 contaminants in the samples, which was identified from a standard proteome-wide database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Blm, Crosslinking ms, Structural proteomics, Bloom’s syndrome

### Affiliations
Genome Stability Unit, St. Vincent’s Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Australia
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Jason Low

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew J Deans
Genome Stability Unit, St. Vincent’s Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Australia


