### Accession
PXD014740

### Title
Protein synthesis in the developing neocortex at near-atomic resolution reveals Ebp1-mediated neuronal proteostasis at the 60S tunnel exit

### Description
Proteostasis must be finely tuned in the nervous system, as it represents an essential feature of neurodevelopment, and dominant pathology in neurodegenerative disease. At the gateway of proteostasis is the ribosome; however, the architecture of ribosomal complexes in the developing mammalian brain has not been visualized. In this study, we analyze the molecular architecture of ex vivo embryonic and perinatal mouse neocortical ribosomes, revealing Ebp1 as a 60S peptide tunnel exit binding factor at near-atomic resolution by multiparticle cryo-electron microscopy. The impact of Ebp1 on the neuronal proteome was analyzed by pSILAC and BONCAT coupled mass spectrometry, implicating Ebp1 in neurite outgrowth proteostasis, with in vivo embryonic Ebp1 knockdown resulting in neurite outgrowth dysregulation. This study constitutes the first near-atomic resolution structure of actively translating ribosomes ex vivo from the nervous system, and visualizes Ebp1 as a chaperone of protein synthesis at the 60S peptide tunnel exit in neocortical neurogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from cell lysates were precipitated in 90% ethanol solution at -20°C, followed by 30 minutes centrifugation at 20000xg at 4°C. Protein pellets and AHA-clicked beads were resuspended in 2M urea, 6M Thiourea, 0.1M Tris pH8 solution. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10mM DTT and 55mM iodoacetamide at room temperature, respectively. For lysis, proteins were incubated with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperature for 3 hours. Three volumes of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution were added, and proteins were further digested with trypsin (Promega) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16hrs. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide concentration was measured based on 280nm UV light absorbance. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed employing an EASY nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made C18 microcolumns (75 µm ID, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm resin, Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Denmark) of a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 2 hours with a 9% to 55.2% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Settings for mass spectrometry analysis were as follows: one full scan (resolution, 60,000; m/z, 350-1,800) followed by top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution, 15,000; AGC target, 1e5; max. injection time, 22ms; isolation width, 1.3m/z; normalized collision energy, 26). The Q Exactive HF-X instruments was operated in data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by up to 20 consecutive MS/MS scans. Ions with an unassigned charge state, singly charged ions, and ions with charge state higher than six were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default parameters, and with match between runs and requantify options on. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl fixed modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide mass tolerance was 6ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20ppm. Database search was performed with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot mouse database (downloaded on January 2019) with common serum and enzyme contaminant sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. Minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. Potential contaminants, reverse database hits and peptides only identified by modification were excluded from analysis. MaxQuant normalized SILAC ratios were used for quantitative data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein synthesis must be finely tuned in the developing nervous system as the final essential step of gene expression. This study investigates the architecture of ribosomes from the neocortex during neurogenesis, revealing Ebp1 as a high-occupancy 60S peptide tunnel exit (TE) factor during protein synthesis at near-atomic resolution by cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM). Ribosome profiling demonstrated Ebp1-60S binding is highest during start codon initiation and N-terminal peptide elongation, regulating ribosome occupancy of these codons. Membrane-targeting domains emerging from the 60S tunnel, which recruit SRP/Sec61 to the shared binding site, displace Ebp1. Ebp1 is particularly abundant in the early-born neural stem cell (NSC) lineage and regulates neuronal morphology. Ebp1 especially impacts the synthesis of membrane-targeted cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), measured by pulsed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (pSILAC)/bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) mass spectrometry (MS). Therefore, Ebp1 is a central component of protein synthesis, and the ribosome TE is a focal point of gene expression control in the molecular specification of neuronal morphology during development.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Proteostasis, Development, Orbitrap, Neocortex, Ebp1

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.


