### Accession
PXD002494

### Title
Identification of GLI-associated proteins by mass spectrometry

### Description
The Hedgehog signaling pathway is essential for the maintenance and response of several types of stem cells. To study the transcriptional response of stem cells to HH signaling, we searched for proteins binding to GLI proteins, the transcriptional effectors of the HH pathway in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.  We purified GLI protein complex from an ES cell line that contained a tamoxifen-inducible 3XFLAG-tagged GLI3 repressor allele by anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation and several novel GLI co-factors were identified in the complex by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
A single 15cm plate (containing approximately 3x108 ES cells expressing FLAG tagged GLI3R or control cells) was harvested with cell scrapers in cold DPBS. Cells were spun down at 300g for 5 min and resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer per 0.3 ml of cell pellet (20mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.5M NaCl, 0.2% Triton X-100, 10mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5mM DTT and Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). The cells were incubated with the Lysis Buffer at 4°C for 30min and centrifuged at 20000g for 30min. 1ml of supernatant was transferred into fresh tube and 0.3 volume of Buffer A (10mM HEPES, pH7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl, 10% glycerol) was added to dilute the salt concentration of cell lysate to a final concentration of approximately 0.3M. 50µl of Anti-FLAG M2 Agarose (Sigma A2220) was mixed with 1.3 ml of cell lysate and rotated at 4°C for 2 hours then washed three times with Washing Buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 300mM NaCl, 10mM KCl, 0.2% TritonX-100, Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)) and then with Elution Base  Buffer (10mM HEPES, pH7.9, 0.1M NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% TritonX-100, Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), no FLAG peptides) once. This was centrifuged at 2500g for 30 seconds and the pellet was resuspended in 30µl of Complete Elution Buffer (200 µg/ml 3xFLAG peptides, Sigma, #F4799 in Elution Base Buffer) and the mixture was incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes with frequent vortexing. The supernatant was collected by spinning at 2500g for 30 seconds, loaded on a 4-20% gradient SDS-PAGE gel and minimally resolved by electrophoresis for 10 minutes at 120V. The gel was subsequently stained with Coomassie Blue for 1 hour and destained for 30 minutes. The stained part of gel containing proteins was excised and digested with trypsin. Peptides were sequenced on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Proteins were identified as described previously using either the Proxeon Easy-nLC II coupled to the Thermo Velos Pro or the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC coupled to the Thermo Orbitrap Elite. Briefly, the digested peptides were desalted using Millipore U-C18 ZipTip Pipette Tips following the manufacturer’s protocol. A 2cm long x 100 µm I.D. C18 5µm trap column (Proxeon EASYColumn) was followed by a 75µm I.D. x 15cm long analytical column packed with C18 3µm material (Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100). Peptides were separated by a 60 minute 5-45% B gradient using buffer A composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. On the Orbitrap Elite, the FT-MS resolution was set to 120,000, and top 20 MS/MS acquired in CID using the ion trap. For the Velos Pro, the ion trap was used for MS and top 20 MS/MS using data dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Proteome Discoverer version 1.4. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest was set up to search MOUSE_04-14.fasta (release 2014_04, 51362 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the MOUSE_04-14 database (release 2014_04, 51388 entries) also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da ("QL060112_G1", "QL060112_G1b", "QL060112_G2", "QL060112_G2b", "071812_Glit3T", "QL060112_C1", "QL060112_C1b", "QL060112_C2", "QL060112_C2b" and "071812_control") and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM (only samples "071812_Glit3T" and "071812_control") and 1.2 Da (only samples "QL060112_G1", "QL060112_G1b", "QL060112_G2", "QL060112_G2b", "QL060112_C1", "QL060112_C1b", "QL060112_C2" and "QL060112_C2b"). Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus and oxidation of methionine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Sequest as a variable modification.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is essential for the maintenance and response of several types of stem cells. To study the transcriptional response of stem cells to HH signaling, we searched for proteins binding to GLI proteins, the transcriptional effectors of the HH pathway in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. We found that both GLI3 and GLI1 bind to the pluripotency factor NANOG. The ectopic expression of NANOG inhibits GLI1-mediated transcriptional responses in a dose-dependent fashion. In differentiating ES cells, the presence of NANOG reduces the transcriptional response of cells to HH. Finally, we found thatGli1andNanogare co-expressed in ES cells at high levels. We propose that NANOG acts as a negative feedback component that provides stem cell-specific regulation of the HH pathway.

### Keywords
Gli, Hedgehog signaling, Nanog, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
The University of Texas at Austin  Department of Molecular Biosciences Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Maria Person

### Lab Head
Dr Steven A. Vokes
The University of Texas at Austin  Department of Molecular Biosciences Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology


