### Accession
PXD008937

### Title
Impact of CD74 knockdown on the HLA peptidome of the H1 melanoma cell line

### Description
The influence of CD74 expression on the HLA peptidome of the H1 melanoma cell line was analyzed by label-free quantitation mass spectrometry of HLA ligand extracts obtained from CD74 siRNA & control siRNA treated cells.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and class II molecules were isolated from 50Mio CD74siRNA treated and mock treated H1 cells using standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously,(PMID 23329485) . The pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32 was utilized for isolation of Class I molecules. A 1:1 mixture of the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü-39 and the HLA-DR- specific mAB L243 was utilized for the isolation of HLA class  II. Label-free relative quantitation (LFQ) of the HLA peptidome composition was performed by LC-MS analysis of HLA class II ligand extracts from treated and control cells in five technical replicates. Peptide samples were separated by nanoflow high- performance liquid chromatography (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50 μm x 25 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a linear gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in an an online-coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data dependent acquisition mode using collision- induced dissociation fragmentation. MS2 spectra for 2+ and 3+ precursors of 400- 650 m/z were acquired at 30k resolution with AGC target values of 70,000 and maximum injection times of 150ms. Normalized collision energy was set to 35%, dynamic exclusion was set to 7s. On column peptide amounts for the 5 LFQ replicates were adjusted based on initial dose-finding LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using SequestHT node of ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to search against the human proteome as comprised in the Swiss-Prot database (version of September 27 th 2013, 20,279 reviewed protein sequences contained) without enzymatic restriction. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Oxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using Percolator (PMID 17952086) and limited to 1%. Peptide lengths were to 8-25 amino acids. Relative quantification of HLA ligands was performed based on the peak area of the corresponding precursor MS1 extracted ion chromatogram. Imputation of missing values, 2-tier normalization for technical variability in MS signal intensity and calculation of fold-change and p-values (heteroskedastic t-test using Benjamini- Hochberg correction) for differential peptide presentation was performed using an in- house R script.

### Publication Abstract
Despite multidisciplinary local and systemic therapeutic approaches, the prognosis for most patients with brain metastases is still dismal. The role of adaptive and innate anti-tumor response including the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) machinery of antigen presentation is still unclear. We present data on the HLA class II-chaperone molecule CD74 in brain metastases and its impact on the HLA peptidome complexity.We analyzed CD74 and HLA class II expression on tumor cells in a subset of 236 human brain metastases, primary tumors and peripheral metastases of different entities in association with clinical data including overall survival. Additionally, we assessed whole DNA methylome profiles including CD74 promoter methylation and differential methylation in 21 brain metastases. We analyzed the effects of a siRNA mediated CD74 knockdown on HLA-expression and HLA peptidome composition in a brain metastatic melanoma cell line.We observed that CD74 expression on tumor cells is a strong positive prognostic marker in brain metastasis patients and positively associated with tumor-infiltrating T-lymphocytes (TILs). Whole DNA methylome analysis suggested that CD74 tumor cell expression might be regulated epigenetically via CD74 promoter methylation. CD74<sup>high</sup> and TIL<sup>high</sup> tumors displayed a differential DNA methylation pattern with highest enrichment scores for antigen processing and presentation. Furthermore, CD74 knockdown in vitro lead to a reduction of HLA class II peptidome complexity, while HLA class I peptidome remained unaffected.In summary, our results demonstrate that a functional HLA class II processing machinery in brain metastatic tumor cells, reflected by a high expression of CD74 and a complex tumor cell HLA peptidome, seems to be crucial for better patient prognosis.

### Keywords
Cd74, Melanoma, Hla peptidome

### Affiliations
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology
University of Tuebingen, Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Daniel Kowalewski

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Stevanovic
University of Tübingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology Department of Immunology


