### Accession
PXD036446

### Title
HDX-MS of AcrIF9 and AcrIF2 binding to CRISPR IF Csy complex

### Description
CRISPR RNA-guided detection and degradation of foreign DNA is a dynamic process. Viruses can interfere with this cellular defense by expressing small proteins called anti-CRISPRs. While structural models of anti-CRISPRs bound to their target complex provide static snapshots that inform mechanism, the dynamics and thermodynamics of these interactions are often overlooked. Here we use hydrogen deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) experiments to determine how anti-CRISPR binding impacts the conformational landscape of the type IF CRISPR RNA guided surveillance complex (Csy) upon binding of two different anti-CRISPR proteins (AcrIF9 and AcrIF2). The results demonstrate that AcrIF2 binding relies on enthalpic stabilization, whereas AcrIF9 uses an entropy driven reaction to bind the CRISPR RNA-guided surveillance complex. Collectively, this work reveals the thermodynamic basis and mechanistic versatility of anti-CRISPR-mediated immune suppression. More broadly, this work presents a striking example of how allosteric effectors are employed to regulate nucleoprotein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of the Csy complex The Csy complex was purified as described previously (9, 38). Csy genes and a synthetic CRISPR were co-expressed on separate vectors (Addgene IDs: 89232 and 89244) in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells (NEB). Expression was induced with 0.5 mM isopropyl-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at an optical density (OD600 nm) of 0.5. Cells were incubated overnight at 16 °C, then pelleted by centrifugation (3000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C) and re-suspended in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris at pH 7.5, and 500 mM sodium chloride. Pellets were sonicated on ice and the lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 25 min at 4 °C. The Csy complex was affinity purified using Ni-NTA resin (QIAGEN). The resin was washed with five column volumes of lysis buffer before elution with 50 mM Tris (pH = 7.5), 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, 5% glycerol. Protein was then concentrated (Corning Spin-X concentrators) at 4 °C prior to size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex 200, GE Healthcare) in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, and 1 mM TCEP. Intact Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry Concentrated protein stocks, Csy (9.7 μM), Csy with ssDNA (15.7µM), Csy with AcrIF9 (13.7 μM), and Csy with AcrIF2 (35.7 μM) were diluted 1:10 into deuterated 50 mM HEPES 150 mM KCl, pH 7.5 or into non-deuterated buffer for the 0-minute controls. The reaction was placed in an Agilent 1290 UPLC series autosampler and 10 μL were withdrawn at 1, 8, 60, 180, and 1440 minutes. LCMS analysis were conducted using a Phenomenex Onyx Monolithic C18 reverse phase column (100 x 2 mm) at 1°C using a ﬂow rate of 300 μL/min under the following conditions: 1.0 min, 10% B; 1.0−4.0 min, 10−70% B; 4.0−4.5 min, 70-90% B; 4.5-6.0 min, 10% B; solvent A = 0.1% FA (Sigma) in water (Thermo-Fisher) and solvent B = 0.1% formic acid (FA) in acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo-Fisher), or a Phenomenex Luna C5 column (30 x 2mm), 1°C at 200 μL/min with the following gradient: 0 min, 10% B; 1.0−6.0 min, 10−90% B; 6.0-7.0 min, 10% B. Data for both experiments were acquired in positive mode. Electrospray settings were as follows: nebulizer set to 5.0 bar, drying gas at 7.0 L/min, drying temperature at 200°C, and capillary voltage at 4.5 kV. The capillary exit was set at 150V, skimmer 1 at 60V, hexapole 1 at 26V, hexapole RF at 350 Vpp, and skimmer 2 at 22V. Data analysis was carried out using Bruker DataAnalysis with the MaximumEntropy plug-in. Each reaction was performed in triplicate. Statistically significant differences were determined using a two tailed students t-test with a p<0.05 being considered significant. Apo Csy was used as a baseline to normalize exchange patterns between conditions. Peptide Level Hydrogen-Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry As described for intact HDX-MS, protein was diluted 1:10 into deuterated buffer. Ten microliters were removed from the reaction mixture at 0.25, 3, 30, 180, and 1800 minutes and quenched by diluting 1:6 into 0.75% formic acid (FA, Sigma) and 0.25 mg/mL porcine pepsin (Sigma) at pH 2.5 on ice. The sample was then digested for two minutes on ice with vortexing every 30 seconds. After digestion, the samples were flash frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen until LC-MS analysis. Each reaction was performed in triplicate. LC-MS analysis was carried out as described in Patterson et al.(39). Briefly, the analysis was completed on a 1290 UPLC series chromatography stack (Agilent Technologies) coupled directly to a 6538 UHD Accurate-Mass QTOF LC/MS mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies). Before electrospray−time-of-ﬂight (ESI-TOF) analysis, peptides were separated on a reverse phase (RP) column (Phenomenex Onyx Monolithic C18 column, 100 × 2 mm) at 1°C using a ﬂow rate of 500 μL/min under the following conditions: 1.0 min, 5% B; 1.0−9.0 min, 5−45% B; 9.0−11.8 min, 45-95% B; 11.80−12.0 min, 5% B; solvent A = 0.1% FA (Sigma) in water (Thermo-Fisher) and solvent B = 0.1% FA in ACN(Thermo-Fisher). Data were acquired at 2 Hz over the scan range 50−1700 m/z in positive mode. Electrospray settings were as follows: nebulizer set to 3.7 bar, drying gas at 8.0 L/min, drying temperature at 350°C, and capillary voltage at 3.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out at previously described (35, 40) using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis (Agilent Technologies), Peptide Analysis Worksheet (PAWs, ProteoMetrics LLC), SearchGUI v3.3.16 (41), PeptideShaker v 1.16.42 (42), HDExaminer v 2.5.1 (Sierra Analytics), and visualized using UCSF Chimera (43).

### Publication Abstract
CRISPR RNA-guided detection and degradation of foreign DNA is a dynamic process. Viruses can interfere with this cellular defense by expressing small proteins called anti-CRISPRs. While structural models of anti-CRISPRs bound to their target complex provide static snapshots that inform mechanism, the dynamics and thermodynamics of these interactions are often overlooked. Here, we use hydrogen deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) experiments to determine how anti-CRISPR binding impacts the conformational landscape of the type IF CRISPR RNA guided surveillance complex (Csy) upon binding of two different anti-CRISPR proteins (AcrIF9 and AcrIF2). The results demonstrate that AcrIF2 binding relies on enthalpic stabilization, whereas AcrIF9 uses an entropy driven reaction to bind the CRISPR RNA-guided surveillance complex. Collectively, this work reveals the thermodynamic basis and mechanistic versatility of anti-CRISPR-mediated immune suppression. More broadly, this work presents a striking example of how allosteric effectors are employed to regulate nucleoprotein complexes.

### Keywords
Acr, Csy, Hdx

### Affiliations
Indiana University (Bloomington, IN)
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry Montana State University

### Submitter
Angela Patterson

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Bothner
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry Montana State University


