### Accession
PXD015773

### Title
Prolyl Hydroxylase Substrate Adenylosuccinate Lyase Is An Oncogenic Driver In Triple Negative Breast Cancer

### Description
Protein hydroxylation extensively regulates cellular signaling by affecting protein stability, protein-protein interaction and protein activity, and its dysregulation contributes to the pathogenesis of various diseases including cancers. However, because of the transient nature of the enzyme-substrate interaction, identifying new prolyl hydroxylation substrates remains a daunting challenge. Here, by developing a novel substrate-trapping strategy combining tumor hypoxia and hydroxylase pharmacological inhibition with TAP-TAG purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify ADSL as a bona fide EglN2 prolyl hydroxylase substrate in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ADSL expression is significantly higher in TNBC than in the other  breast cancer subtypes and normal breast tissues. Functionally, ADSL knock out greatly impairs TNBC 2-D and 3-D cell proliferation and invasiveness in vitro, as well as TNBC tumorigenesis and metastasis in xenograft models. Mechanistically, the integrated transcriptome and metabolome analysis reveals that ADSL promotes the activation of the oncogene cMYC pathway by regulating cMYC protein level via a mechanism requiring ADSL hydroxylation. Specifically, ADSL, by affecting adenosine levels, controls the expression of the long non-coding RNA MIR22HG, which negatively regulates the oncogene cMYC protein level and, thus, cMYC target gene expression. Our findings identify ADSL and ADSL hydroxylation as potential therapeutic targets in TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
HA affinity gel was used to pull-down HA-tagged ADSL or GSH-agarose to pull-down GST-tagged ADSL. The samples were digested with trypsin and processed. Desalted peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo, Germany).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis search against whole-proteome human or ADSL only. Inclusion of oxidation (+16Da) for M,P,Y,N,H,K, W and double oxidation for W and M. Data was analysed by XIC the P hydroxylated and non-hydroxylated ion

### Publication Abstract
Protein hydroxylation affects protein stability, activity, and interactome, therefore contributing to various diseases including cancers. However, the transiency of the hydroxylation reaction hinders the identification of hydroxylase substrates. By developing an enzyme-substrate trapping strategy coupled with TAP-TAG or orthogonal GST- purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) as an EglN2 hydroxylase substrate in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ADSL expression is higher in TNBC than other breast cancer subtypes or normal breast tissues. ADSL knockout impairs TNBC cell proliferation and invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. An integrated transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis reveals that ADSL activates the oncogenic cMYC pathway by regulating cMYC protein level via a mechanism requiring ADSL proline 24 hydroxylation. Hydroxylation-proficient ADSL, by affecting adenosine levels, represses the expression of the long non-coding RNA MIR22HG, thus upregulating cMYC protein level. Our findings highlight the role of ADSL hydroxylation in controlling cMYC and TNBC tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Hydroxylation, Ptm, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhang
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA


