### Accession
PXD035858

### Title
Proteomic characterization of NHL cells in presence of CDK9 inhibitor

### Description
non-Hodgkins lymphoma cells were treated with a CDK9 inhibitor to determine which proteins and phosphorylation events are affected by CDK9 in lymphoma.

### Sample Protocol
250ug of each sample were denatured using urea and then dual digested with Lyc-C/trypsin. peptides were TMT labeled and pooled and processed using SMOAC. Enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated into 9 fractions, and global peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions. Spectra were acquired on a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer with a FAIMSPro interface, using a 120min gradient on a 50cm EasySpray column, with FAIMS TMT-SPS-MS3 and FAIMS TMT-MS2 workflows for global and phosphoproteomics respectively.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were processed through Proteome Discoverer against a human 2020 SwissProt database. Oxidation was set as a variable modification, with carbamidomethyl (C) and TMTpr 16plex (N-term and K) as fixed modifications. The global proteomics search was performed with Mascot search engine. The phosphoproteomics search was performed with Byonic search engine and included phosphorylation (STY) as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) exhibits significant genetic heterogeneity which contributes to drug resistance, necessitating development of novel therapeutic approaches. Pharmacological inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) demonstrated pre-clinical activity in DLBCL, however many stalled in clinical development. Here we show that AZD4573, a selective inhibitor of CDK9, restricted growth of DLBCL cells. CDK9 inhibition (CDK9i) resulted in rapid changes in the transcriptome and proteome, with downmodulation of multiple oncoproteins (eg, MYC, Mcl-1, JunB, PIM3) and deregulation of phosphoinotiside-3 kinase (PI3K) and senescence pathways. Following initial transcriptional repression due to RNAPII pausing, we observed transcriptional recovery of several oncogenes, including MYC and PIM3. ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq experiments revealed that CDK9i induced epigenetic remodeling with bi-directional changes in chromatin accessibility, suppressed promoter activation and led to sustained reprograming of the super-enhancer landscape. A CRISPR library screen suggested that SE-associated genes in the Mediator complex, as well as AKT1, confer resistance to CDK9i. Consistent with this, sgRNA-mediated knockout of MED12 sensitized cells to CDK9i. Informed by our mechanistic findings, we combined AZD4573 with either PIM kinase or PI3K inhibitors. Both combinations decreased proliferation and induced apoptosis in DLBCL and primary lymphoma cells in vitro as well as resulted in delayed tumor progression and extended survival of mice xenografted with DLBCL in vivo. Thus, CDK9i induces reprogramming of the epigenetic landscape, and super-enhancer driven recovery of select oncogenes may contribute to resistance to CDK9i. PIM and PI3K represent potential targets to circumvent resistance to CDK9i in the heterogeneous landscape of DLBCL.

### Keywords
Cdk9, Phosphoproteomics, Lymphoma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Translational Genomics Research Institute
TGen

### Submitter
Krystine Mansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Pirrotte
Translational Genomics Research Institute


