### Accession
PXD008115

### Title
eEF1A peptide pull-down LC-MS/MS

### Description
Peptide pull-down using synthetic peptides corresponding to unmodified and methylated human eEF1A.

### Sample Protocol
On bead tryptic digestion followed by desalting using C18 StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm embedded in the MaxQuant software suite.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1A) delivers aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome and thereby plays a key role in protein synthesis. Human eEF1A is subject to extensive post-translational methylation, but several of the responsible enzymes remain unknown. Using a wide range of experimental approaches, we here show that human methyltransferase (MTase)-like protein 13 (METTL13) contains two distinct MTase domains targeting the N terminus and Lys55 of eEF1A, respectively. Our biochemical and structural analyses provide detailed mechanistic insights into recognition of the eEF1A N terminus by METTL13. Moreover, through ribosome profiling, we demonstrate that loss of METTL13 function alters translation dynamics and results in changed translation rates of specific codons. In summary, we here unravel the function of a human MTase, showing that it methylates eEF1A and modulates mRNA translation in a codon-specific manner.

### Keywords
Ptm, Lc-ms/ms, Methylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Magnus Jakobsson

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research (NNF-CPR), University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


