### Accession
PXD011144

### Title
iTRAQ dataset of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 following dially disulfide treatment

### Description
To establish the effect of DADS on the P. aeruginosa proteome, 50-mL LB medium samples were inoculated at 108 CFU/mL with exponential growth phase P. aeruginosa PAO1. DADS was then added at a concentration of 0 (control) or 0.64 mg/mL, in triplicate. The six experimental groups were incubated for 5 h in a water bath shaker at 37 ºC with a shaking rate of 180 rpm. Cells from the three control groups and three DADS treatment groups were then sampled and centrifuged. The cell precipitate from each experiment group was snap-frozen at -80 ºC.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and were cleaned up using the RIPA reagent. Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay using BSA as the standard (BCA Assay Kit, Biotech) according to the manufacture's protocol. Protein iTRAQ sequencing analysis was performend at Guangzhou FigGene Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Guangzhou, China).iTRAQ labeling was performed using the iTRAQ reagents – 8plex Kit (Applied Biosystems, SCIEX) according to the user’s manual. The three control P. aeruginosa PAO1 samples were labeled with iTRAQ tags 114, 115, and 116, while the three P. aeruginosa PAO1 samples treated with DADS were labeled with iTRAQ tags 117, 118, and 119. iTRAQ labeled samples were diluted to 100 μL with 20 mM HCOONH4 and 2 M NaOH (pH 10) prior to HPLC. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient consisting of 20 mM HCOONH4, 2 M NaOH, and 80% CAN, from 5% to 40% of mobile phase B for 30 min at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The UV detector was set at 214/280 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. In total, 10 fractions were pooled for each sample and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were acidified with 50% CF3COOH, and then separated by a linear gradient from 5% to 40% of mobile phase B for 70 min at a flow rate of 300 mL/min. MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX) in information dependent mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400-1250 m/z in high resolution mode using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 50 precursors per cycle was chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100 ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 20 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode with rolling collision energy on and iTRAQ reagent collision energy adjustment on.

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification and protein identification were performed with ProteinPilot software (version 4.0, revision 148085, Applied Biosystems) using the Paragon algorithm as the search engine. Specified processing included quantitate, bias correction, and background correction. All proteins identified had ≥ 95% confidence, and the protein confidence threshold cutoff was set to 1.3 (unused) with at least more than one peptide above the 95% confidence level. To designate significant changes in protein expression, fold-changes > 1.25 or < 0.8 were set as cutoff values. The differentially expressed proteins were examined using agriGO for GO annotation and enrichment analyses. The GO project classifies proteins in three categories based on their annotation: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. Following annotation, the enzyme codes assigned to each protein were sequentially mapped to the known metabolic pathways in KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) for biological pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we determined that diallyl disulfide (DADS) from garlic oil can inhibit <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> PAO1 pathogenic factors by inactivating the transcription of key genes from three quorum sensing (QS) systems (<i>las</i>, <i>rhl</i>, and <i>pqs</i>) based on the effects of DADS on growth, virulence factor production (elastase, pyocyanin, biofilm, and swarming motility), and RNA transcription (real-time q-PCR). To further investigate the mechanisms underlying the inhibition of the three <i>P. aeruginosa</i> QS systems by DADS, high-throughput RNA and proteome sequencing techniques were used to study differences in the transcriptional and proteome expression of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PAO1 following treatment with DADS. The RNA-seq and proteomic data are available via NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database with accession number GSE118801 and ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011144, respectively. The experimental results indicated that all key genes of the three QS systems (<i>las</i>, <i>rhl</i>, and <i>pqs</i>) of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PAO1 as well as the virulence factors (including exoprotease LasA, elastase LasB, lectin LecA and LecB, pyocyanin biosynthesis, and biofilm formation) regulated by these three QS systems were inhibited. This is consistent with our previous studies on the physiology, biochemistry, and RNA expression of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> treated with DADS. Additionally, our results also indicated that bacterial motility, chemotaxis, and two-component systems were inhibited by DADS treatment. All these changes abolish the sensitivity of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> PAO1 to environmental stimuli and cause the cells to be in a state of passivation. Further research is needed to determine how QS systems regulate these functions. Our findings could potentially contribute to the treatment and control of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infection, virulence, and pathogenicity.

### Keywords
Psuedomonas aeruginosa pao1, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Wen-Ru Li

### Lab Head
Dr Wen-Ru Li
Guangdong Institute of Microbiology


