### Accession
PXD003078

### Title
Recombinant shewasin D and shewasin A specificity preferences profiled by proteomic identification of protease cleavage sites (PICS)

### Description
We determined the specificity preferences of both recombinant shewasin D and shewasin A (pepsin-like aspartic proteases from S. denitrificans and S. amazonensis, respectively) using proteome-derived peptide libraries and observed remarkable similarities between both shewasins and eukaryotic pepsins, in particular with BACE-1 thereby confirming their phylogenetic proximity. We further observed subtle differences in sequence preferences at several positions, suggesting variations in their subsite binding pockets.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by digest of THP-1 cells lysates with trypsin or GluC. Both libraries were independently incubated with purified recombinant shewasin D or shewasin A in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer pH 4.0 supplemented with 100 mM NaCl  at protease-to-library ratios of 1:40 (w/w), for six h at 37 °C. Reactions were stopped by addition of 1 μM pepstatin. Carboxy-terminal peptide cleavage products enriched by biotinylation and streptavidin-mediated pullout, were separated on a HALOTM C18 column (Eksigent) connected to a TripleTOF 5600 (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data files (.wiff) were converted into .mgf files using ProteinPilot software (AB SCIEX) using default parameters. The .mzxml files were further generated using the software msConvert (ProteoWizard) applying MS1 level filter (Darren Kessner D, et al. (2008) Bioinformatics). Peptide sequences were then identiﬁed with X!Tandem (Craig R & Beavis RC (2004) Bioinformatics), in conjunction with IProphet [Shteynberg D, et al. (2011) Mol. Cell Proteomics) at a conﬁdence level > 99%. Search parameters included mass tolerances of 0.05 Da for parent ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions and the following static modifications: carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02 Da), dimethylation of lysines (+ 28.03 Da) and thioacylation of peptide amino termini (+ 88.00 Da). Semi-style cleavage searches were applied with no constraints for the orientation of the specific terminus. The Web-based PICS service (Schilling O, et al. (2011) Nat. Protoc.) was used for inference of  nonprime sequences and reconstruction of the cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
The widespread presence of pepsin-like enzymes in eukaryotes together with their relevance in the control of multiple biological processes is reflected in the large number of studies published so far for this family of enzymes. By contrast, pepsin homologs from bacteria have only recently started to be characterized. The work with recombinant shewasin A from Shewanella amazonensis provided the first documentation of this activity in prokaryotes. Here we extend our studies to shewasin D, the pepsin homolog from Shewanella denitrificans, to gain further insight into this group of bacterial peptidases that likely represent ancestral versions of modern eukaryotic pepsin-like enzymes. We demonstrate that the enzymatic properties of recombinant shewasin D are strongly reminiscent of eukaryotic pepsin homologues. We determined the specificity preferences of both shewasin D and shewasin A using proteome-derived peptide libraries and observed remarkable similarities between both shewasins and eukaryotic pepsins, in particular with BACE-1, thereby confirming their phylogenetic proximity. Moreover, we provide first evidence of expression of active shewasin D in S. denitrificans cells, confirming its activity at acidic pH and inhibition by pepstatin. Finally, our results revealed an unprecedented localization for a family A1 member by demonstrating that native shewasin D accumulates preferentially in the cytoplasm.

### Keywords
Pics; trypsin; gluc; shewasin d; shewasin a; shewanella denitrificans; shewanella amazonensis; pepsin-like; specificity profile;

### Affiliations
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal;  Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal;
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Rui Cruz

### Lab Head
Dr Isaura Simões
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal;  Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal;


