### Accession
PXD029088

### Title
Phosphorylation of methyltransferase Set2p and demethylase Jhd1p and its association with histone H3K36 methylation and stress response pathways in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Histone lysine methylation is a key epigenetic modification that regulates eukaryotic transcription. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it is controlled by a reduced but evolutionarily conserved suite of methyltransferase (Set1p, Set2p, Dot1p, and Set5p) and demethylase (Jhd1p, Jhd2p, Rph1p, and Gis1p) enzymes. Many of these enzymes are extensively phosphorylated in vivo; however, the functions of specific phosphosites are poorly understood. Here, we comprehensively investigate the phosphoregulation of the yeast histone methylation network by analysing 40 phosphosites on six enzymes through mutagenesis. A total of 82 genomically-edited S. cerevisiae strains were generated and screened for changes in native H3K4, H3K36, and H3K79 methylation levels, and for sensitivity to environmental stress conditions. This demonstrated the functional relevance of phosphosites on methyltransferase Set2p (S6, S8, S10, and T127) and demethylase Jhd1p (S44) in the regulation of H3K36 methylation in vivo, and in the coordination of specific stress response pathways in budding yeast. Proteomic analysis of SET2 mutants revealed that phosphorylation site mutations lead to significant downregulation of membrane-associated proteins and processes, consistent with changes brought about by SET2 deletion. This study represents the first systematic investigation into the phosphoregulation of an entire epigenetic network in any eukaryote, and our findings establish phosphorylation as an important regulator of histone lysine methylation in S. cerevisiae.

### Sample Protocol
Histone methylation analysis: For analysis of histone methylation levels in mutant yeast strains, triplicate 15 mL cultures were grown for 2-3 doublings to an optical density at 600 nm of 0.8 in YEPD liquid medium. Cell pellets were resuspended in 300 µL HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesolfonic acid (HEPES), 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.5% (v/v) Triton-X-100, pH 7.5) supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and lysed by glass-bead homogenisation, as done previously (Winter et al., 2018). Clarified lysates from relevant strains (30 µL) were electrophoresed on NuPAGE 12% Bis-Tris protein gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and gel slices corresponding to histone H3 prepared for mass spectrometry as described (Hamey et al., 2016). For analysis of H3K36 methylation, in-gel derivatisation of histones using propionic anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich) was done to generate uniform K36-containing tryptic peptides for relative quantification, as done previously (Separovich et al., 2020). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA; sequencing-grade, 50 ng in 20 mM NH4HCO3) at 37°C for 16 h in 100 µL reactions, and resultant peptides were extracted from gel slices and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described (Hamey et al., 2016). Mass spectrometry of histone peptides was done on a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) as per established methods (Hamey et al., 2016), albeit without inclusion lists. SILAC proteomics: For proteomic analysis, S. cerevisiae strains of interest were metabolically labelled by stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) using the 2nSILAC method (Dannenmaier et al., 2018). Briefly, 30 mL yeast cultures were grown for at least 12 doublings to an optical density at 600 nm of 0.8 in minimal medium (0.68% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base with ammonium sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich), 2% (w/v) D-glucose, 20 mg/L L-histidine, 20 mg/L L-leucine, 20 mg/L L-methionine, 20 mg/L L-tryptophan, 20 mg/L L-tryptophan, 20 mg/L D-adenine, 20 mg/L D-uracil, 200 mg/L L-proline) supplemented with either light or heavy isotopes of lysine (L-lysine monohydrochloride (light; Sigma-Aldrich); L-lysine (13C6 15N2) monohydrochloride (heavy; Silantes, Munich, Germany); 342 µM) and arginine (L-arginine monohydrochloride (light; Sigma Aldrich); L-arginine (13C6 15N4) monohydrochloride (heavy; Silantes); 287 µM). Yeast cells were lysed in 600 µL denaturing lysis buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M urea, pH 8.0) by glass-bead homogenisation as outlined above. For pairwise comparisons between mutant and wild-type strains, light- and heavy-labelled lysates were mixed in equal amounts to 700 µg total protein in label swap replicates. Proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and diluted tenfold in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to proteolytic digestion. Tryptic digestion was at a 1:100 proteinase : protein (w/w) ratio at 37°C with gentle agitation. Resultant peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) as described (Chavez et al., 2019), and vacuum dried. Peptides from SILAC cultures were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. This was done using the Agilent 1260 Infinity II high performance liquid chromatography system and a Phenomenex Luna 5 µm SCX 100 Å liquid chromatography column (250 mm x 10 mm). Peptides were separated into 96 x 1.5 mL fractions using a gradient of buffer A (7 mM KH4PO4, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 2.6) and buffer B (7 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 2.6), a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min, and standard instrument settings. SCX fractions were then pooled into five larger fractions of approximately equal peptide content as determined by absorbance at 214 nm. These fractions were buffer exchanged into 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges as described above. Peptides were then dried before resuspension in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) for analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Peptide samples were separated and ionised by nano-electrospray liquid chromatography with a linear gradient over 122 min, as described previously (Hamey et al., 2021), and then analysed by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with data-dependent acquisition. Precursor scanning, selection, and isolation were as per established methods (Hamey et al., 2021). Fragmentation was done using HCD and a normalised collision energy of 30% according to standard instrument settings (Smith et al., 2020). Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap (resolution = 30,000, maximum injection time = 125 ms).

### Data Protocol
Histone methylation analysis: Quantification of H3K36 and H3K79 methylation from mass spectrometry data was done by generating extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) in the Thermo XCalibur Qual Browser 2.2 within a mass range window ± 10 ppm. For H3K36, the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of a triply-charged K36-containing tryptic peptide, of sequence KSAPSTGGVKKPHR, in its various methylation states was used for quantification (Figures S2 and S8). When accounting for the effect of propionylation (Maile et al., 2015), the expected methylpeptides and their respective masses following in-gel derivatisation are as follows: unmethylated, m/z = 539.97; monomethylated, m/z = 544.65; dimethylated, m/z = 530.64; trimethylated, m/z = 535.31. For H3K79 analysis, a doubly-charged K79-containing tryptic peptide, of sequence EIAQDFKTDLR, was quantified, with methylpeptides and masses as follows: unmethylated, m/z = 668.35; monomethylated, m/z = 675.36; dimethylated, m/z = 682.36; trimethylated, m/z = 689.37. Relative quantification of histone methylation states was done using the ICIS algorithm on XIC peaks as described (Hamey et al., 2018), and statistical testing of changes in overall methylation was performed with an ordinal logistic regression model and a proportional odds assumption (Separovich et al., 2020). To confirm methylpeptide identification, mass spectrometry data were searched on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using primarily default settings, as described previously (Separovich et al., 2020). Representative fragmentation spectra for H3K36-containing peptides were visualised using the Interactive Peptide Spectra Annotator tool (Brademan et al., 2019). SILAC proteomics: For quantitative proteomics analysis, SILAC mass spectrometry data were searched against S. cerevisiae SWISS PROT proteins (02-2021, 6049 sequences) and contaminants (245 sequences) using MaxQuant (v.2.0.2.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Search parameters were as follows: multiplicity: 2 (heavy labels designated as Lys8 and Arg10); enzyme: Trypsin/P; maximum missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term); precursor ion tolerance: 4.5 ppm; fragment ion tolerance: 20 ppm; minimum peptide length: 7. At least two unique and razor peptides per protein were used for quantification, and ‘match between runs’ was enabled. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% as determined by a decoy database search. This gave a total of 3099 proteins identified across the eight experiments. After the normalisation of heavy-to-light (H/L) ratios in MaxQuant, the resultant dataset was subject to quality filtering as described previously (Chia et al., 2018). For each experiment, proteins for which SILAC ratios were obtained in both label-swap replicates (set2Δ = 1536, S6A/S8A/S10A = 1311, S6D/S8D/S10D = 1220, T127D = 1379; Table S2) were analysed in Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016b). Here, ratios for reverse labelled samples were inverted (i.e., a reverse ratio of 0.5 was converted to 2.0), then ratios were averaged across replicates, and log2-transformed prior to statistical analysis. Each mutant was analysed for significantly changing proteins using a one-sample Student’s t-test, and proteins showing significant (p < 0.05) up- or downregulation were considered differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
Histone lysine methylation is a key epigenetic modification that regulates eukaryotic transcription. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, it is controlled by a reduced but evolutionarily conserved suite of methyltransferase (Set1p, Set2p, Dot1p, and Set5p) and demethylase (Jhd1p, Jhd2p, Rph1p, and Gis1p) enzymes. Many of these enzymes are extensively phosphorylated in vivo; however, the functions of almost all phosphosites remain unknown. Here, we comprehensively analyse the phosphoregulation of the yeast histone methylation network by functionally investigating 40 phosphosites on six enzymes. A total of 82 genomically-edited S. cerevisiae strains were generated through mutagenesis of sites to aspartate as a phosphomimetic or alanine as a phosphonull. These phosphosite mutants were screened for changes in native H3K4, H3K36, and H3K79 methylation levels, and for sensitivity to environmental stress conditions. For methyltransferase Set2p, we found that phosphorylation at threonine 127 significantly decreased H3K36 methylation in vivo, and that an N-terminal phosphorylation cluster at serine residues 6, 8, and 10 is required for the diamide stress response. Proteomic analysis of Set2p phosphosite mutants revealed a specific downregulation of membrane-associated proteins and processes, consistent with changes brought about by SET2 deletion and the sensitivity of mutants to diamide. For demethylase Jhd1p, we found that its sole phosphorylation site at serine 44 is required for the cold stress response. This study represents the first systematic investigation into the phosphoregulation of the epigenetic network in any eukaryote, and shows that phosphosites on histone methylation enzymes are required for a normal cellular response to stress in S.cerevisiae.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Yeast, Histone methylation, Methyltransferase, Epigenetics, Demethylase, Signalling

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Ryan Separovich

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Ronald Wilkins
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia


