### Accession
PXD012550

### Title
Proteome profiling of three cell populations from the common starfish Asterias rubens

### Description
The origin of cells involved in regeneration in Echinoderms is an open question till now. Most experimental data support the process of transdifferentiation as the main mechanism, although the activity of progenitor/stem cells is also considered. The renewal of coelomocytes, the cells which occupy the coelomic cavity in Asterias rubens is an example of physiological regeneration. Although it is considered that coelomic epithelium is the main source of coelomocytes, many details of this process remain unclear. In this study, we provide evidence of the origin of several types of coelomocytes in A. rubens from the coelomic epithelium, with particular emphasis on small undifferentiated cells. The concept of a pool of marginal coelomocytes is introduced as cells sequestered on the surface of the coelomic epithelium and characterized by a special cellular composition. Proteomic analysis by LC-MALDI TOF/TOF MS identified in total 403 proteins in coelomocytes (COE), coelomic epithelium (CE) and coelomic epithelium subpopulation enriched with undifferentiated cells (CEW). Proteins common and associated with each cell pool were revealed and the intermediate status of cells on the border of coelomic epithelium and coelom was confirmed. The potential players involved in regenerative processes were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Cell suspensions were isolated from untreated animals. Suspensions from four animals were pooled. Coelomocytes (COE) were collected by cutting off an arm tip and draining the coelomic fluid into a test tube with Ca2+-, Mg2+-free saline solution (CMFSS) supplemented with 15 mM EDTA. Fragments of coelomic epithelium (CE) were isolated with forceps from aboral part of arm and washed in CMFSS for 30 min. Washing solution supernatant enriched with cells weakly attached to CE (CEW) was filtered through nylon gauze (mesh 70 µm), centrifuged at 1,800 rpm for 10 min, and washed with CMFSS. Washed CE fragments were dissociated with 0.05–0.1 % crab hepatopancreas collagenase (Biolot, Russia) in CMFSS for 15 min by gentle pipetting, filtered, centrifuged and washed. The pellets were frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were lysed with buffer containing 0.15 M NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete, Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Protein extracts were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Each gel line was divided into two sections (high and low) and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega). The extracted peptides from each gel section were then concentrated with a rotor vacuum evaporator. After rehydration with 0.1% TFA, samples were filtered and separated with a Jupiter Proteo C12 reversed-phase column (1 mm × 50 mm, 4 μm, 90 Å, Phenomenex) on a microbore HPLC system (MiLiChrom A-02, EcoNova). A sample volume of 50 μl was injected and separated using a linear gradient of 10–35% B over 54 min followed by 35–90% B for 6 min at a flow rate of 50 μl•min-1. The mobile phases used were A, 0.125% (v/v) TFA in water and B, 0.125% (v/v) TFA in acetonitrile. The column was maintained at 45°C. The effluent from the HPLC column was mixed with CHCA matrix (12 mg•ml-1 in 95% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 15 μl•min-1 via a micro tee. An in-house constructed micro-fraction collector was used to deposit a total of 912 fractions of 0.5 μl in a 24 × 38 array on an LC-MALDI plate (SCIEX). The column was washed with a saw-tooth gradient (15–80–15% B for 4 min and 2 min respectively, repeated eight times) and equilibrated to 10% B for 10 min before subsequent injections. The fractionated samples were analyzed with a TOF/TOF 5800 System (SCIEX) instrument operated in the positive ion mode. The MALDI stage was set to continuous motion mode. MS data was acquired at 2400 laser intensity with 1000 laser shots/spectrum (200 laser shots/sub-spectrum) and MS/MS data were acquired at 3300 laser intensity with a DynamicExit algorithm and a high spectral quality threshold or a maximum of 1000 laser shots/spectrum (250 laser shots/sub-spectrum). Up to 35 top precursors with S/N > 30 in the mass range 850–4000 Da were selected from each spot for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Three cellular populations (COE, CE and CEW) each with one pooled biological replicate (4 individuals) were analyzed. Samples originating from the same gel line (high and low) were processed together in one run with the Protein Pilot 4.0 software (SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm 4.0 was used in thorough mode with biological modifications and substitutions enabled. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The subject of Paragon searches was a pooled protein database comprising 25,725 protein-coding sequences predicted from A. rubens and A. forbesi transcriptome shotgun assembly datasets. The database also incorporated a list of common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) analysis was done by analysis of reversed sequences using the embedded PSEP tool.

### Publication Abstract
The origin of cells involved in regeneration in echinoderms remains an open question. Replenishment of circulatory coelomocytes-cells of the coelomic cavity in starfish-is an example of physiological regeneration. The coelomic epithelium is considered to be the main source of coelomocytes, but many details of this process remain unclear. This study examined the role of coelomocytes outside circulation, named marginal coelomocytes and small undifferentiated cells of the coelomic epithelium in coelomocyte replenishment in Asterias rubens. A qualitative and quantitative comparison of circulatory and marginal coelomocytes, as well as changes of circulatory coelomocyte concentrations in response to injury at different physiological statuses, was analysed. The presence of cells morphologically similar to coelomocytes in the context of coelomic epithelium was evaluated by electron microscopy. The irregular distribution of small cells on the surface and within the coelomic epithelium was demonstrated and the origin of small undifferentiated cells and large agranulocytes from the coelomic epithelium was suggested. Two events have been proposed to mediate the replenishment of coelomocytes in the coelom: migration of mature coelomocytes of the marginal cell pool and migration of small undifferentiated cells of the coelomic epithelium. The proteomic analysis of circulatory coelomocytes, coelomic epithelial cells and a subpopulation of coelomic epithelial cells, enriched in small undifferentiated cells, revealed proteins that were common and specific for each cell pool. Among these molecules were regulatory proteins, potential participants of regenerative processes.

### Keywords
Coelomocytes, Asterias rubens, Progenitor cells, Lc-maldi, Coelomic epithelium, Sciex 5800

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Regulation of Gene Expression, Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences
Institute if Cytology of RAS

### Submitter
Sergey Shabelnikov

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Shabelnikov
Laboratory of Regulation of Gene Expression, Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences


