### Accession
PXD005587

### Title
Proteomic perturbations of extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing Klebsiella pneumoniae by using LC MS/MS

### Description
A comprehensive analysis of proteome changes in ESBL-KP cells in response to the sub-MIC doses of antibiotics was performed by using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of proteins was used to generate tryptic digest using the “filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)” protein digestion method.

### Data Protocol
raw data files were loaded into the 1.5.2 version of the MaxQuant software in combination with the Andromeda search engine with the MaxQuant default parameters for database search.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria can circumvent the effect of antibiotics by transitioning to a poorly understood physiological state that does not involve conventional genetic elements of resistance. Here we examine antibiotic susceptibility with a Class A &#x3b2;-lactamase+ invasive strain of <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> that was isolated from a lethal outbreak within laboratory colonies of <i>Chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus</i> monkeys. Bacterial responses to the ribosomal synthesis inhibitors streptomycin and doxycycline resulted in distinct proteomic adjustments that facilitated decreased susceptibility to each antibiotic. Drug-specific changes to proteomes included proteins for receptor-mediated membrane transport and sugar utilization, central metabolism, and capsule production, whereas mechanisms common to both antibiotics included elevated scavenging of reactive oxygen species and turnover of misfolded proteins. Resistance to combined antibiotics presented integrated adjustments to protein levels as well as unique drug-specific proteomic features. Our results demonstrate that dampening of <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i> susceptibility involves global remodeling of the bacterial proteome to counter the effects of antibiotics and stabilize growth.

### Keywords
Streptomycin, Doxycycline, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
USAMRIID
Molecular and Translational Sciences Division, U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD 21702

### Submitter
Moo-Jin Suh

### Lab Head
Dr Robert G Ulrich
Molecular and Translational Sciences Division, U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD 21702


