### Accession
PXD000642

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of extracellular vesicles released from human primary macrophages upon beta/glucan stimulation

### Description
Fungal infections (mycoses) are common diseases of varying severity that cause problems especially to immunologically  compromised people. During stimulatory conditions of infection and colonization, besides intensive intracellular response,  human cells actively communicate on the intercellular level by secreting proteins with several mechanisms. The main  immunostimulatory components of fungi are beta-glucans, fungal cell-wall components. Here, we have used high-throughput  quantitative proteomics combined with bioinformatics to characterize and quantify vesicle-mediated protein release from beta-glucan-stimulated human primary macrophages. We show that β-glucan stimulation induces vesicle-mediated protein  secretion. Proteomic study identified 540 distinct proteins from the vesicles including several receptors which have not been  identified from vesicles before. Bioinformatics analysis strongly suggests a significant role for these proteins in transfer of  biological information. Our current data provides an important resource on the protein composition of extracellular vesicles  released from human macrophages upon fungal infection.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Fungal infections (mycoses) are common diseases of varying severity that cause problems, especially to immunologically compromised people. Fungi express a variety of pathogen-associated molecular patterns on their surface including &#x3b2;-glucans, which are important immunostimulatory components of fungal cell walls. During stimulatory conditions of infection and colonization, besides intensive intracellular response, human cells actively communicate on the intercellular level by secreting proteins and other biomolecules with several mechanisms. Vesicular secretion remains one of the most important paths for the proteins to exit the cell. Here, we have used high-throughput quantitative proteomics combined with bioinformatics to characterize and quantify vesicle-mediated protein release from &#x3b2;-glucan-stimulated human macrophages differentiated in vitro from primary blood monocytes. We show that &#x3b2;-glucan stimulation induces vesicle-mediated protein secretion. Proteomic study identified 540 distinct proteins from the vesicles, and the identified proteins show a proteomic signature characteristic for their cellular origin. Importantly, we identified several receptors, including cation-dependent mannose-6-phosphate receptor, macrophage scavenger receptor, and P2X7 receptor, that have not been identified from vesicles before. Proteomic data together with detailed pathway and network analysis showed that integrins and their cytoplasmic cargo proteins are highly abundant in extracellular vesicles released upon &#x3b2;-glucan stimulation. In conclusion, the present data provides a solid basis for further studies on the functional role of vesicular protein secretion upon fungal infection.

### Keywords
Human primary macrophages, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq-labeling

### Affiliations
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head


