### Accession
PXD004735

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of ovarian tissue from Huoyan goose between pre-laying period and laying period using iTRAQ-based approach

### Description
In this study, we performed a comprehensive evaluation of proteomic profile in ovarian tissues of Huoyan goose during laying period compared to pre-laying period using iTRAQ based approach. 403 proteins which including 255 up-regulated and 148 down-regulated were identified. Subsequently, GO enrichment and KEGG pathway analyses of those proteins were conducted.

### Sample Protocol
All ovarian tissues were homogenized in 0.5 ml STD lysis buffer. Then the samples were sonicated and boiled at 100 °C for 15 min followed by centrifugation at 14000 × g for 45 min at 25 °C. The supernatant was precipitated overnight with cold acetone. After discarding acetone, air-drying, and the resulting pellet was dissolved in 30 μl STD buffer. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay reagent. Protein samples were stored at −80 °C until needed. The protein samples from three randomly selected individuals within each group were pooled in equal amounts to generate one biological sample pool, and then there are three biological protein pools in pre-laying group and laying groups, respectively. Protein (300 μg) from three equally pooled biological replicates was diluted with 200 μl UA buffer and loaded onto an ultrafiltration filter (30 kDa cut-off, Sartorius, Germany). Samples were centrifuged at 14,000×g for 15 min; 200 μl UA buffer was then added, followed by centrifugation for an additional 15 min. discarding supernatant, 100 μl 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer was subsequently added to the filter, and oscillating at 600 rpm for 1 min. the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness, and then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. The filters were washed twice with 100 μl UA buffer, and 100 μl dissolution buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5) was added to the filters followed by centrifugation for 10 min. This step was repeated twice, and 40 μl trypsin buffer (2 μg trypsin in 40 μl dissolution buffer) was then added to each filter. The samples were oscillated at 600 rpm for 1 min, and incubated at 37 °C for 16-18 h. Finally, the filter unit was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate, and the peptide concentration was analyzed at OD280. The resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems). The labeling solution reaction was then incubated at room temperature for 1 h prior to further analysis. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were subjected to SCX fractionation in an AKTA Purifier 100 equipped with a polysulfethyl column. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM KH2PO4 and 25% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 3.0, and Buffer B consisted of 10 mM KH2PO4, 25% (v/v) acetonitrile and 500 mM KCl, pH 3.0. Both were filter sterilized. The following gradient was applied to perform separation: 100% Buffer A for 25 min, 0-10% Buffer B for 7 min, 10-20% Buffer B for 10 min, 20-45% Buffer B for 5 min, 45-100% Buffer B for 5 min, 100% Buffer B for 8 min, and finally 100% Buffer A for 15 min. The elution process was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions (approximately 30) were finally combined into 6 pools and desalted on C18 cartridges (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany). Each fraction was concentrated via vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 μl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed using an Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC system connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 5 μg of each samples was loaded onto a Thermo Scientific EASY column using an auto sampler at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The peptides were separated on a Thermo Scientific EASY column using a segmented 2 h gradient from Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% Solvent B (84% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 100 min, followed by 35-100% Solvent B for 8 min and then 100% Solvent B for 12 min. The column was re-equilibrated to its initial highly aqueous solvent composition before each analysis. The peptides were subjected to the Q-Exactive (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-1800 m/z) for subsequent high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation in the positive ion mode. Dynamic exclusion was used with 40.0 s duration. The resolving powers of the MS scan and the MS/MS scan at 200 m/z were set as 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. The top 10 most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window was 2 m/z, the normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. The maximum ion injection times were set at 10 ms for the survey scan and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans, and the automatic gain control target values for both scan modes were set to 3.0×10-6. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MASCOT 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) were used for identification and quantitative analysis. The raw files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software. Protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine embedded into Proteome Discoverer, searching against the Uniport database of anatidae protein sequences (08-15-2014, 34815 entries, downloaded from: http://www.uniprot.org/). Search parameters were set as follows: monoisotopic mass, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, two missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance at ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.1 Da. Variable modifications were defined as oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8-plex labeled tyrosine, while lysine and N-term of peptides labeled by iTRAQ 8-plex and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were specified as fixed modifications. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 1%. The protein identification was supported by at least one unique peptide. The relative quantitative analysis of the proteins in the samples based on the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ions from all unique peptides representing each protein was performed using Proteome Discoverer. The relative peak intensities of the iTRAQ reporter ions released in each of the MS/MS spectra were used. The summary of the intensities in all channels was employed as a reference for calculating the iTRAQ ratios of all reporter ions. The iTRAQ ratio of every group proteins was obtained by the intensity of each channel normalized to the reference. For statistical analysis, The Student’s t-test was employed to identify significant changes between the pre-laying group and laying group sample. The FDR value was further computed by using the p.adjust function in R (version 3.1.3, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, http://www.r-project.org). Proteins with a statistically significant iTRAQ ratio of > 1.2 or < 0.83 (FDR < 0.05) were considered to be differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
To explore the key regulatory genes and their translated products involved in Huoyan goose egg laying, we first applied the iTRAQ technology integrated with LC-MS/MS analysis to identify differentially abundant proteins in the ovarian tissue of Huoyan geese between the pre-laying and laying periods. Then, Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses of the proteins were conducted. As observed, 403 proteins, which included 255 up-regulated and 148 down-regulated proteins, were identified. Some differentially abundant proteins, such as apolipoprotein B (apoB), retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4), vitellogenin-2 (VTG-2), apolipoprotein II (apoVLDL-II), and fatty-acid binding protein 4 (FABP4), were found to be involved in lipid transportation and metabolic process, follicle development and final egg production, ovarian steroidogenesis, and steroid hormone biosynthesis. Subsequently, the modification of the abundance of 3 proteins, adiponectin, FABP4, and RBP4, was verified using Western blotting. Our findings might provide comprehensive protein expression information that can facilitate the understanding of the reproductive biology and improve the egg-laying performance of Huoyan geese.

### Keywords
Ovary, Goose, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science & Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, P.R. China
College of Animal Science & Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, P.R. China

### Submitter
xinhong luan

### Lab Head
Dr chen qijun
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science & Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, P.R. China


