### Accession
PXD004437

### Title
Evaluation of Non-Supervised MALDI Mass Spectrometry Imaging Combined to MicroProteomics for Glioma Grade III Classification

### Description
An integrated diagnosis using molecular features is recommended in the updated World Health Organization (WHO) classification. Our aim was to explore the role of MALDI-Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) coupled to microproteomics in order to classify anaplastic glioma by integration of clinical data.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh-frozen tissues section were subjected to in-situ trypsin digestion and MALDI matrix deposition with an automatic micro-sprayer. Images were acquired with 70 µm spatial resolution. After acquisition, the imaging datasets including all the biopsy sections were spatially segmented all together by clustering all spectra by their molecular profiles similarity. The Regions of Interest (ROIs) resulting from the clustering were used for protein large scale identification by performing microextraction followed by shotgun proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine. The proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the Decoy version of the complete proteome for Homo sapiens in the UniProt database (Release February 2016, 70615 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. A second search was also done combining the Human database with an AltORF database previously published. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable. We allowed up to two missed cleavages. An initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected for MS spectra, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data. FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was set to 1%. Relative, label-free quantification of the proteins was conducted into Max-Quant using the MaxLFQ algorithm with default parameters. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed using Perseus software (version 1.5.0.31). The file containing the information from the identification were used and hits from the reverse database, proteins with only modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensity was logarithmized (log2(x)). Categorical annotation of the rows was used to define the different group depending on the following: (1) the group (Group 1, Group 2, Group 3) and (2) the patient (case 1, case 2, case 3, case 4 and case 5). Statistical Multiple-sample tests were performed using ANOVA with a FDR of 5%. To evaluate the enrichment of the categorical annotations (Gene Ontology terms and KEGG pathway), Fisher’s exact test was performed taking into account the results of the ANOVA for each group. Normalization was achieved using a Z-score with matrix access by rows. Only proteins that were significant by ANOVA were used. Hierarchical clustering was first performed using the Euclidean parameter for the distance calculation, and the average option for linkage in the rows and columns of the trees with a maximum of 300 clusters

### Publication Abstract
An integrated diagnosis using molecular features is recommended in the 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classification. Our aim was to explore non-targeted molecular classification using MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI MSI) associated to microproteomics in order to classify anaplastic glioma by integration of clinical data. We used fresh-frozen tissue sections to perform MALDI MSI of proteins based on their digestion peptides after in-situ trypsin digestion of the tissue sections and matrix deposition by micro-spraying. The generated 70&#x3bc;m spatial resolution image datasets were further processed by individual or global segmentation in order to cluster the tissues according to their molecular protein signature. The clustering gives 3 main distinct groups. Within the tissues the ROIs (regions of interest) defined by these groups were used for microproteomics by micro-extraction of the tryptic peptides after on-tissue enzymatic digestion. More than 2500 proteins including 22 alternative proteins (AltProt) are identified by the Shotgun microproteomics. Statistical analysis on the basis of the label free quantification of the proteins shows a similar classification to the MALDI MSI segmentation into 3 groups. Functional analysis performed on each group reveals sub-networks related to neoplasia for group 1, glioma with inflammation for group 2 and neurogenesis for group 3. This demonstrates the interest on these new non-targeted large molecular data combining both MALDI MSI and microproteomics data, for tumor classification. This analysis provides new insights into grade III glioma organization. This specific information could allow a more accurate classification of the biopsies according to the prognosis and the identification of potential new targeted therapeutic options. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: MALDI Imaging, edited by Dr. Corinna Henkel and Prof. Peter Hoffmann.

### Keywords
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging, Microproteomics, Anaplastic glioma

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, Inserm, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France
University of Lille

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Univ. Lille, Inserm, U-1192 - Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse-PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France


