### Accession
PXD015941

### Title
Structure of herpes simplex virus pUL7:pUL51, a conserved complex required for efficient herpesvirus assembly

### Description
Herpesviruses  are  an  ancient  family  of  highly-prevalent human  and  animal  pathogens  that  acquire  their  membrane envelopes in the cytoplasm of infected cells. While multiple conserved viral proteins are known to be required for efficient herpesvirus production, many of these proteins lack identifiable structural homologues and the  molecular  details of  herpesvirus assembly  remain  unclear.  We  have  characterized  the complex  of  assembly  proteins  pUL7  and  pUL51  from  herpes  simplex  virus  (HSV)-1,  an  α-herpesvirus,  using  multi-angle light  scattering  and  small-angle  X-ray  scattering  with  chemical  crosslinking.  HSV-1  pUL7  and  pUL51  form  a  stable 1:2 complex that is capable of higher-order oligomerization in solution. We solved   the crystal structure of this complex, revealing a core heterodimer comprising pUL7 bound to residues 41–125 of pUL51. While pUL7 adopts a previously-unseen compact fold, the extended helix-turn-helix conformation of pUL51 resembles the cellular endosomal complex required for transport (ESCRT)- III component CHMP4B, suggesting a direct role for pUL51 in promoting membrane scission during virus assembly. We demonstrate that the interaction between pUL7 and pUL51 homologues is conserved acrosshuman α-, β- and γ-herpesviruses, as is their association with trans-Golgi membranes in cultured cells. However, pUL7 and pUL51 homologues do not form complexes with their respective partners from different virus families, suggesting that the molecular details of the interaction interface  have  diverged.  Our  results  demonstrate  that  the  pUL7:pUL51  complex  is  conserved  across  the  herpesviruses and provide a structural framework for understanding its role in herpesvirus assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Purified pUL7:pUL51(8–142) at 1 mg/mL (16.4 μM) in SAXS buffer was incubated with 20- to 100-fold molar excess of disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO; ThermoFisher) or disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU; ThermoFisher) dissolved in DMSO, or with DMSO carrier alone (the final DMSO concentration remaining below 2% (v/v) in all cases). Reactions were incubated at room temperature for 30 min before quenching by addition of 1 M tris pH 7.5 to a final tris concentration of 20 mM. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using a 4–12% Bolt Bis-Tris gel (ThermoFisher) in MOPS running buffer and stained with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain (Expedeon) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Cross-linked samples corresponding to pUL7:pUL51(8–142) heterodimers (1:1) or heterotrimers (1:2) were excised, reduced, alkylated and digested in-gel using trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 100 μm ID × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap Precolumn and a 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Loading solvent was 0.1% formic acid (FA) with analytical solvents A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (MeCN) + 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded at 5 μL/min, loading solvent for 5 minutes before beginning the analytical gradient. The analytical gradient was 3% to 40% B over 42 minutes, rising to 95% B by 45 minutes, followed by a 4-minute wash at 95% B, and finally equilibration at 3% solvent B for 10 minutes. Columns were held at 40ºC. Data was acquired in a DDA fashion with MS3 triggered by a targeted mass difference. MS1 was acquired from 375 to1500 Th at 60,000 resolution, 4×105 AGC target and 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2 used quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 and CID fragmentation (25% NCE). Fragment ions were scanned in the Orbitrap with 5×104 AGC target and 100 ms maximum injection time. MS3 was triggered by a S3 targeted mass difference of 25.979 for DSBU and 31.9721 for DSSO with HCD fragmentation (30% NCE) and fragment ions scanned in the ion trap with an AGC target of 2.0×104.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were process using XLinkX 2.2 in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (ThermoFisher). MS2 or MS3 spectra were selected based on the identification of either DSSO (K +158.004 Da) or DSBU (K +196.085 Da) and then processed in two workflows in parallel with the following parameters. Workflow 1: XlinkX Search against a database containing an HSV-1 proteome (downloaded 04.04.2016), E. coli proteome (downloaded 06.09.2019 with OPGE removed) and 246 common contaminants; full trypsin digestion; carbamidomethyl static modification of cysteines; oxidation variable modification of methionines; 1% FDR using XlinkX validator Percolator. Workflow 2: spectra filtered for either MS2 or MS3 scans with each set searched separately using Mascot against a database containing an E. coli proteome (downloaded 06.09.2019 with OPGE removed) with 246 common contaminants, and HSV-1 proteome (downloaded 04.04.2016); PSM validator Max. Delta Cn = 0.05. Statistical validation of identified cross-link peptides from both workflows was carried out by a joint consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Herpesviruses acquire their membrane envelopes in the cytoplasm of infected cells via a molecular mechanism that remains unclear. Herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 proteins pUL7 and pUL51 form a complex required for efficient virus envelopment. We show that interaction between homologues of pUL7 and pUL51 is conserved across human herpesviruses, as is their association with <i>trans</i>-Golgi membranes. We characterized the HSV-1 pUL7:pUL51 complex by solution scattering and chemical crosslinking, revealing a 1:2 complex that can form higher-order oligomers in solution, and we solved the crystal structure of the core pUL7:pUL51 heterodimer. While pUL7 adopts a previously-unseen compact fold, the helix-turn-helix conformation of pUL51 resembles the cellular endosomal complex required for transport (ESCRT)-III component CHMP4B and pUL51 forms ESCRT-III-like filaments, suggesting a direct role for pUL51 in promoting membrane scission during virus assembly. Our results provide a structural framework for understanding the role of the conserved pUL7:pUL51 complex in herpesvirus assembly.

### Keywords
Secondary envelopment; virus budding; focal adhesions; human cytomegalovirus (hcmv)

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jack Houghton

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Stephen C Graham
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge


