### Accession
PXD034938

### Title
FBXO42 facilitates Notch signaling activation and global chromatin relaxation by promoting K63-linked polyubiquitination of RBPJ

### Description
Dysregulation of the Notch-RBPJ signaling pathway has been found associated with various human diseases including cancers; however, precisely how this key signaling pathway is fine-tuned via its interactors and modifications is still largely unknown. In this study, using a proteomic approach, we identified FBXO42 as a novel RBPJ interactor. FBXO42 promotes RBPJ polyubiquitination on lysine (K) 175 via K63 linkage, which enhances the association of RBPJ with chromatin remodeling complexes and induces a global chromatin relaxation. Genetically depleting FBXO42 or pharmacologically targeting its E3 ligase activity attenuates the Notch signaling-related leukemia development in vivo. Taken together, our findings not only revealed FBXO42 as a critical regulator of the Notch pathway by modulating RBPJ-dependent global chromatin landscape changes, but also provide insights into the therapeutic intervention of the Notch pathway for leukemia treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 1x108 HEK293T cells stably expressing cSFB-RBPJ or FBXO42 were lysed in 5 ml of NETN buffer (with protease inhibitors) at 4°C for 30 min followed by TurboNuclease treatment. The lysate was then incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 2 h at 4 ℃. After washing with NETN buffer, the bound proteins were eluted with NETN buffer containing 2 mg/mL biotin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 2 h at 4°C. The eluates were then incubated with S-protein beads (EMD Millipore, Burlington, VT) for 4 h. The beads were washed three times with NETN buffer and subjected to SDS–PAGE, followed by Coomassie blue staining. The whole band was excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and MS analysis.Global protein ubiquitination analysis was performed according to the manufacture’s guidance (5562, CST). Briefly, the cell lysis was prepared in urea buffer, followed with reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin overnight. Then the peptides were used for immunoaffinity purification using Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) and mass spectrometry detection.

### Data Protocol
MS peptide sequences and, hence, protein identity were determined by matching fragmentation patterns in protein databases using the Mascot software program (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with two missed cleavages. Modifications of the peptides included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, variable), oxidation (methionine, variable), phosphorylation (S, T, Y, H, variable),acetylation (N-term, K, variable)and ubiquitination. Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment ions. The database searched was Swiss-Prot (Homo sapiens). Spectral matches were filtered to contain the false-discovery rate to less than 1% at the peptide level using the target-decoy method, and protein inference was considered following the general rules with manual annotation applied when necessary. This same principle was used for protein isoforms when they were present. Generally, the longest isoform was reported.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of the Notch-RBPJ (recombination signal-binding protein of immunoglobulin kappa J region) signaling pathway has been found associated with various human diseases including cancers; however, precisely how this key signaling pathway is fine-tuned via its interactors and modifications is still largely unknown. In this study, using a proteomic approach, we identified F-box only protein 42 (FBXO42) as a previously unidentified RBPJ interactor. FBXO42 promotes RBPJ polyubiquitination on lysine-175 via lysine-63 linkage, which enhances the association of RBPJ with chromatin remodeling complexes and induces a global chromatin relaxation. Genetically depleting <i>FBXO42</i> or pharmacologically targeting its E3 ligase activity attenuates the Notch signaling-related leukemia development in vivo. Together, our findings not only revealed FBXO42 as a critical regulator of the Notch pathway by modulating RBPJ-dependent global chromatin landscape changes but also provided insights into the therapeutic intervention of the Notch pathway for leukemia treatment.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Notch signaling, Rbpj

### Affiliations
Westlake University
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

### Submitter
bian weixiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Li
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China


