### Accession
PXD011284

### Title
search substrates of receptor kinase complex SIRK1/QSK1

### Description
In this project, we are searching phosphorylation targets of receptor kinases complexes SIRK1/QSK1, especially to find the phosphorylation status of aquaporin PIP2F in sirk single mutant and sirk/qsk1 double mutant.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 1 to 1.5 g of roots (fresh weight) was homogenized in 10 ml extraction buffer (330mM mannitol, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-MES, fresh 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, pH 7.5) in the presence of 0.5% v/v proteinase inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitors (25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM benzamidin, 3 µM leupeptin). The homogenate was centrifuged for 15 minutes at 7500 × g at 4 °C. The pellet was discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged for 75 minutes at 48,000 × g at 4 °C. The microsomal pellet was re-suspended in 100 µl of membrane buffer (330 mM mannitol, 25 mM Tris-MES, 0.5 mM DTT) or UTU (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8). The soluble fraction in the supernatant was precipitated with three times volume ethanol plus 40 µl ml-1 of 2.5 M Sodium acetate pH 5 overnight, and then proteins were resuspended in 500 µl UTU. Further tryptic digestion, desalting over C18 and enrichment of phosphopeptides over titanium dioxide beads was performed as described (Wu and Schulze, 2015a).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification against the UniProt FASAT database UP000006548 (39,389 entries). Protein quantification was performed in MaxQuant using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. The following parameters were applied: trypsin as cleaving enzyme; minimum peptide length of six amino acids; maximal two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; Protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da was used as MS/MS tolerance. Further settings were: “label-free quantification” marked, multiplicity set to 1; “match between runs” marked with time window 2 min; peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) set to 0.01; common contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc.) excluded. Phosphorylation sites were determined by the site-scanning algorithm search engine Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Sucrose as a product of photosynthesis is the major carbohydrate translocated from photosynthetic leaves to growing nonphotosynthetic organs such as roots and seeds. These growing tissues, besides carbohydrate supply, require uptake of water through aquaporins to enhance cell expansion during growth. Previous work revealed Sucrose Induced Receptor Kinase, SIRK1, to control aquaporin activity via phosphorylation in response to external sucrose stimulation. Here, we present the regulatory role of AT3G02880 (QSK1), a receptor kinase with a short external domain, in modulation of SIRK1 activity. Our results suggest that SIRK1 autophosphorylates at Ser-744 after sucrose treatment. Autophosphorylated SIRK1 then interacts with and transphosphorylates QSK1 and QSK2. Upon interaction with QSK1, SIRK1 phosphorylates aquaporins at their regulatory C-terminal phosphorylation sites. Consequently, in root protoplast swelling assays, the <i>qsk1qsk2</i> mutant showed reduced water influx rates under iso-osmotic sucrose stimulation, confirming an involvement in the same signaling pathway as the receptor kinase SIRK1. Large-scale phosphoproteomics comparing single mutant <i>sirk1</i>, <i>qsk1</i>, and double mutant <i>sirk1 qsk1</i> revealed that aquaporins were regulated by phosphorylation depending on an activated receptor kinase complex of SIRK1, as well as QSK1. QSK1 thereby acts as a coreceptor stabilizing and enhancing SIRK1 activity and recruiting substrate proteins, such as aquaporins.

### Keywords
Arabisopsis, Phosphoproteomics, Receptor kinase

### Affiliations
Uni-Hohenheim, 260b
Universität Hohenheim (260b) Systembiologie der Pflanze Garbenstraße 30, Bio1 U2 70599 Stuttgart

### Submitter
Xuna Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Waltraud Schulze
Universität Hohenheim (260b) Systembiologie der Pflanze Garbenstraße 30, Bio1 U2 70599 Stuttgart


