### Accession
PXD017447

### Title
In situ chromatin interactomics using a chemical bait & trap approach: SILAC datasets

### Description
Elucidating the physiological binding partners of histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) – i.e. their interactomes – is key to understanding fundamental epigenetic regulatory pathways. Here we use a synthetic biology approach to set a series of hPTM-controlled photo-affinity traps in native chromatin. Using quantitative proteomics, the local interactomes of these chemically customized chromatins are determined. We show that the approach captures transiently interacting factors such methyltransferases and demethylases, as well as previously reported and novel hPTM reader proteins. We also apply this in situ proteomics approach to a recently disclosed cancer-associated histone mutation, H3K4M, revealing a number of perturbed interactions with the mutated tail. Collectively our studies demonstrate that modifying and interrogating native chromatin with chemical precision is a powerful tool for exploring epigenetic regulation and dysregulation at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiments were performed in duplicate in a “forward” and “reversed” fashion to control for effects of metabolic incorporation of isotopic labels. Each “forward” and “reversed” experimental replicate was carried out starting from 6 x107 cells. “Heavy” and “light” HEK 293T cells were lysed by hypotonic lysis in RSB buffer (10 mM tris, 15 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, pH 7.6) for 10 min on ice. The crude nuclei were isolated by centrifugation at 400 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The nuclei were resuspended in RSB buffer, and homogenized with ten strokes of a loose pestle Dounce homogenizer, and pelleted at 400 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The nuclei were resuspended in crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, pH 7.6) and centrifuged at 400 g for 5 min at 4 °C. Finally, the nuclei were resuspended in 300 l of crosslinking buffer per 1 x107 cells. To the isolated nuclei was added the appropriate delivery construct bearing the selected PTMs and/or photoleucine to a final concentration of 0.3 M. The splicing reactions were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min protected from light. The nuclei were pelleted at 400 g for 5 min at 4 °C, and washed twice with crosslinking buffer to remove excess delivered material. The nuclei were then resuspended in 200 l crosslinking buffer per 1 x107 cells and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min.  The nuclei were placed on ice and irradiated with 365 nm UV light for 20 min. The UV-irradiated nuclei were mixed as necessary for “forward” and “reversed” experiments and pelleted at 1,500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The chromatin fraction was isolated by sequential resuspension and centrifugation in LB1 (50 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% v/v glycerol, 0.5% NP-40 alternative, 0.25% Triton-X100, Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, pH 7.5), LB2 (10 mM tris, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, pH 8.0), and LB3 (10 mM tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.5% sodium lauroylsarcosine, Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors, pH 8.0); 1.5 ml, 1.5 ml, and 1.1 ml, respectively. Chromatin was sheared to approximately mono- and di-nucleosomes with 12 cycles of a probe sonicator at 25% amplitude, for 15 sec on and 45 sec off. 0.5% v/v Triton X-100 was added to the sheared chromatin and any insoluble material was pelleted at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Binding buffer (25 mM tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% v/v NP-40 alternative, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) was added to the supernatant in a ratio of 1 ml supernatant to 2.5 ml binding buffer, and added to equilibrated Sepharose magnetic streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare). The immunoprecipitation was performed at room temperature for two hours, with end-over-end rotation. The beads were washed sequentially with 1x binding buffer, 2x 0.5% SDS in PBS, 2x 1 M NaCl in PBS, 2x tris-buffered saline, and 10x 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at (pH 8.0). Finally, trypsin Gold (Promega; 2 l of a 1 g/ul stock) was added to the beads in 200 l ammonium bicarbonate, and on-bead digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C with end-to-end rotation. A further 1 l of trypsin was added the following morning, and the digestion incubated at 37 °C for a further 2 h. The supernatant was removed, and the beads washed with ammonium bicarbonate. The combined supernatants were dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher).  Trypsin-digested samples were desalted using an Empore SDB-XC disc (3M) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher). Dried samples were resuspended in 21 l of 0.1% formic acid (pH 3.0). 2 l was injected per run using an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system.  Samples were loaded directly onto a 45 cm x 75 m nanocapillary column packed with 1.9 m C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch, Germany) mated to a metal emitter in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). The column temperature was set to 45 °C and a 2 h gradient method with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (positive mode, profile data type, AGC 4 x105, Max IT 50 ms, 375-1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap, followed by HCD fragmentation in the ion trap with 35% collision energy. A dynamic exclusion list was invoked to exclude previously fragmented peptides for 60 s and maximum cycle time of 3 s was used.  Peptides were isolated for fragmentation using a 1.2 Da window in the quadrupole. The ion trap was operated in Rapid mode with AGC 1 x104, maximum IT of 54 ms, and a minimum of 5000 ions.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.2.6)2 using default parameters unless otherwise noted. Replicates were analyzed in parallel with match between runs selected. The Uniprot human proteome reference database was used (proteome ID UP000005640) and Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme. Met oxidation (+15.9949) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) were specified as variable modifications. Homothreonine (+14.0157), a product of the reaction of photoleucine with water, was selected as a variable modification for Thr. For protein quantification, requantify was enabled and the minimum label ratio count was set to one. Only proteins quantified in both experimental replicates were reported. Mean and standard errors of protein ratios were calculated with values from experimental replicates. p-values were calculated by fitting log protein ratios to a normal distribution and calculating the probability that each protein ratio exhibited no change. These values were subsequently adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.3 Protein ratios with an average H/L ratio greater than 1.5 and FDR-adjusted p-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Elucidating the physiological binding partners of histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) is key to understanding fundamental epigenetic regulatory pathways. Determining such interactomes will enable the study of how perturbations of these interactions affect disease. Here we use a synthetic biology approach to set a series of hPTM-controlled photo-affinity traps in native chromatin. Using quantitative proteomics, the local interactomes of these chemically customized chromatin landscapes are determined. We show that the approach captures transiently interacting factors such as methyltransferases and demethylases, as well as previously reported and novel hPTM reader proteins. We also apply this in situ proteomics approach to a recently disclosed cancer-associated histone mutation, H3K4M, revealing a number of perturbed interactions with the mutated tail. Collectively our studies demonstrate that modifying and interrogating native chromatin with chemical precision is a powerful tool for exploring epigenetic regulation and dysregulation at the molecular level.

### Keywords
Silac; chromatin; histone ptm

### Affiliations
Princeton University

### Submitter
Antony Burton

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Muir
Princeton University


