### Accession
PXD003773

### Title
Integrative genome annotation of Malassezia sympodialis

### Description
The skin commensal yeast Malassezia is associated with several skin disorders. To establish a reference resource, we sought to determine the complete genome sequence of Malassezia sympodialis and identify its protein-coding genes. A novel genome annotation workflow combining RNA sequencing, proteomics, and manual curation was developed to determine gene structures with high accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
Four replicates of M. sympodialis (ATCC 42132) were cultured on mDixon agar (see above) at 32°C for 2 and 15 days. Cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) by centrifugation at 1,200 × g for 5 min. Pellets were frozen at −80°C. To extract proteins for mass spectrometry analyses, 30 mg of every pellet was dissolved in 200 µl PBS and transferred to tubes containing 200 µl 425 to 600 µm acid-washed glass beads (Sigma-Aldrich, Sweden). The cells were disrupted by homogenization in a Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France). Approximately 100 µl cell suspension from every sample was removed and transferred to a new tube and a 1:1 volume of lysis buffer was added to obtain a final concentration of 4% (wt/vol) SDS, 1 mM DTT (dithiothreitol), 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6). The samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min followed by sonication twice for 30 s each time. Protein concentration was determined with a DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Sweden). Samples were subsequently reduced by dithiothreitol and alkylated by iodoacetamide followed by overnight trypsination (Promega). The four biological replicates of each sample from the 2- and 15-day cultures were pooled and separated by immobilized pH gradient-isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on a narrow-range pH 3.7 to 4.9 strip and a 3- to 10-gel strip as described in Branca et al 2014. Extracted fractions from the IPG-IEF were separated using an Agilent 1200 Nano-LC system coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectra were searched against a customized database using the SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Peptide spectra matches were filtered at 1% FDR, estimated with the Percolator algorithm. The database was constructed by combining peptide sequences from (i) the complete genome sequence translated in all six reading frames, (ii) splice junctions extracted from the previously published M. sympodialis gene set [4], (iii) candidate splice junctions discovered by RNA-seq(iv) known Bos taurus proteins downloaded from UniProt. Spectra matching B. taurus peptides were assumed regarded as contaminants and therefore excluded because bovine serum was used in the culture medium and therefore excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Complete and accurate genome assembly and annotation is a crucial foundation for comparative and functional genomics. Despite this, few complete eukaryotic genomes are available, and genome annotation remains a major challenge. Here, we present a complete genome assembly of the skin commensal yeast Malassezia sympodialis and demonstrate how proteogenomics can substantially improve gene annotation. Through long-read DNA sequencing, we obtained a gap-free genome assembly for M. sympodialis (ATCC 42132), comprising eight nuclear and one mitochondrial chromosome. We also sequenced and assembled four M. sympodialis clinical isolates, and showed their value for understanding Malassezia reproduction by confirming four alternative allele combinations at the two mating-type loci. Importantly, we demonstrated how proteomics data could be readily integrated with transcriptomics data in standard annotation tools. This increased the number of annotated protein-coding genes by 14% (from 3612 to 4113), compared to using transcriptomics evidence alone. Manual curation further increased the number of protein-coding genes by 9% (to 4493). All of these genes have RNA-seq evidence and 87% were confirmed by proteomics. The M. sympodialis genome assembly and annotation presented here is at a quality yet achieved only for a few eukaryotic organisms, and constitutes an important reference for future host-microbe interaction studies.

### Keywords
Malassezia sympodialis, Clinical isolates, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Cancer proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Yafeng Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Cancer proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet


