### Accession
PXD006998

### Title
Human Leukaemia cells (HL-60) proteomic and biological signatures underpinning cryo-damage are differentially modulated by novel cryo-additives

### Description
Cryopreservation is a routinely used methodology for prolonged storage of viable cells. The use of cryo-protective agents (CPAs) such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), glycerol or trehalose is paramount to reduce cellular cryo-injury but their effectiveness is still limited. The current study focuses on establishing and modulating the proteomic and the corresponding biological profiles associated with the cryo-injury of human leukaemia (HL-60) cells cryopreserved in DMSO alone or DMSO +/- novel CPAs [e.g. nigerose (Nig) or salidroside (Sal)].

### Sample Protocol
Extracted proteins from HL-60 cells prior to and 24 h post cryopreservation were precipitated by mixing cell pellets with cooled acetone. The cells were vortexed, incubated for 60 min at -20°C and centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatants were decanted and tubes were uncapped to let the acetone evaporate at room temperature for 30 min. Pelleted proteins were homogenised in 6 M urea buffer, vortexed and sonicated for 2 min. 70 mM DTT was added to 7 samples and incubated 30-60 min at room temperature. Next 140 mMIodoacetic acid alkylating reagent was added, followed by vortexing and incubation for 30-60 min at room temperature. The urea concentration was reduced by adding 775μLmilliQ water and vortexing. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford method. After this, 60 μg of extracted proteins were trypsinized in a 1:50 ratio, mixed carefully and left overnight at 37°C for digestion. The next day, the reactions were stopped via adjusting the pH to <6 by adding concentrated acetic acid.The digested peptides were purified using SEP-PAK C18 purification columns. Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed in a bi-dimensional microUPLC tandem nanoESI-HDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisition experiments. A 2D-RP/RP Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters Corporation: Milford, MA) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation) platform was used. The samples were fractionated using a one-dimension reversed-phase approach. Peptide samples (0.5 μg) were loaded into a 100 Å, 1,8μm, 75 μm . 150 mm M-Class HSS T3 column (Waters Corporation). The fractionation was achieved by using an acetonitrile gradient from 7% to 40% (v/v) over 95 min at a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min directly into a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. For every measurement, the mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode with an m/z resolving power of about 40,000 FWHM, using ion mobility with a cross-section resolving power of at least 40 Ω /ΔΩ. MS and MS/MS data were acquired in positive ion mode using ion mobility separation of precursor ions (HDMSE) over a range of 50-2000 m/z. The lock mass channel was sampled every 30 s. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with a MS/MS spectrum of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B human (Glu-Fib) solution delivered through the reference sprayer of the NanoLock Spray source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by using dedicated algorithms and searching against the Uniprot proteomic database of Homo sapiens (version 2016/09), with the default parameters for ion accounting. The databases used were reversed “on the fly” during the database queries and appended to the original database to assess the false-positive identification rate. For proper spectral processing and database searching conditions, we used Progenesis QI for Proteomics software package with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accounting informatics (Waters Corporation). This software starts with LC-MS data loading and then performs alignment and peak detection, which creates a list of interesting peptide ions (peptides) that are explored within Peptide Ion Stats by multivariate statistical methods. The following parameters were considered in identifying peptides: 1) digestion by trypsin with at most two missed cleavages; 2) variable modifications by oxidation (M) and glycosylation (-O-GlcNac ST) and fixed modification by carbamidomethyl (C); and 3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. Identifications that did not satisfy these criteria were rejected. The Shapiro–Wilk W-test analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to identify proteins that were present at different levels. Only those findings with p-values <0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Cryopreservation, Dimethylsulfoxide, Salidroside., Nigerose

### Affiliations
University of Campinas
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas

### Submitter
Juliana Cassoli

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas


