### Accession
PXD003288

### Title
CNS-EVs enriched by PROSPR -  Enrichment of extracellular vesicles from tissues of the central nervous system by PROSPR

### Description
Study of EVs from CNS tissues becomes challenging with the current available methods of EVs enrichment. We recently developed PROSPR, a standardized and easy-to-perform method to enrich EVs from biological fluids. We have optimized the use of PROSPR to efficiently enrich EVs from CNS tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue was dissected in small pieces of 150 mg. and EVs were extracted in 100mM ammonium acetate buffer by serial homogenization steps using a bullt blender homogenizer. Extracted EVs were enriched by PROSPR as previously described (Gallart-Palau et al. 2015). PROSPR-CNS-EVs were characterized by lipidomics and proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw MS/MS data acquired using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was deisotoped using Thermo proteome discoverer. Database search was performed using an in-house mascot server version 2.3.02. Lipidomics raw MS/MS data acquired using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer was deisotoped using Thermo proteome discoverer and identification of lipids was performed using an in-house software and LipidBlast in high-throughput mode.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Purification, Evs, Prospr, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Reasearch Associate
School of Biological Sciences. Division of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology. Nanyang Technological University. 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Xavier Gallart Palau

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences. Division of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology. Nanyang Technological University. 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


