### Accession
PXD041359

### Title
Conformational restriction shapes the inhibition of a multidrug efflux adaptor protein

### Description
Membrane efflux pumps play a major role in bacterial multidrug resistance. The tripartite multidrug efflux pump system from Escherichia coli, AcrAB-TolC, is a target for inhibition to lessen resistance development and restore antibiotic efficacy, with homologs in other ESKAPE pathogens. Here, we rationalize a mechanism of inhibition against the periplasmic adaptor protein, AcrA, using a combination of hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, cellular efflux assays, and molecular dynamics simulations. We define the structural dynamics of AcrA and find that an inhibitor can inflict long-range stabilisation across all four of its domains, whereas an interacting efflux substrate has minimal effect. Our results support a model where an inhibitor forms a molecular wedge within a cleft between the lipoyl and αβ domains of AcrA, diminishing its conformational transmission of drug-evoked signals from AcrB to TolC. This work provides molecular insights into multidrug adaptor protein function which could be valuable for developing antimicrobial therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS experiments were performed on a nanoAcquity ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) Xevo G2-XS QTof mass spectrometer system (Water Corporation). Optimised peptide identification and peptide coverage for AcrAS/PD was performed from undeuterated controls. The optimal sample workflow for HDX-MS of AcrAS/PD was as follows: 5 μl of AcrAS/SD (20 μM) was diluted into 95 μl of either equilibration buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, 5% DMSO, +/- NSC 60339/Novobiocin, pH 6.0) or labelling buffer (deuterated equilibration buffer) at 20 ˚C. After fixed times of deuterium labelling, the samples were mixed with 100 μl of quench buffer (formic acid, 1.6 M GuHCl, 0.1% Fos-choline, pH 1.9) to provide a quenched sample at pH 2.4. 70 μl of quenched sample was then loaded onto a 50 μl sample loop before being injected onto an online Enzymate™ pepsin digestion column (Waters) in 0.1% formic acid in water (200 μl/min flow rate) at 20 ˚C. The peptic fragments were trapped onto an Acquity BEH c18 1.7 μM VANGUARD pre-column (Waters) for 3 min. The peptic fragments were then eluted using an 8-35% gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (40 μl/min flow rate) into a chilled Acquity UPPLC BEH C18 1.7 μM 1.0 x 100mm column (Waters). The trap and UPLC were both maintained at 0 ˚C. The eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray into the Xevo G2-XS QTof mass spectrometer. MSE data was acquired with a 20–30 V trap collision energy ramp for high-energy acquisition of product ions. Argon was used as the trap collision gas at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. Leucine enkephalin was used for lock mass accuracy correction and the mass spectrometer was calibrated with sodium iodide. The online Enzymate™ pepsin digestion column (Waters) was washed three times with pepsin wash (1.5 Gu-HCl, 4% MeOH, 0.8% formic acid, 0.1% Fos-choline), and a blank run was performed between each sample with pepsin wash without Fos-choline, to prevent significant peptide carryover between runs.

### Data Protocol
All deuterium time points and controls were performed in triplicate/quadruplicate. Sequence identification was performed from MSE data of digested undeuterated samples of AcrAS/PD using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.1 software (Waters). The output peptides were then filtered using DynamX (v. 3.0) using these parameters: minimum intensity of 1481, minimum and maximum peptide sequence length of 5 and 20 respectively, minimum MS/MS products of 1, minimum products per amino acid of 0.11, and a maximum MH+ error threshold of 5 ppm. All the spectra were visually examined and only those with a suitable signal to noise ratio were used for analysis.  The amount of relative deuterium uptake for each peptide was determined using DynamX (v. 3.0) and are not corrected for back exchange since only relative differences were used for analysis and interpretation and there was no benefit from normalizing the data. The only exception is for the HDX heatmap of AcrAS, to which back exchange correction was applied. A significance level cut off was decided for each dataset based on the quality of the data as previously defined. Confidence intervals for differential HDX measurements of any individual time point is were determined according to a Welch’s T-test using HDeXplosion software.41 Only peptides which satisfied the corresponding ΔHDX cutoff and a confidence interval of 99% were considered significant. All ΔHDX structure figures were generated from the data using HDeXplosion and Chimera.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Efflux pump inhibitors, Multidrug efflux pump, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Chemisty, Redaing Group, King's College London
King's College London

### Submitter
Benjamin Russell Lewis

### Lab Head
Dr Eamonn Reading
Department of Chemisty, Redaing Group, King's College London


