### Accession
PXD029360

### Title
Generation of ENSEMBL-based proteogenomics databases boost the identification of novel peptides

### Description
A novel bioinformatics tool pypgatk and the pgdb workflow is presented in study to create proteogenomics databases based on ENSEMBL resources. The tools allow the generation of protein sequences from novel protein-coding transcripts by performing a three-frame translation of pseudogenes, lncRNAs, and other non-canonical transcripts, such as those produced by alternative splicing events. It also includes exonic out-of-frame translation from otherwise canonical protein-coding mRNAs. Moreover, the tool enables the generation of variant protein sequences from multiple sources of genomic variants including COSMIC, cBioportal, gnomAD, and mutations detected from sequencing of patient samples. pypgatk and pgdb provide multiple functionalities for database handling, notably optimized target/decoy generation by the algorithm DecoyPyrat. Finally, we perform a reanalysis of four public datasets in PRIDE by generating cell-type specific databases for 65 cell lines using the pypgatk and pgdb workflow, revealing a wealth of non-canonical or cryptic peptides amounting to more than 10% of the total number of peptides identified (43,501 out of 402,512).

### Sample Protocol
Reanalyzed data is originally described in submissions PXD019263, PXD005946, PXD004452, PXD014145

### Data Protocol
The proteomicsLFQ (v1.1.0dev) nf-core workflow (https://github.com/nf-core/proteomicslfq, v.2.6.0) allows performing protein identification and quantification for label-free proteomics experiments. In summary, peptide identification is performed using MS-GF+ (v5 Aug 2020) and Comet (v2019.01) search engines. The Percolator tool (v3.05.0) is then applied to calculate the SVM score and the respective q-values for the PSMs identified by the search engines. The results from both search engines are combined using the ConsensusID OpenMS tool and filtered on 1% FDR using the target/decoy approach. OpenMS feature detection and quantification of each peptide is performed for each sample and dataset using the proteomicsLFQ workflow. The final peptide intensities are exported into different file formats including mzTab, MSstats, and Triqler file format.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Proteogenomics', 'Reanalysis', 'Ensembl']

### Affiliations
['EMBL-EBI', 'EBI']

### Submitter
['Yasset Perez-Riverol']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'EMBL-EBI', 'email': 'yperez@ebi.ac.uk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Yasset Perez-Riverol', 'id': '2307960'}]

