### Accession
PXD001434

### Title
Interaction of cGMP-dependent protein kinase and HAP1

### Description
Here, we use cAMP-based chemical proteomics approach, employing competitive concentrations of free cyclic nucleotides to isolate PKA and PKG and their secondary interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed with a dounce homogenizer in ice cold PBS, supplemented with 0.1% Tween 20, protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. Prior to the pull-down assay, ADP and GDP were added to the lysate to a final concentration of 10 mM. The lysate was divided in three equal fractions. One was supplemented with cAMP (10 µM final concentration), one with cGMP (10 µM final concentration), while the third sample was used as control. The three samples were then incubated for 30 min at 4°C under agitation. 8-AHA-cAMP agarose beads (Biolog, Germany) were added to the lysates with a ratio of 1:100 (µL dried beads: µg protein), and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. After the incubation the beads were washed three times with 1 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer containing the above mentioned concentrations of either free cAMP, or free cGMP, or normal lysis buffer for the control. Beads were subsequently washed three times with 1 ml ice-cold PBS before protein elution using SDS sample buffer at 95°C. The eluted proteins were separated on 4-12% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and subjected to in-gel digestion. Briefly the proteins were reduced dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) prior to analysis with LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis - LC–MS/MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 1100 series liquid chromatography system equipped with an 20-mm Aqua C18 trapping column and a 400 mm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ analytical column (packed in-house, i.d. 50 μm; resin 3 μm). Trapping was performed at 5 μL min−1 solution A (0.6% acetic acid) for 10 min. Peptide elution was achieved with a linear gradient from 13 to 32% of solution B (80% acetonitrile, 0.6% acetic acid) in 60 min at a flow rate of 100 nL min−1 obtained by passively splitting the flow from 0.6 mL min−1. Nanospray was achieved using a distally coated fused silica emitter biased to 1.8 kV. The LC system was coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 in the Orbitrap. The five most intense ions were fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision induced dissociation (CID) at a target value of 10 000.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a standardized workflow. Peak lists, generated in Proteome Discoverer, were searched against the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy Human, 20,407 protein entries or IPI rat 3.36, 42,689 protein entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants, using Mascot (version 2.3.02 Matrix Science, London, UK). The database search parameters were as follow: a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor ions and ±0.6 Da for the fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with allowing two missed cleavages. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was used as variable modification. Search results were filtered by using a 5% FDR at the PSMs level. In addition the results were filtered using the following criteria: (i) Mascot ion score of at least 20, (ii) a minimum of six amino acid residues per peptide, and (iii) maximum search engine rank of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions are important in providing compartmentalization and specificity in cellular signal transduction. Many studies have hallmarked the well designed compartmentalization of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) through its anchoring proteins. Much less data are available on the compartmentalization of its closest homolog, cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), via its own PKG anchoring proteins (GKAPs). For the enrichment, screening, and discovery of (novel) PKA anchoring proteins, a plethora of methodologies is available, including our previously described chemical proteomics approach based on immobilized cAMP or cGMP. Although this method was demonstrated to be effective, each immobilized cyclic nucleotide did not discriminate in the enrichment for either PKA or PKG and their secondary interactors. Hence, with PKG signaling components being less abundant in most tissues, it turned out to be challenging to enrich and identify GKAPs. Here we extend this cAMP-based chemical proteomics approach using competitive concentrations of free cyclic nucleotides to isolate each kinase and its secondary interactors. Using this approach, we identified Huntingtin-associated protein 1 (HAP1) as a putative novel GKAP. Through sequence alignment with known GKAPs and secondary structure prediction analysis, we defined a small sequence domain mediating the interaction with PKG I&#x3b2; but not PKG I&#x3b1;. In vitro binding studies and site-directed mutagenesis further confirmed the specificity and affinity of HAP1 binding to the PKG I&#x3b2; N terminus. These data fully support that HAP1 is a GKAP, anchoring specifically to the cGMP-dependent protein kinase isoform I&#x3b2;, and provide further evidence that also PKG spatiotemporal signaling is largely controlled by anchoring proteins.

### Keywords
Gkap, Cgmp, Hap1, Pkg, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science Faculty, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands, Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Science Faculty, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands, Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands


