### Accession
PXD007525

### Title
Characterisation of nuclear and sub-nuclear proteomes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
This study concerns characterisation of the nuclear, chromatin and nuclear non-chromatin proteomes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We performed nuclear and chromatin enrichments from exponentially growing cells using differential centrifugation and analysed the nuclear and chromatin pellets, along with their accompanying supernatants, by LC-MS/MS on two different platforms. We inferred relative quantitation of proteins using emPAI and compared the relative amounts of proteins in each of our samples which enabled us to infer probable residents of the nuclear and chromatin proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae was cultured to exponential phase and cell walls were digested using zymolyase 100-T. The resultant spheroplasts were lysed hypotonically for the chromatin preparation and by Dounce homogenisation in 18% (w/v) Ficoll containing buffer for the nuclear preparation. Following pre-clearing of the Dounce homogenisation lysate at 3,220 x g, the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 50,000 x g for 35 minutes in a fixed angle rotor and the pellet and supernatant from that step were taken for analysis. After hypotonic lysis, chromatin was extracted using a buffer containing a final concentration of 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 and extracted chromatin was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant and pellet from this step were kept for analysis. The pellet was additionally treated with 500 U benzonase nuclease and resolubilised, before protein concentration of all fractions from both experiments was estimated by BCA assay. Aliquots representing 75 μg protein from each fraction were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel and processed by in-gel digestion. Lanes corresponding to the chromatin preparation samples were excised and cut into 8 pieces each, whereas those corresponding to the nuclear preparation samples were cut into 16 pieces each. The gel pieces were reduced (dithiothreitol), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to tryptic digest at 37°C for 16 hours. Digests corresponding to each of the gel pieces were analysed by mass spectrometry and approximately 1 μg of sample was analysed per run, using a 60-minute LC-MS/MS gradient. The chromatin preparation samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos, using a method which was modified from Chen et al. (2015). Drosophila Ionotropic Receptor 25a mediates circadian clock resetting by temperature. Nature 527, 516–20; to select the top 20 most abundant ions per survey scan for fragmentation by CID (NCE: 30%) in MS2, and so that the Orbitrap was operated at a resolution of 30,000. The nuclear preparation samples were analysed on a Q Exactive, using a method which was modified from Mata et al. (2017). In-depth characterization of the tomato fruit pericarp proteome. Proteomics. 17, 1600406; to select the top 20 most abundant ions per survey scan for fragmentation by HCD (NCE: 25%) in MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using MSConvert (version 3.0.9283, Proteowizard). MGF files were searched using Mascot server version 2.6.0 (Matrix Science) against a canonical S. cerevisiae database, downloaded from UniProt (March 2017; 6,749 sequences). Samples corresponding to each original gel lane (16 for the nuclear preparation samples; 8 for the chromatin preparation samples) were merged for searching, yielding a master results file of mass spectrometry runs for a given sample. Precursor ion tolerance was set to ±25 ppm for all experiments. For LTQ Orbitrap Velos experiments the fragment ion tolerance was set to ±0.6 Da and for Q Exactive experiments it was set to ±0.1 Da. In all cases carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was included as a variable modification. A 1% FDR threshold for protein identifications was imposed, based on the search of a decoy database of reversed protein entries. Relative protein quantification was inferred using the built-in emPAI score feature of Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Topological analysis of large networks, which focus on a specific biological process or on related biological processes, where functional coherence exists among the interacting members, may provide a wealth of insight into cellular functionality. This work presents an unbiased systems approach to analyze genetic, transcriptional regulatory and physical interaction networks of yeast genes possessing such functional coherence to gain novel biological insight. The present analysis identified only a few transcriptional regulators amongst a large gene cohort associated with the protein metabolism and processing in yeast. These transcription factors are not functionally required for the maintenance of these tasks in growing cells. Rather, they are involved in rewiring gene transcription in response to such major challenges as starvation, hypoxia, DNA damage, heat shock or the accumulation of unfolded proteins. Indeed, only a subset of these proteins were captured empirically in the nuclear-enriched fraction of non-stressed yeast cells, suggesting that the transcriptional regulation of protein metabolism and processing in yeast is primarily concerned with maintaining cellular robustness in the face of threat by either internal or external stressors.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Chromatin, Organelle, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Daniel Nightingale

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Susan Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom


