### Accession
PXD003639

### Title
So ce56 secretome LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this work, the secretome of the aerobic soil bacterium Sorangium cellulosum So ce56 was studied and the main hemicellulases for the degradation of arabinoxylan, avicel, wheat straw and oat spelts xylan were determined. For this purpose, bacterial cultures were set in triplicate for each substrate as well as for the basic medium CNS, which contained no lignocellulose substrate. Samples from the supernatants were taken after 5, 10 and 15 days of cultivation. After LC-MS/MS analysis, the secreted hemicellulases were identified and relatively quantified.

### Sample Protocol
Four mL of culture medium were centrifuged for 15 min and filtered (0.22 μm pore size, Roth) in order to remove cells and insoluble substrate. 66.67 ng/mL of bovine serum albumin (BSA) was then added to the flow-through to allow normalization of protein abundances. Two mL of this mixture were filtered through Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filters 10 K (Merck) and proteins were concentrated in a final volume of 300 μL using 50 mM TRIS, pH 8 as solvent. Forty-five μL were processed according to the following in-solution peptide digest protocol: addition of 3 μL 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), incubation for 1 h at room temperature (RT), addition of 12 μL 200 nM iodoacetamide (IAM), incubation for 1 h at RT in the dark, addition of 12 μL 200mM DTT, incubation for 1 h at RT in the dark, addition of urea and CaCl2 to a final concentration of 600 mM and 1 mM, respectively.  All components were dissolved in 50 mM TRIS, pH 8. Mass spectrometry grade trypsin (0.5 μg; Promega) was added to the mixture, which was incubated at 37°C overnight. After acidification to a final concentration of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) of 0.2% (v/v), the peptides were purified using Finisterre SPE columns C18/17% (Teknokroma). Equilibration and washing of the columns was performed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were eluted with 800 μL 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The solvent was evaporated using a vacuum concentrator (Christ RVC 2-25). Peptides were re-suspended in 30 μL 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive Plus coupled with an Easy nLC1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 10 cm long; Thermo Scientific) at flow 0.4 μL min-1 in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, and eluted with a 3% to 60% (v/v) acetonitrile concentration gradient over 96 min, followed by a washing step with 90% (v/v) acetonitrile for 10 min, at 0.3 μL/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 200 to 2000.  MS/MS scans were performed for the ten peptides with the highest MS signal (AGC target 1e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 4 m/z, relative collision energy 30%). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of MS/MS measurements was performed with the Progenesis IQ software (Nonlinear Dynamics). Proteins were identified from spectra using Mascot (Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were set as follows: Uniprot protein annotation, requirement for tryptic ends, one missed cleavage allowed, fixed modification:  carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine), peptide mass tolerance = ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ± 0.6 Da, allowed peptide charges of +2 and +3. A decoy database search was used to limit false discovery rates to 1% on the protein level. Peptide identifications below rank one or with a Mascot ion score below 25 were excluded. Mascot results were imported into Progenesis QI, quantitative peak area information extracted and the results exported for data plotting and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sorangium cellulosum, Hemicellulases, Biomass degradation, Secretion

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molekular Plant Physiology
University of Potsdam, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Molecular Biology Department. Potsdam (Germany).

### Submitter
Alexander Graf

### Lab Head
Dr Mueller-Roeber  
University of Potsdam, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Molecular Biology Department. Potsdam (Germany).


