### Accession
PXD036881

### Title
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis infected cows reveal divergent immune response in bovine peripheral blood derived lymphocyte proteome

### Description
Bovine paratuberculosis is a serious chronic disease of the gastrointestinal tract caused by Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP). The aim of this study was to detect proteomic changes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from cows of the same herd with different MAP infection status after co-incubation with viable MAP in vitro using label-free LC-MS/MS. Our data contribute to a better understanding of the bovine immune response and mechanisms of susceptibility to MAP.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine PBMC were isolated by density gradient centrifugation (room temperature, 500 x g, 25 min, brake off) using Pancoll separating solution (PanBiotech, Aidenbach, Germany). After resuspension in RPMI 1640 (PanBiotech) with 1% penicillin-streptomycin (PanBiotech), bovine PBMC (5 x 10^6 cells per sample) were co-incubated with viable MAP of strain DSM 11023 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 4:1 at 37°C and 5% CO2. MAP were obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) and grown in Middlebrook 7H9 broth (VWR, Ismaning, Germany) supplemented with Middlebrook enrichment ADC medium (VWR, Ismaning, Germany), Mycobactin J (IDVet, Grabels, France), 0.002% glycerol, and 0.03% Tween 80. After 48 hours, cells were washed twice with PBS and the supernatant was discarded before proteomic analysis.  From each PBMC sample, 6x10^5 cells were digested using a modified FASP protocol, as described (Grosche et al., 2016). Samples were separately lysed directly in 200 µl urea buffer (UA buffer, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri) with the addition of 1 µl 1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), then shaken for 30 min at room temperature and diluted 1:2 with UA buffer. After addition of 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide, samples were shaken for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. 2 µl of 1 M DTT was added to quench unreacted 2-iodoacetamide. 30 kDa cut-off centrifuge filters (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) were equilibrated with 200 µl UA buffer and centrifuged at 15000 x g for 15 minutes. Samples were subsequently transferred to the filters by centrifugation at 15300 x g and washed three times with 200 µl UA buffer at 15500 x g and three times with 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri). After washing, proteins were subjected to proteolysis for 1.5 h at room temperature by adding 0.5 µg lysyl endopeptidase in 40 µl ABC buffer to the filter, followed by the addition of 1 µg trypsin and 10 µl ABC buffer and incubation at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation over the filter, and 20 µl of ABC buffer containing 5% acetonitrile was added to the filter. After a second centrifugation at 15900 x g for 20 min at room temperature, the eluates were combined and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to give a pH of 2. Peptide analysis of each PBMC sample was performed as previously described (Lutterberg et al, 2018). Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed in data-dependent mode on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled on-line to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the Nanotrap column, eluted after 5 minutes, and separated from 2 to 40 percent ACN on the analytical column (75 µm inner diameter × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) by a 265-minute gradient flow at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. By using LTQ OrbitrapXL, peptides were analyzed with acquired MS spectra resolution at 60,000in profile mode. The ten most intense peptide ions were chosen for fragment analysis in the linear ion trap if they were at least doubly charged and surpassed an intensity of at least 200 counts after the high-resolution prescan. The normalized collision energy for CID was set to a value of 35, and the resulting fragments were detected at normal resolution in the linear ion trap in centroid mode and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds.   References: Grosche A, Hauser A, Lepper MF, Mayo R, von Toerne C, Merl-Pham J and Hauck SM. The proteome of native adult Muller glial cells from murine retina. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Feb;15(2):462-80. Lutterberg, K.; Kleinwort, K.J.H.; et al. A Functionally Different Immune Phenotype in Cattle Is Associated With Higher Mastitis Incidence. Front Immunol 2018, 9, 2884, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.02884.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were imported into Progenesis QI (version 2.5) software. The spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and further processed with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) with the search parameters in the Ensembl bovine database (version 93, number of coding genes: 21880) as follows: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated Decoy database search resulted in an average false discovery of <1% when the search was performed with a Mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Peptide assignments were imported into Progenesis QI software, and the abundances of all individual peptides assigned to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of each protein were used to calculate fold-changes of protein ratios between conditions. Statistical analysis was performed on the log2-transformed normalized abundance values using Student's t test. At p<0.05 changes in protein expression between conditions were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Bovine paratuberculosis is a serious chronic disease of the gastrointestinal tract that causes economic losses and dramatically affects animal health in livestock. The underlying infectious agent, <i>Mycobacterium avium</i> subspecies <i>paratuberculosis</i> (MAP), cannot reliably be detected by standard diagnostic tests due to the long asymptomatic disease stage. The aim of this study was to detect proteomic changes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from cows of the same herd with different MAP infection status after co-incubation with viable MAP in vitro using label-free LC-MS/MS. In our proteomic discovery experiment, we detected 2631 differentially regulated proteins between cows with negative MAP infection status (so-called MAP-resistant cows) and cows with positive MAP infection status (so-called persistently MAP-infected cows). In MAP-resistant cows, we detected enriched immune-related signaling pathways for TLR2 and MHC class II component proteins, among others, indicating a successful defensive immune response of the cows to MAP. In contrast, persistently MAP-infected cows were not directly enriched in immune-related signaling pathways associated with ITGA2B and KCNMA1, among others. The introduction of these distinct immune responses contributes to a better understanding of the bovine immune response and mechanisms of susceptibility to MAP.

### Keywords
Paratuberculosis; mycobacteria; host-pathogen response; immune system; quantitative label-free lc-ms/ms; bovine

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Germany


