### Accession
PXD008339

### Title
Characterisation of proteome of a novel Escherichia coli strain exhibiting mucoviscous phenotype.

### Description
Protein expression by E. coli 26561 during the late-exponential phase of cultures under anaerobic conditions was examined.  E. coli 26561 is a multidrug resistant (MDR) and shows an unusual hyper-mucoviscous phenotype.  Resistance includes ESBL (CTX-M-14) and proteome was determined with and without exposure to sub-MIC concentrations of the 3rd generation cephalosporin ceftazidime. Ceftazidime exposure was at two sub-MIC levels, specifically 0.25x MIC (samples 5-7), 0.5x MIC (samples 8 - 10); samples 1-4 provided the unexposed Control.  Both whole and phospho-enriched fractions for each sample were analysed.  Quantification of peptides was assessed using 10-plex TMT labelling in conjunction with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. Raw data produced by the Orbitrap were processed using Max Quant 1.5.4.7 using the included Andromeda search engine. Peptides were searched against our own database of E. coli 26561 proteins which was produced from a hybrid assembly of our reads obtained from MiSeq and PacBio sequencing platforms.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to preparations of samples for TMT labelling, we established the growth dynamics of strain 26561 when grown in anaerobic conditions in DMEM (low glucose) media (SigmaAldrich product 6046). We also established that growth was highly similar in the presence of 0.25 and 0.5 MIC of ceftazidime. All cells were harvested, lysed and flash-frozen 6hrs post inoculation of the samples. Aliquots of 100µg of ten samples per experiment were digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled.  For the Total proteome analysis, an aliquot of 50ug of the pooled sample was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS. For the Phospho proteome analysis, the remainder of the TMT-labelled pooled sample was fractionated as above and the resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and then subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). The phospho-enriched fractions were evaporated to dryness and then resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS. High pH RP fractions (Total proteome analysis) or phospho-enriched fractions (Phospho-proteome analysis) were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5000, max injection time of 120ms and CID collision energy of 35%.  For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 60 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 120ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 was used to identify proteins from the 20 raw MS files (10 fractions from whole proteome, 10 phospho-enriched). The protein sequences from our 26561 hybrid assembly, together with the contaminant sequences provided by MQ, were used to form the search database. Modifications were selected as ‘fixed’ for Carbamidomethyl and ‘variable’ for Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). Phospho (STY) was added as ‘variable’ for the files related to phospho-enriched samples. The reporter ion was MS3, TMT10plex, with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Daltons. The digestion mode was trypsin with 2 missed cleavages permitted. The PSM and Protein FDR was 1%. Only peptides mapping uniquely to one protein sequence were used for quantification.  Data was further processed and analysed using Perseus 1.5.5.0 .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Quantification, Mucoviscous, Escherichia coli, Mic, Shotgun, Tmt, Ceftazidime, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
IB3, Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK
Heriot Watt University

### Submitter
Susan Harris

### Lab Head
Dr Professor David G. E. Smith
IB3, Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, UK


