### Accession
PXD009822

### Title
Life history shapes variation in egg composition in a wild passerine

### Description
Maternal investment directly shapes early developmental conditions and therefore has long-term fitness consequences for the offspring. In oviparous species prenatal maternal investment is fixed at the time of laying.  To ensure the best survival chances for most of their offspring, females must equip their eggs with the resources required to perform well under various circumstances, yet the actual mechanisms remain unknown. Here we describe the blue tit egg albumen and yolk proteome and evaluate its potential to mediate maternal effects. We show that variation in egg composition (proteins, lipids, carotenoids) primarily depends on laying order, female age and paternity (within- versus extra-pair) and that the investment in the egg proteome is functionally biased among eggs. Our results suggest that maternal effects on egg composition result from both passive and active (partly compensatory) mechanisms, and that the between- and within-clutch variation in egg composition creates diverse biochemical environments for embryonic development.

### Sample Protocol
Albumen proteins were extracted in 4% SDS, 0.05 M TEAB buffer (14 ml extraction volume per 1 ml albumen) for 5 min at 95°C under shaking. After 5 min of centrifugation at 4500 rpm the supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C until analysis. Yolk samples (0.13 - 0.22 µg) diluted with 200 µl ultra-pure water were delipidated prior to protein extraction by sequential addition of 1.6 ml methanol, 0.8 ml chloroform and 1.2 ml water. After each step the sample was homogenized and centrifuged for 1 min at 4500 rpm. The upper water phase was removed, dried in a speed vac, dissolved in 1 ml sample buffer (first protein extract). The proteins were precipitated from the lower phase with 1.2 ml methanol and pelleted by centrifugation for 2 min at 4500 rpm. The lipid phase was removed and frozen until further processing. The protein pellet was dissolved in 3 ml sample buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 50 mM TEAB, and then mixed with the first protein extract. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM to clarify the cloudy extract. Protein concentration was measured using a tryptophan assay against a BSA standard curve.   For each sample, 50 µg of proteins were diluted to 50 µl, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone over night at -20°C. The pellet was washed with 80% acetone, dried and dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB. Proteins were digested with 2 µg LysC for 4.5 h at 500 rpm, then with 0.5 µg trypsin over night at 37°C and 500 rpm. The resulting peptides were concentrated and desalted on a stage tip C18.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectrometry data was analyzed with the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow version 1.5.1.113. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut off was set to 1% for protein and peptide spectrum matches. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. MaxQuant was used to score fragmentation scans for identification based on a search with an initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion of a maximum of 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration. The allowed fragment mass deviation was 20 ppm. Fragmentation spectra were identified using the 6-frame translated blue tit transcriptome database combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage before proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.  Both “match between runs,” with a maximum time difference of 42 s, and label-free quantification (LFQ) with standard settings, were enabled. The LFQ algorithm uses only information from unique and razor peptides to quantify the protein. We considered proteins correctly identified in a sample when we obtained positive intensity values from at least two MS technical replicates. We considered proteins correctly quantitated when they satisfied the above identification criterion in at least half of the samples in at least one of the compared biological groups. For those proteins, missing values were replaced with random values extracted from a uniform distribution bounded by the minimum normalised intensity value and the 1% quantile of the intensity distribution for that sample and replicate combination.  Intensity values were normalized per sample and replicate to obtain relative abundances of the proteins. Normalised intensities (relative abundances) of the individual proteins were multiplied with the total amount of protein in the egg compartment to obtain a measure of the absolute abundance of the protein in the sample, then divided by the weight of the egg compartment to obtain the concentration. All values were log transformed towards a normal distribution. To account for the technical variation, the abundances of individual proteins in each sample were estimated from linear mixed-effect models with batch as random intercept and sample as a fixed factor.  Functional annotation was based on Gene Ontology and the MIPS Functional Catalogue database.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal investment directly shapes early developmental conditions and therefore has long-term fitness consequences for the offspring. In oviparous species prenatal maternal investment is fixed at the time of laying. To ensure the best survival chances for most of their offspring, females must equip their eggs with the resources required to perform well under various circumstances, yet the actual mechanisms remain unknown. Here we describe the blue tit egg albumen and yolk proteomes and evaluate their potential to mediate maternal effects. We show that variation in egg composition (proteins, lipids, carotenoids) primarily depends on laying order and female age. Egg proteomic profiles are mainly driven by laying order, and investment in the egg proteome is functionally biased among eggs. Our results suggest that maternal effects on egg composition result from both passive and active (partly compensatory) mechanisms, and that variation in egg composition creates diverse biochemical environments for embryonic development.

### Keywords
Cyanistes caeruleus, Differential allocation

### Affiliations
Dept Behavioural Ecology & Evolutionary Genetics Max Planck Institute for Ornithology E Gwinnerstr 82319 Seewiesen Germany
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Richard Scheltema

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bart Kempenaers
Dept Behavioural Ecology & Evolutionary Genetics Max Planck Institute for Ornithology E Gwinnerstr 82319 Seewiesen Germany


