### Accession
PXD022523

### Title
Delayed induction of type I and III interferons enhances nasal epithelial permissiveness to SARS-CoV-2

### Description
We provide the first comprehensive analysis of nasal cell responses to SARS-COV-2 using single cell transcriptomics and proteomics. The immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is dominated by a delayed type I and III IFN response, which is too slow to contain viral replication. Cells transitioning from secretory to ciliated states are highly permissive to SARS-CoV-2, whereas goblet cells are relatively resistant. Cell-type differences in the production and response to IFN-I/III correlate with permissiveness. Pre-treatment with recombinant IFNs potently restricts SARS-CoV-2. Nasal delivery of recombinant IFNs is a promising prophylactic strategy for SARS-CoV-2

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed three times with cold PBS before addition of solubilisation buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB) to the apical compartment for 10 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were heated at 75°C for 45 min, before freezing and storage at -80°C. Protein concentration was determined by EZQ® protein quantification assay. A total of 30 µg protein was reduced by incubation with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 15 min at 37°C, and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Protein digestion was performed using the suspension trapping (S-Trap™) sample preparation method according to manufacturer’s guidelines (ProtiFi™, USA). Briefly, 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid was added to each sample, followed by the addition of 165 µl S-Trap binding buffer (100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, pH 7.1). Samples were added to S-Trap Micro spin columns followed by centrifugation (4,000 g, 2 min). Each S-Trap Mini-spin column was washed with 150 µl S-trap binding buffer by centrifugation (4,000 g, 1 min). This process was repeated for a total of 4 washes. 25 µl of 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 containing trypsin (1:20 ratio of trypsin to protein) was added to each sample, followed by proteolytic digestion for 3 hours at 47°C without shaking. Peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0 and centrifugation (4,000 g, 2 min). Elution steps were repeated twice more, using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, respectively. The three eluates from each sample were combined and dried using a speed-vac before storage at -80°C.  TMT-16 plex labelling  Each 30 µg protein digest was resuspended in 25 µl 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5. TMT-16 plex labelling (TMT lot number: UI292951) was carried out as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were assigned to a TMT tag. 10 µl of the corresponding TMT tag was added per sample and incubated for 1 hour at RT. An aliquot corresponding to 1 µg was taken from each sample and pooled together for ratio and labelling efficiency checks, prior to making the full pooled sample. The test pool was quenched with 0.69 µl of 5% hydroxylamine, incubated for 15 min at room temperature, and dried using a speed-vac. The sample was cleaned-up using C18 spin column as per the manufacturer’s guidelines (Thermo Scientific), and subsequently dried using a speed-vac. Peptides (dissolved in 5% formic acid) and the pooled sample were analysed for labelling efficiency and ratio check. For the ratio check, each sample (corresponding to a single TMT channel) was normalised to the average summed intensity of all samples within its pool. Each sample was quenched with 2.5 µl 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min. Subsequently, samples were pooled together based on the scaling factors which were calculated using the test pool. Samples were dried using a speed-vac, cleaned using MacroSpin columns as per the manufacturer’s guidelines (Harvard Apparatus, USA), and dried down again using a speed-vac prior to offline high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation.  Offline HPLC Fractionation  Peptides were resuspended in 80 µl ammonium formate, pH 8.0. Peptides were fractionated on a Basic Reverse Phase column (Gemini C18, 3um particle size, 110A pore, 3 mm internal diameter, 250 mm length, Phenomenex #00G-4439-Y0) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 off-line LC system. All solvents used were HPLC grade (Rathburn Chemicals, UK). 40 μL of peptide sample were loaded in to a column for 1 min at 250 μL/min using 99% Buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0) and eluted for 40 min on a linear gradient from 1 to 90% Buffer B (100% acetonitrile (ACN)). Peptide elution was monitored by UV detection at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every minute from 2 to 38 minutes for a total of 36 fractions. Fractions were pooled using non-consecutive concatenation to obtain 18 pooled fractions (e.g. pooled fraction 1: fraction 1 + 19). Each fraction was acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and dried using a speed-vac.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry  Peptides were dissolved in 5% formic acid, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (~2 μg per fraction) were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 ID μm × 750 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Solvent A is 0.1% formic acid in H2O, and solvent B was 80% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis of proteome samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase of solvent B from 3% to 35% in 120 min, 35% to 90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 20 min. Mass spectrometric identification and quantification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) operated in data dependent, positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in a range from 375 m/z to 1500 m/z, at a resolution of 120000, with a standard automated gain control (AGC) (Tune 3.3) and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 0.7 m/z and CID fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 30% and 0.25 activation Q. Detection of MS/MS fragments was acquired in the linear ion trap in a rapid mode using a Top 3s method, with a standard AGC target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor was enabled for 60 s with a tolerance of +/-10 ppm. Quantitative analysis of TMT-tagged peptides was performed using FTMS3 acquisition in the Orbitrap mass analyser operated at 60,000 resolution, with a standard AGC target and maximum injection time of 118 ms. HCD fragmentation on MS/MS fragments was performed in one-step collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield and synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) was enabled to include 10 MS/MS fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan. Mass spectrometry data analysis:  All spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 and searched against a SwissProt Homo sapiens and Trembl SARS-CoV-2 FASTA files. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. Reporter ion MS3 was used for quantification and the additional parameter of quantitation labels with 16 plex TMT on N‐terminal or lysine was included. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant.  Reporter ion intensities were used for data analysis. Briefly, the data was filtered to remove proteins that matched to a contaminant or a reverse database, which were only identified by site, which were not quantified in every sample, or which contained less than 2 unique peptides. Reporter ion intensity values were log2 transformed. Each sample within a TMT set was then normalised to the average median intensity of all 12 samples within that set. Moderated t-tests, with patient accounted for in the linear model, was performed using Limma, where proteins with an adjusted P < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. All analysis was performed using R 3.6.2.

### Publication Abstract
The nasal epithelium is a plausible entry point for SARS-CoV-2, a site of pathogenesis and transmission, and may initiate the host response to SARS-CoV-2. Antiviral interferon (IFN) responses are critical to outcome of SARS-CoV-2. Yet little is known about the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and innate immunity in this tissue. Here we apply single-cell RNA sequencing and proteomics to a primary cell model of human nasal epithelium differentiated at air-liquid interface. SARS-CoV-2 demonstrates widespread tropism for nasal epithelial cell types. The host response is dominated by type I and III IFNs and interferon-stimulated gene products. This response is notably delayed in onset relative to viral gene expression and compared to other respiratory viruses. Nevertheless, once established, the paracrine IFN response begins to impact on SARS-CoV-2 replication. When provided prior to infection, recombinant IFN&#x3b2; or IFN&#x3bb;1 induces an efficient antiviral state that potently restricts SARS-CoV-2 viral replication, preserving epithelial barrier integrity. These data imply that the IFN-I/III response to SARS-CoV-2 initiates in the nasal airway and suggest nasal delivery of recombinant IFNs to be a potential chemoprophylactic strategy.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Nasal

### Affiliations
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK


