### Accession
PXD011081

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Protein-Mannosyltransferase Knock-Out Mutant.

### Description
This project focused in the proteomic characterization of the secreted proteome of a Rv1002c (Protein mannosyltransferase) knock-out mutant and its wild type counterpart.  The analysis was carried out using a M. tuberculosis ΔleuDΔpanCD auxotroph Rv1002c wild type compared to M. tuberculosis ΔleuDΔpanCDΔRv1002c. Both strains were grown in triplicate and their whole cell lysate (WCL) and secreted proteins (CFP) where purified, trypsin digested and characterized by liquid-chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Three replicate injections were performed for each of the sampels. The resulting spectra were searched against an M. tuberculosis database and relative protein abundance was determined using normalized spectral counts. Protein abundance differences were tested by Student’s t test. Abundance of 39 secreted proteins was significantly different between the WT and the ΔRv1002c. Decrease abundance of known glycoproteins, including several lipoglycoproteins was observed in the ΔRv1002c strain. In the WCL, 61 proteins presented significantly different abundance between the WT and the ΔRv1002c strains, including 4 proteins that were completely absent in the mutant (Rv2510c, PknF, Mpt70 and CeoC).

### Sample Protocol
Mtb auxotroph strains were cultured in triplicate in a final volume of 1L of Glycerol Alanine Salts (GAS) media supplemented with L-Leucine (50 µg/ml) and D-pantothenate (25 µg/ml) and incubated at 37°C in constant agitation. Culture media for Mtb ΔleuDΔpanCDΔRv1002c was also supplemented with Hygromycin B (50 µg/ml) the The preparation of Culture Filtrate Proteins (CFP) and Whole cell lysate (WCL) was prepared as previously described by Mehaffy et al (2010). Total protein concentration of each sample was measured using the bicinchoninic acid method (Thermo Scientific™Pierce™BCA Protein Assay BCA). 100 µg of each samples were dried down and proceeded to in-solution digestion of proteins as follows: samples were rehydrated in digest buffer (0.5M Urea, 0.02M Methylamine, 0.05M NaCl2, 0.01M Tris-HCl) to a final concentration of 2.5mg/ml. Trypsin (0.1 mg/ml in 0.2M Ammonium bicarbonate) was added at a 1:100 (enzyme:substrate ratio) and incubated O.N. in agitation at 37°C. Next day, additional trypsin (1:100 enzyme:substrate) was added and sample incubated at 37°C for additional 6 hours. The reaction was stopped by 3 freeze-thaw cycles.  Samples were desalted using a C18 spin column.  Peptide eluate was dried in a vacuum evaporator and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Once resolubilized, absorbance at 205nm was measured on a NanoDrop (ThermoScientific) and total peptide concentration was subsequently calculated using an extinction coefficient of 31 (Scopes, 1974). A total of 0.5 µg of peptides of each sample were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (Thermo Scientific 5mm, 100 mm ID x 2cm C18 column).  Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (Thermo Scientific EASYnano-LC, 3mm, 75 mm ID x 100mm C18 column) using a 90 minute linear gradient from 5%-30% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min.   Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) and spectra were collected over a m/z range of 400–2000, positive mode ionization, using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given m/z value for 30 s (exclusion duration of 90 s). The instrument was operated in FT mode for MS detection (resolution of 60,000) and ion trap mode for MS/MS detection with a normalized collision energy set to 35%. Compound lists of the resulting spectra were generated using Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) with a S/N threshold of 1.5 and 1 scan/group.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra raw data were converted to mzXML files using ProteoWizard. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.0). Sequest was set up to search the MtbReverse041712 database (7992 entries) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme with no missed cleavages. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications represent a key aspect of enzyme and protein regulation and function. Post-translational modifications are involved in signaling and response to stress, adaptation to changing environments, regulation of toxic and damaged proteins, proteins localization and host-pathogen interactions. Glycosylation in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), is a post-translational modification often found in conjunction with acylation in mycobacterial proteins. Since the discovery of glycosylated proteins in the early 1980's, important advances in our understanding of the mechanisms of protein glycosylation have been made. The number of known glycosylated substrates in Mtb has grown through the years, yet many questions remain. This review will explore the current knowledge on protein glycosylation in Mtb, causative agent of Tuberculosis and number one infectious killer in the world. The mechanism and significance of this post-translational modification, as well as maturation, export and acylation of glycosylated proteins will be reviewed. We expect to provide the reader with an overall view of protein glycosylation in Mtb, as well as the significance of this post-translational modification to the physiology and host-pathogen interactions of this important pathogen. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011081 and 10.6019/PXD011081.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Mycobaterium, Proteomics, Protein glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology. Colorado State University, 1682 Campus delivery, Fort Collins, CO, USA
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Carolina Mehaffy

### Lab Head
Dr Carolina Mehaffy
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology. Colorado State University, 1682 Campus delivery, Fort Collins, CO, USA


