### Accession
PXD039914

### Title
Phosphoproteomics and Morphology of Red Blood Cells treated by Protein-Tyrosine-Phosphatases Inhibitor

### Description
Phosphorylation of proteins is involved in cell functions, of which cytoskeleton organization. In particular, the phosphotyrosine (pY) has been reported to play a role in red blood cell (RBC) functions. During the storage of RBC in the context of transfusion medicine, cells suffer from storage lesions that affect energy metabolism as well as cell morphology. In the present research work, RBCs were treated (in absence of calcium) with a protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor (orthovanadate, OV) to trigger phosphorylation allowing to investigate this effect on RBCs during the storage. Erythrocytes were studied by phosphoproteomics, Western blot analyses and cell morphology by digital holographic microscopy in presence of kinase inhibitors. The OV treatment triggered phosphorylation events, that disappeared during the storage. As a result, 609 phosphoproteins containing 5’298 phosphosites were detected in the membrane extract, of which 43 pY were up- or down-regulated. Following these phosphorylation processes, shape of RBCs shifted from discocytes to spherocytes, and the addition of kinase inhibitors (KIs) inhibited this transition by counteracting the OV treatment. In addition, the different KIs used highlighted potentially two mechanisms involving membrane proteins and playing a role in RBC shape. The capacity of RBCs to maintain their function is central in transfusion medicine and the presented results contribute to a better understanding of RBC biology.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein extracts were prepared in 4 volumes of extraction buffer: 8 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.5% SDS, and 10 mM DTE. Each sample was in-solution digested (using first Lys-C [1:50 enzyme/protein], then with Trypsin gold [1:50 enzyme/protein]). Phosphopeptides were enriched by capture performed on homemade titania tips and analyzed by liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 with Andromeda as an internal database search engine against the Uniprot Human reference proteome (71567 canonical and isoform Sequences - Last Modified July 2017). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of seven amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modifications whereas oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y) were considered as a variable.

### Publication Abstract
The process of protein phosphorylation is involved in numerous cell functions. In particular, phosphotyrosine (pY) has been reported to play a role in red blood cell (RBC) functions, including the cytoskeleton organization. During their storage before transfusion, RBCs suffer from storage lesions that affect their energy metabolism and morphology. This study investigated the relationship between pY and the storage lesions. To do so, RBCs were treated (in the absence of calcium) with a protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor (orthovanadate [OV]) to stimulate phosphorylation and with 3 selective kinase inhibitors (KIs). Erythrocyte membrane proteins were studied by western blot analyses and phosphoproteomics (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039914) and cell morphology by digital holographic microscopy. The increase of pY triggered by OV treatment (inducing a global downregulation of pS and pT) disappeared during the storage. Phosphoproteomic analysis identified 609 phosphoproteins containing 1752 phosphosites, of which 41 pY were upregulated and 2 downregulated by OV. After these phosphorylation processes, the shape of RBCs shifted from discocytes to spherocytes, and the addition of KIs partially inhibited this transition. The KIs modulated either pY or pS and pT via diverse mechanisms related to cell shape, thereby affecting RBC morphology. The capacity of RBCs to maintain their function is central in transfusion medicine, and the presented results contribute to a better understanding of RBC biology.

### Keywords
Protein tyrosine phosphorylation, Storage of red blood cells, Transfusion medicine., Digital holographic microscopy, Kinase inhibitors

### Affiliations
PCF
Laboratoire de Recherche sur les Produits Sanguins, Transfusion Interrégionale CRS, Epalinges, Switzerland Center for Research and Innovation in Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Western Switzerland, University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Western Switzerland, University of Geneva, University of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Prudent
Laboratoire de Recherche sur les Produits Sanguins, Transfusion Interrégionale CRS, Epalinges, Switzerland Center for Research and Innovation in Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Western Switzerland, University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Western Switzerland, University of Geneva, University of Lausanne, Switzerland


