### Accession
PXD034868

### Title
thermal proteome profiling study on Haemonchus contortus

### Description
Parasitic diseases of humans and other animals represent a major socioeconomic burden worldwide. In humans, parasitic worms (helminths) that cause neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) affect ~ billion people, equating to a burden of >12 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) (Hotez et al., 2014). In other animals, although challenging to quantitate, the disease impact of such helminths is major (Pedersen, et al., 2015; Charlier et al., 2020; Selzer and Epe, 2021), and some of these parasites are also transmissible to humans (i.e. zoonotic) (McCarthy et al., 2000; Gordon et al., 2016). The control of these diseases relies on diagnosis, treatment and management strategies, and anthelmintic treatment is usually a central component of a control campaign, as vaccines are not available for the vast majority of them. These treatments are not always highly efficacious/effective, and the reliance on them, particularly if they are used excessively in an uncontrolled (suppressive) manner, has led to the emergence and spread of anthelmintic resistances in parasitic worms (within 4-X generations; REF), particularly those of animals. Although the resistance status of worms of humans to available compounds is somewhat unclear (Prichard, 2005; Keiser and Utzinger, 2008; Vercruysse et al., 2011), this is not the case for worms of important production animals (e.g., sheep, goats and pigs), where such resistance(s) is/are widespread and essentially worldwide. In recent work, we established a high-throughput whole-organism, phenotypic assay for the screening of relatively large libraries of tens to hundreds of thousands of compounds, the subsequent evaluation of active compounds and structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies to strive toward the optimisation of the activity and potency of analogs, and the minimisation of side effects and toxicity (Taki et al., 2021b; Taki et al., 2021c; Shanley et al., 2022). However, our early discovery work has been hampered by not knowing the target(s) to which compounds might bind and how they might work. In recent years, there have been major advances in the development of methods for identifying drug-target interactions (reviewed by Mateus et al., 2021), which include affinity purification, activity-based protein profiling, kinobeads (for kinases), stability of proteins from rates of oxidation, protein painting, limited proteolysis/drug affinity responsive target stability and thermal proteome profiling (TPP). Published evidence (Savitski et al., 2014; Perrin et al., 2020; Selkrig et al., 2020) demonstrates clearly the exquisite capacity of TPP to define or infer target molecules in projects with a biomedical focus (e.g., cancer, autophagy or infectious disease), but this method has not yet been utilised to define an anthelmintic target. This context provides the very exciting prospect of being able to rapidly provide evidence of drug-target interactions. For these reasons, in the present study, we undertook a high-throughput whole-organism, phenotypic screen of a well-curated compound library, identified ‘hit’ compounds for evaluation, identified one candidate with lead-like characteristics and inferred the target of this promising small molecule in H. contortus.

### Sample Protocol
Production and storage of H. contortus. The Haecon-5 strain of H. contortus was maintained in experimental sheep as described previously (Schwarz et al., 2013; Preston et al., 2015), in accordance with the institutional animal ethics guidelines and the regulations of Australia (permit no. 1714374; University of Melbourne). In brief, helminth-free Merino sheep (six months of age; male) were orally inoculated (via a gastric tube) with 7,000 L3s of H. contortus. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP). This method followed an established protocol (Jafari et al., 2014) and included five steps (preparation of parasite protein extracts; incubation with compound and ‘heating’ of samples; protein digestion and peptide labelling; mass spectrometric analysis; and data processing and analysis):   (i) Preparation of protein extracts from H. contortus; (ii) Incubation with compound (SP0), and temperature profile; (iii) In-solution digestion and isobaric stable isotope labelling of peptides; (iv) LC-MS/MS analysis, and protein identification/annotation

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis: The protein data produced by MaxQuant was taken for analysis in R (v.4.1.2). Decoy proteins, contaminant proteins, proteins only identified by modified peptides, and proteins that were identified by less than 2 razor or unique peptides were removed. Corrected reporter ion intensities were then divided by the intensity of the 37 °C channel. In two cases where TMT reporter ion channels showed significantly lower intensity than expected, values were imputed by taking the average of the two adjacent channels. The remaining proteins that were filtered to retain only those with non-zero values were taken for subsequent analysis. Thermal proteome profiles were established using the TPP ‘R’ package (Kurzawa et al., 2020). In brief, a global quantile normalisation process based on the protein intensity at the lowest temperature (i.e. 37 °C) was performed to obtain relative abundances of each protein using the Limma (v.3.50.0) R package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Subsequently, melting curves of each identified protein were determined by fitting with the following equation that based on chemical denaturation theory (Schellman, 1994). Subsequently, thermal profiles of quantified proteins were assessed using the NPARC (v.1.6.0) R package (Childs et al., 2019), which fits nonparametric models to the temperature profile data under null and alternative hypotheses. p-values were then calculated from F-statistics and the cumulative F-distribution with empirically estimated degrees of freedom as described in the NPARC package documentation (Childs et al., 2019). To select protein of interest, the following priori filters were applied to calculate the melting point differences between the compound treated and vehicle condition prior to manually inspection: a. the plateau of the vehicle curves of the two replicates less than 0.3; the coefficient of determination R2 of both fitted curves for the vehicle and compound treated condition greater than 0.8 (Childs et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Haemonchus contortus; tpp; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The University of Melbourne


