### Accession
PXD022186

### Title
Detection and Quantification of Novel C-terminal TDP-43 Fragments in ALS-TDP

### Description
The pathological hallmark of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the presence of cytoplasmic inclusions, containing C-terminal fragments of the protein TDP-43. Here, we tested the hypothesis that highly sensitive mass spectrometry with parallel reaction monitoring (MS-PRM) can generate a high-resolution map of pathological TDP-43 peptide ratios to form the basis for quantitation of abnormal C-terminal TDP-43 fragment enrichment.  Human cortex and spinal cord, microscopically staged for the presence of phosphoTDP-43, p-tau, alpha-synuclein and beta-amyloid pathology, were biochemically fractionated and analysed by immunoblot and MS for detection of full-length and truncated (disease-specific) TDP-43 peptides. This informed synthesis of heavy isotope-labelled peptides for the absolute quantification of TDP-43 by MS-PRM across 16 ALS, 8 Parkinson’s and 8 Alzheimer’s disease and 8 aged control cases.  We confirmed by immunoblot the previously described enrichment of pathological C-terminal fragments in ALS-TDP urea fractions. Subsequent MS analysis resolved specific TDP-43 N- and C-terminal peptides, including a novel N-terminal truncation site-specific peptide. Absolute quantification of peptides by MS-PRM showed an increased C:N-terminal TDP-43 peptide ratio in ALS-TDP brain compared to normal and disease controls. A C:N-terminal ratio >1.5 discriminated ALS from controls with a sensitivity of 100% (CI 79.6-100) and specificity of 100% (CI 68-100), and from Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease with a sensitivity of 93% (CI 70-100) and specificity of 100% (CI 68-100). N-terminal Truncation site-specific peptides were increased in ALS in line with C-terminal fragment enrichment, but also found in a proportion of Alzheimer cases with normal C:N-terminal ratio but coexistent TDP-43 pathology.  In conclusion this is a novel, sensitive and specific method to quantify the enrichment of pathological TDP-43 fragments in human brain, which could form the basis for an antibody-free assay. Our methodology has the potential to help clarify if specific pathological TDP-43 peptide signatures are associated with primary or secondary TDP-43 proteinopathies.

### Sample Protocol
Urea fractions were thawed on ice and used for digestion. For in-gel digestion gel bands were excised with a scalpel after electrophoresis and gel pieces rinsed in 200μl wash solution (50% methanol, 5% acetic acid in MilliQ water). 200μl of acetonitrile was added to dehydrate the gel pieces prior to reduction with 5mM DTT and alkylation with 20mM IAA. After dehydration samples were first rehydrated in 200μl 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and then in 30µl of 200ng/µl chymotrypsin (Promega) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight. 50μl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to the samples, 50µl of extraction buffer 1 (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in MilliQ water) and 50µl of extraction buffer 2 (85% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid in MilliQ water) was added and supernatant with eluted peptides collected. For in-solution digestion samples were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (Alfa Alsar) followed by alkylation with 20mM IAA. Samples were subsequently precipitated by methanol-chloroform extraction. Pellets were fully resuspended by addition of 6M Urea (Merck) and brief sonication. 50mM TEAB (Merck) was subsequently added to reduce the final concentration of urea to 1M. The samples were incubated with 2μg chymotrypsin (Promega) at 25°C, respectively, on a shaker for 14-16 hrs. The reaction was stopped by addition of formic acid (Millipore). Samples were desalted using SOLA SPE columns (ThermoFisher). All in-solution and in-gel digested samples were dried in a speed-vac (ThermoScientific) and pellets were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid diluted in MilliQ water

### Data Protocol
For the measurement of endogenous (light) TDP-43 peptides by MS-PRM, C- and N-terminal and truncation site specific peptides detected from the discovery experiments and a previously reported sequence (14) were used to generate heavy isotope-labelled (heavy) peptides. Heavy peptides were commercially synthesized using AQUA-grade (ThermoFisher). 1μl of chymotrypsin-digested and desalted samples were injected into the mass spectrometer. A time schedule targeted MS/MS method was used with peptide-specific parameters as described in Table 2. 10fmol of the heavy peptides listed were injected and, as technical quality check, pools of samples for each group were prepared and loaded every 10th run to determine the reproducibility of the assay. Samples were randomized per diagnostic group and run in ascending order according to TDP-43 pathology (Ctrl, PD, AD, ALS). MS data processing was conducted by an independent investigator blinded for diagnoses using the software packages Skyline and R. Briefly, Skyline was used to export ion chromatogram data for the light and heavy versions of each peptide in each analysis run as a text table that was then analysed with an R script. The elution peaks of each light and heavy peptide pair were located in each sample. Pairs in each sample were filtered to remove those with insufficient signal for quantitation (minimum 2 monitorable fragment ion values measured over at least 3 collected spectra) or poor-quality data (Pearson correlation between light and heavy chromatogram data less than 0.5). Elution peak boundaries were assigned at the point where the heavy peptide signal dipped below 1% of its maximum intensity in that sample. Finally, a light-heavy ratio was calculated for each peptide by finding the gradient of a fitted simple linear model with no intercept (L = mH) to the light and heavy data points at each time point.  For interpretation of the PRM results absolute abundances of the light peptides (log10 ratio (light:heavy peptide)) were compared across diagnostic groups. The C:N-terminal peptide ratio was calculated by dividing non-log absolute abundances of the light peptides. All significant differences were tested comparing ALS to all other diagnostic groups using one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. P-values < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant. Standard measures of diagnostic test validity were performed on non-log abundances of the light peptides. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive values accompanied by their confidence interval (CI) stated at the 95% level were calculated for varying peptide cut-off levels. The optimal cut-off level for dichotomising values was selected as the situation maximising the Youden index (28). The receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve is used for a graphical visualisation of the impact of the variation in the cut-off values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tdp-43, Als, Prm

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute


