### Accession
PXD020871

### Title
Inflammatory fibroblasts mediate resistance to neoadjuvant therapy in rectal cancer

### Description
Standard cancer therapy targets tumor cells without considering the possible collateral damage on the tumor microenvironment that could impair therapy response. Employing patient-derived tumor organoids and primary stroma cells or a novel murine rectal cancer model, we show that interleukin-1 (IL-1 dependent inflammatory cancer-associated fibroblast (iCAF) polarization triggers oxidative DNA damage in iCAFs leading to p53-mediated therapy-induced senescence associated with changes in matrisome composition, chemoradiotherapy resistance and disease progression. IL-1 inhibition, prevention of iCAF senescence or senolytic therapy sensitizes mice to irradiation. In rectal cancer patients a dominant iCAF gene signature as well as lower IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) serum levels correlate with poor prognosis. Moreover, conditioned supernatant from patient tumor organoids renders fibroblasts susceptible to radiation-induced senescence in an IL-1-dependent manner. Collectively, we unravel a critical role for iCAFs in therapy resistance and identify IL-1 signaling as an attractive target for stroma-repolarization and prevention of CAF senescence.

### Sample Protocol
After ECM enrichment the samples were solubilized in urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate) and protein concentrations in the supernatants were determined using a BCA assay. Sample volumes containing 80 µg of protein were adjusted to a volume of 120 µl with urea buffer and disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT in a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at 37 °C. Subsequently, sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with IAA in a final concentration of 25 mM for 15 min at 37 °C in the dark. After dilution with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 to a concentration of 2 M urea the samples were treated with 500 U PNGase F per 20 µg of protein for 2 h at 37 °C. For protein digestion the samples were incubated with Lys-C in an enzyme-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) for 2 h at 37 °C, followed by incubation with trypsin at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-substrate ratio for 16 h at 37 °C. The peptide mixtures were acidified, subjected to clean-up using C18 spin tips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Afterward, the peptide samples were reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB and peptide concentrations were determined using a fluorometric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling of each sample was carried out according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Briefly, 20 µg of peptides per sample were adjusted to a volume of 25 µl with 50 mM TEAB and incubated with 0.2 mg of TMT labeling reagent for 1 h at room temperature. After quenching the labeling reactions with hydroxylamine in a final concentration of 0.1 % the individually labeled samples were combined in a multiplex sample which in one TMT channel also contained a reference sample consisting of equal peptide amounts from each sample. The TMT sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA for pre-fractionation using a high-pH C18 reversed-phase kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting 8 fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C until mass spectrometric analysis.    After reconstitution the peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). After clean-up on a pre-column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 100 µm Ã— 5 cm; self-packed) the samples were separated on an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 Î¼m; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 310 Ã— 0.075 mm; self-packed) with a linear gradient of 2-40% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) versus solvent A (0.1% FA in water) in 110 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent top 30 MS/MS method with a survey scan resolution setting of 120,000 FWHM and an MS/MS resolution setting of 15,000 FWHM at 200 m/z, respectively. The 30 most abundant precursor peptide ions within the mass range 350-1600 m/z were selected for higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 28% and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. AGC target values and maximum ion injection times for MS and MS/MS were set to 10^6 in 50 ms and 10^5 in 60 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0, MPI for Biochemistry). Fragment ion mass spectra spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse protein database (date: February 2019) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants using the Andromeda search engine. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. Deamidation (N), hydroxylation of lysine and proline, proline oxidation to pyroglutamic acid, oxidation of methionine and acetylation on the protein N-terminus were considered as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Both on the peptide and protein level the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on using a decoy database approach. For extraction of TMT reporter ion intensities their quantitation on the MS2 level was enabled including the full set of TMT 10-plex labels on lysine and the peptide N-terminus. Downstream data evaluation was carried out using the Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7, MPI for Biochemistry). First, potential contaminants, hits to the decoy database and proteins identified solely with modified peptides were removed. The individual TMT reporter intensities from each LC/MS run were normalized on the median summed-up intensities from each channel to control for equal sample loading. Furthermore, reporter intensities from replicate measurements were normalized by scaling to an internal reference containing equal peptide amounts of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Standard cancer therapy targets tumor cells without considering possible damage on the tumor microenvironment that could impair therapy response. In rectal cancer patients we find that inflammatory cancer-associated fibroblasts (iCAFs) are associated with poor chemoradiotherapy response. Employing a murine rectal cancer model or patient-derived tumor organoids and primary stroma cells, we show that, upon irradiation, interleukin-1&#x3b1; (IL-1&#x3b1;) not only polarizes cancer-associated fibroblasts toward the inflammatory phenotype but also triggers oxidative DNA damage, thereby predisposing iCAFs to p53-mediated therapy-induced senescence, which in turn results in chemoradiotherapy resistance and disease progression. Consistently, IL-1 inhibition, prevention of iCAFs senescence, or senolytic therapy sensitizes mice to irradiation, while lower IL-1 receptor antagonist serum levels in rectal patients correlate with poor prognosis. Collectively, we unravel a critical role for iCAFs in rectal cancer therapy resistance and identify IL-1 signaling as an attractive target for stroma-repolarization and prevention of cancer-associated fibroblasts senescence.

### Keywords
Rectal cancer, Tmt labeling, Extracellular matrix, Matrisome, Chemoradiotherapy

### Affiliations
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy, Georg-Speyer-Haus, 60596 Frankfurt/Main, Germany
Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany

Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy  Georg-Speyer-Haus  60596 Frankfurt/Main  Germany

### Submitter
Adele Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Florian R. Greten
Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy  Georg-Speyer-Haus  60596 Frankfurt/Main  Germany


