### Accession
PXD022936

### Title
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry (CLMS) analysis of Tetrahymena ODA-Q22MS1 complex

### Description
The outer dynein arms (ODAs) are the main force generators in cilia. Crosslinking/mass spectrometry (CLMS) was applied to investigate the interaction between ODA and its binding factor Q22MS1.

### Sample Protocol
This study investigated the interaction between the outer dynein arms (ODAs) and their binding factor Q22MS1 in cilia. The ODAs were purified from a native source (Tetrahymena) and reconstituted with recombinantly expressed Q22MS1. The resulting ODA-Q22MS1 complex was crosslinked using BS3 for analysis. Peptides were fractionated and separated using size exclusion chromatography and a Superdex 30 Increase 3.2/300 column. The seven earliest peptide-containing fractions were collected and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The resulting BS3 crosslinked ODA-Q22MS1 complex was precipitated and resolubilized in a digestion buffer. The protein sample was reduced, alkylated, and digested with LysC and trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. The MS data was acquired in data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
To analyze the raw mass spectrometric data files, MS2 peak lists were created using the MSConvert module in ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11729), with default parameters. Precursor and fragment m/z values were recalibrated, and crosslinked peptides were identified using xiSEARCH software (https://www.rappsilberlab.org/software/xisearch) (version 1.7.6.1) (Mendes et al., 2019). The peak lists from all LC-MS/MS acquisitions were searched against the sequence and reversed sequence of ODA-MS1 subunits. The search parameters applied were: MS accuracy = 3 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 5 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity); allowed number of missed cleavages = 2; missing monoisotopic peak = 2; cross-linker = BS3 (specific to lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, and protein N termini); fixed modification = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine and BS3 modification on lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, and protein N termini with the NHS ester on the other side hydrolyzed or amidated. Crosslinked peptide candidates were filtered using xiFDR (Fischer and Rappsilber, 2017), with a false discovery rate of 2% on residue-pair level, and the "boost between" option selected.

### Publication Abstract
The main force generators in eukaryotic cilia and flagella are axonemal outer dynein arms (ODAs). During ciliogenesis, these ~1.8-megadalton complexes are assembled in the cytoplasm and targeted to cilia by an unknown mechanism. Here, we used the ciliate <i>Tetrahymena</i> to identify two factors (Q22YU3 and Q22MS1) that bind ODAs in the cytoplasm and are required for ODA delivery to cilia. Q22YU3, which we named Shulin, locked the ODA motor domains into a closed conformation and inhibited motor activity. Cryo-electron microscopy revealed how Shulin stabilized this compact form of ODAs by binding to the dynein tails. Our findings provide a molecular explanation for how newly assembled dyneins are packaged for delivery to the cilia.

### Keywords
Bining factor, Protein interaction, Outer dynein arms (oda), Clms

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin


