### Accession
PXD021990

### Title
Collagen Fiber Regulation in Human Pediatric Aortic Valve Development and Disease

### Description
Congenital aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) affects up to 10% of the world population without medical therapies to treat the disease. New molecular targets are continually being sought that can halt CAVS progression. Collagen deregulation is a hallmark of CAVS yet remains mostly undefined.  Here, histological studies were paired with high resolution accurate mass (HRAM) collagen-targeting proteomics to investigate collagen fiber production with collagen regulation associated with human AV development and pediatric end-stage CAVS (pCAVS). Histological studies identified collagen fiber realignment and unique regions of high-density collagen in pCAVS. Proteomic analysis reported specific collagen peptides are modified by hydroxylated prolines (HYP), a post-translational modification critical to stabilizing the collagen triple helix. Quantitative data analysis reported significant regulation of collagen HYP sites across patient categories. Non-collagen type ECM proteins identified (26/44; 59%) have direct interactions in collagen synthesis, regulation, or modification. Network analysis identified BAMBI (BMP and Activin Membrane Bound Inhibitor) as a potential upstream regulator of the collagen interactome. This is the first study to detail the collagen types and HYP modifications associated with human AV development and pCAVS. We anticipate that this study will inform new therapeutic avenues that inhibit valvular degradation in pCAVS and engineered options for valve replacement.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were buffer exchanged into water and deglycosylated with 2 μg of PNGaseF PRIME (N-zyme Scientifics, Doylestown, PA) for two hours at 38°C at 450 rpm using a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Supernatant was removed, and samples were buffer exchanged into 10 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, 3 mmol/L CaCl2, pH 7.25 and treated with 4 μg of Collagenase Type III (COLase3) overnight, shaking at 38°C. An additional 4 μg of COLase3 was then added to each sample and incubated for 5 hrs at 38°C with mixing at 450 rpm. COLase3 activity of 3 Units/mL was confirmed prior to digestion by a colorimetric activity kit (ab196999, Abcam, Cambridge, MA). Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 minutes at 4°C and supernatant collected for proteomic analysis. Samples were purified by C18 STAGE tip79 (Pierce Biotechnology, Waltham, MA) followed by a C18 ZipTip (Millipore Scientific, Burlington, MA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Solutions were modified for STAGE tip using 90% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (initialize and elute); 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (equilibrate and wash). STAGE-tip eluate was dried down via speed vac and resuspended in 0.1% TFA in water. An additional C18 ZipTip according to manufacturer’s protocol (Millipore Scientific) and sample resuspended in mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid).  Peptides were analyzed by data dependent acquisition on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer equipped with a LC Packing U3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column and separated on a 75 μm x 30 cm classic pulled tip column (C18-Reprosil-AQ Pur RP 1.9 µm particles, Dr. Maisch, GmbH) at 60°C. The gradient was from 5% to 40% solvent B over 180 min, where solvent A was 0.2% v/v formic acid in water and solvent B was 98% acetonitrile with 0.2% v/v formic acid. An FTMS survey scan was acquired over a mass range of 400-1700 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 106, followed by CID MS/MS of the top 10 most intense ions in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s, and exclusion duration of 180 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 80 against the human database (42,106 entries downloaded May 5, 2017) and a subset 1783 entries with keywords used (collagen, elastin, aggrecan, gelatin, osteonectin, perlecan, plasminogen, and fibronectin).  Parameters included unspecified proteolytic enzyme, precursor mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance ± 0.8 Da. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation were included as variable modifications. Proteins were identified with FDR≤0.05 and at least two peptides. Hydroxylated proline modification site localization probabilities were obtained by re-searching MS/MS using a restricted database of identified proteins and allowing for dynamic modification proline oxidation. Perseus81 was used for protein and peptide level analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) affects up to 10% of the world population without medical therapies to treat the disease. New molecular targets are continually being sought that can halt CAVS progression. Collagen deregulation is a hallmark of CAVS yet remains mostly undefined. Here, histological studies were paired with high resolution accurate mass (HRAM) collagen-targeting proteomics to investigate collagen fiber production with collagen regulation associated with human AV development and pediatric end-stage CAVS (pCAVS). Histological studies identified collagen fiber realignment and unique regions of high-density collagen in pCAVS. Proteomic analysis reported specific collagen peptides are modified by hydroxylated prolines (HYP), a post-translational modification critical to stabilizing the collagen triple helix. Quantitative data analysis reported significant regulation of collagen HYP sites across patient categories. Non-collagen type ECM proteins identified (26 of the&#xa0;44 total proteins) have direct interactions in collagen synthesis, regulation, or modification. Network analysis identified BAMBI (BMP and Activin Membrane Bound Inhibitor) as a potential upstream regulator of the collagen interactome. This is the first study to detail the collagen types and HYP modifications associated with human AV development and pCAVS. We anticipate that this study will inform new therapeutic avenues that inhibit valvular degradation in pCAVS and engineered options for valve replacement.

### Keywords
Collagen, Aortic valve stenosis

### Affiliations
Medical University of South Carolina

### Submitter
Cassandra Clift

### Lab Head
Dr Peggi Angel
Medical University of South Carolina


