### Accession
PXD024849

### Title
Bacillus cereus msrABmsrA double mutant strain proteomics under fermentative anoxic conditions, cellular proteome

### Description
This project provides tandem mass spectrometry datasets of Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579 wild-type strain without its pBClin15 plasmid devoided of both the methionine sulfoxide reductase AB (msrAB)and the methionine sulfoxide reductase A (msrA) genes. The double mutant strain was grown under fermentative anaerobic condition and harvested at three growth stages.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT. The results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide (Met(O)) is a common posttranslational modification occurring on proteins in all organisms under oxic conditions. Protein-bound Met(O) is reduced by methionine sulfoxide reductases, which thus play a significant antioxidant role. The facultative anaerobe <i>Bacillus cereus</i> produces two methionine sulfoxide reductases: MsrA and MsrAB. MsrAB has been shown to play a crucial physiological role under oxic conditions, but little is known about the role of MsrA. Here, we examined the antioxidant role of both MsrAB and MrsA under fermentative anoxic conditions, which are generally reported to elicit little endogenous oxidant stress. We created single- and double-mutant &#x394;<i>msr</i> strains. Compared to the wild-type and &#x394;<i>msrAB</i> mutant, single- (&#x394;<i>msrA</i>) and double- (&#x394;<i>msrA</i>&#x394;<i>msrAB</i>) mutants accumulated higher levels of Met(O) proteins, and their cellular and extracellular Met(O) proteomes were altered. The growth capacity and motility of mutant strains was limited, and their energy metabolism was altered. MsrA therefore appears to play a major physiological role compared to MsrAB, placing methionine sulfoxides at the center of the <i>B. cereus</i> antioxidant system under anoxic fermentative conditions.

### Keywords
Anaerobiosis, Bacillus cereus, Proteomics, Cellular proteome, Methionine sulfoxide reductase, Atcc 14579

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


