### Accession
PXD023454

### Title
Maternal iron deficiency modulates placental transcriptome and proteome in mid-gestation of mouse pregnancy

### Description
Background: Maternal iron deficiency (ID) is associated with poor pregnancy and fetal outcomes. The effect is thought to be mediated by the placenta but there is no comprehensive assessment of placental response to maternal ID. Additionally, whether the influence of maternal ID on the placenta differs by fetal sex is unknown.  Objectives: Our primary aim was to identify gene and protein signatures of ID mouse placentas at mid-gestation. A secondary objective was to profile the expression of iron genes in mouse placentas across gestation.  Methods: We used a real-time PCR based array to determine the mRNA expression of all known iron genes in mouse placentas at embryonic day (E) 12.5, E14.5, E16.5, and E19.5 (n=3 placentas/time point). To determine the effect of maternal ID, we performed RNA sequencing and proteomics in male and female placentas from ID and iron adequate mice at E12.5 (n=8 dams/diet).  Results: In female placentas, six genes including transferrin receptor (Tfrc) and solute carrier family 11 member 2 were significantly changed by maternal ID. An additional 154 genes were altered in male ID placentas. Proteomic analysis quantified 7662 proteins in the placenta. Proteins translated from iron responsive element (IRE) containing mRNAs were altered in abundance; ferritin and ferroportin 1 decreased while TFRC increased in ID placenta. Less than 4% of the significantly altered genes in ID placentas occurred both at the transcriptional and translational levels.  Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that the impact of maternal ID on placental gene expression in mice is limited in scope and magnitude at mid-gestation. We provide strong evidence for IRE-based transcriptional and translational coordination of iron gene expression in the mouse placenta. Finally, we discover sexually dimorphic effects of maternal ID on placental gene expression, with more genes and pathways altered in male compared with female mouse placentas.

### Sample Protocol
All pools of placentas were homogenized with urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 75 mM NaCl, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche], 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail [Roche]). Lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C and protein concentration of the supernatant quantified by BCA (Pierce). 100 µg of protein of each sample was collected and brought to the same protein concentration with urea lysis buffer. Then, proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, cysteines alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and the reaction quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min. All incubations were performed at room temperature. Next, proteins were methanol-chloroform precipitated and the protein pellet resuspend in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Finally, LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (LysC:protein) ratio, and incubated overnight at room temperature in an orbital shaker at 1,500 rpm. The day after, trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) was added at 1:75 (trypsin:protein) ratio and incubated for another 5 h at 37°C with shaking at 1,500 rpm. Resultant peptides were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min and peptide concentration quantified using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher). For Tandem-Mass-Tag (TMT) labeling we used the TMT11-plex kit (Thermo Fisher). 25 µg of peptides were brought to 1 µg/µl with 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 30%. Finally, TMT labeling was started after the addition of 50 µg of the corresponding TMT reagent to each of the samples. Reaction was performed for 1 hr at room temperature. To stop the reaction, 0.3% hydroxylamine (Sigma) was added to each of the samples and incubated for another 15 min at room temperature. Labeled peptides were mixed at the same ratio and desalted with tC18 50 mg SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). After drying it in a SpeedVac, the peptide mixture was resuspended in 5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) and fractionated with a basic-pH reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (using a 3.5μm Zorbax 300 Extended-C18 column [Agilent]). Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate, then combined into 24 samples. 12 of these were desalted following the C18 Stop and Go Extraction Tip (STAGE-Tip) and dried down in a SpeedVac. Finally, peptides were resuspended in 1% formic acid, 3% ACN and analyzed by LC-SPS-MS3 in an Orbitrap Lumos equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher) and a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000. Peptides were separated in a column packed in-house to a length of 35 cm with a C18 reverse phase resin (Accucore 150 2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher) using a 90-min linear gradient from 3% to 25% buffer B (90% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (3% ACN,  0.125% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min across the column.

### Data Protocol
In the mass spectrometer, FAIMS compensation voltages (CVs) were set to -40/-60/-80 V. MS1 spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (mass range: 375-1500 m/z, 120k resolution, maximum injection time of 50 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) 4x105). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, fragmented by CID (normalized collision energy, NCE, of 35%) and detected in the ion trap (AGC 2x103, maximum injection time 35 ms). For TMT quantification, the synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS)-MS3 method was used, where the 10 most intense fragments ions of each MS2 were further isolated with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z, fragmented by HCD (NCE of 65%), and detected in the Orbitrap (50k of resolution, maximum injection time of 120 ms, AGC of 1.5x105). Database searches were performed against the mouse Uniprot database (downloaded June 2019) using Comet. Decoy reverse database and the most common contaminants were included in the searches. Precursor and product ion tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 1 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0215 Da) and TMT labeling (+229.1629 Da) on lysines and peptide N-termini were included as static modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant analysis. Moreover, proteins were further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1% and assembled by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Relative quantification values of each peptide were obtained by subtracting the intensities of the TMT report ions from the MS3 spectra using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. PSM with poor-quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (<100 summed signal-to-noise across all eleven channels and <0.7 precursor isolation specificity). Finally, quantifications were normalized assuming equal peptide loading for all eleven samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Placenta, Iron deficiency, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Finley and Gygi labs, Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School, US
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Finley
Finley and Gygi labs, Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School, US


