### Accession
PXD006295

### Title
SWATH-MS dataset of Garcinia mangostana pericarp’s proteome across ripening stages

### Description
Data provided is derived from our research on comparing protein expression profiling of Garcinia mangostana (G. mangostana) Linn. on different ripening stages. Proteins were extracted from the pericarp of G. mangostana at three points of ripening stages (stage 0, 2 and 6) and digested with trypsin before being analyzed using 1 Dimensional and 2 Dimensional Information Dependent Acquisition Liquid Chromatography (1D and 2D IDA LC) coupled with sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) analysis. This approach enable us to identify and relatively quantify protein in complex mixture. Protein identification was performed by matching tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra from 1D and 2D IDA to in-house-generated and UniProt databases using a database search algorithm software ProteinPilot (v4.2) (AB Sciex). Protein quantification was performed by analyzing protein peak areas extracted from SWATH analysis data sets using PeakView (v2.1) (AB Sciex) software. Finally, protein peaks were subjected to statistical analysis to compare relative protein peak areas between the sample groups.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and preparation  G. mangostana fruit were obtained from mangosteen plots in Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia (2.922649, 101.786817). Fruit were harvested at three different ripening stages (Stage 0, 2, and 6) with three biological replicates for each stage. The pericarp tissue of these fruit were separated from sepal and aril tissues and diced and ground using liquid nitrogen. Whole tissues were used for Stage 0 as they were inseparable during this stage (Osman and Milan 2005). The fine powdered tissues were kept in -80°C until used.  The total proteins were extracted with an extraction buffer [500 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM potassium chloride, 2% 2-ME and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylflouride (PMSF)]. The samples were then isolated using fractionation of Tris-buffered phenol and extraction buffer. The fractionation was aided with centrifugation for 10 minutes (13,000 × g at 4°C).  The samples were then precipitated with precipitation solution [0.1 M ammonium sulfate in cold methanol before centrifuged for 10 minutes (13,000 × g at 4°C). Resulting pellets were washed with cooled precipitation solution for three times and finally with cold acetone. The residual acetone was then air dried. These pellets were sent to The Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF), Macquarie University, Sydney NSW, Australia.  The protein pellets were rehydrated with 300 μL of buffer (1% NaDOC, 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS) and were probe-sonicated and centrifuged for 5 min. The protein concentration was then determined by DirectDetect Spectrometer kit. The samples were then subjected to in-solution digestion. 100 μg of each sample was taken for digestion. Samples were diluted with 100 mM TEAB to dilute the SDS concentration, then reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM IAA) and then digested with 4 μg trypsin (1:25) for 16 hours at 37°C. The digested sample was dried and cleaned up using Detergent Removal Spin Column (Pierce) as per manufacturer’s procedure. The cleaned sample was then dried and resuspended in 100 μL of loading buffer (2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid).  LC-MS/MS analysis  All prepared proteome samples in vials were subjected to peptide separation using Eksigent Ultra nanoLC system (Eksigent) equipped with analytical column Halo C18 (100 mm × 150 µm, 160Å, 2.7 μm) coupled with TripleTOF™ 5600 (AB SCIEX, USA) Mass-spectrometer. For every LC-MS/MS analysis, 10 μL of sample was injected onto a peptide trap (Bruker peptide Captrap) for pre-concentration and desalted with 0.1% formic acid, 2% Acetonitrile (ACN), at 10 μL/minute for 5 minutes. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the column using linear solvent gradients, with steps, from mobile phase A: mobile phase B (98:2) to mobile phase A: mobile phase B (90:10) for 10 min, then to (65:35) where mobile phase A is 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B is 99.9% ACN/0.1% formic acid at 500 nl/min over a period of 78 minutes. After peptide elution, the column was cleaned with 95% buffer B for 10 minutes and then equilibrated with 98% buffer A for 20 minutes before next sample injection. The reverse phase nanoLC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in an information dependant acquisition mode (IDA) for 1D-IDA and 2D-IDA analysis, and in a data independent acquisition mode (DIA) for SWATH analysis.  LC-SWATH-MS acquisition  IDA Mode  In the IDA mode, a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/z 350 - 1500, 0.25 second), with the ten most intense multiply charged ions (2+ - 5+; counts >150) in the survey scan sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 50 milliseconds in the mass range m/z 100 – 1500 with rolling collision energy.  DIA Mode  The m/z window sizes for DIA mode were determined based on precursor m/z frequencies (m/z 400 – 1250) in the previous IDA data (60 windows in total). First a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (m/z 350-1500, 0.05 sec), then were sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 60 milliseconds in the mass range m/z 350-1500 with rolling collision energy optimized for lowed m/z in m/z window +10%. To minimize instrument condition causing bias, SWATH data were acquired in random order for the samples with one blank run between every sample injection.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data of the IDA runs were searched using ProteinPilot (v4.2) (AB Sciex) in thorough mode in a compiled G. mangostana database (in-house generated database 256,448 proteins + UniProt 118 proteins). The listed protein and peptide unused scores larger than 1.3 indicate a better than 95% confidence in all IDA runs were merged to serve as an ion library for the SWATH acquisition runs. Correct peptide peaks from SWATH-MS data compiled from ProteinPilot ion library were extracted using PeakView (v2.1), where top 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data sets (75 ppm mass tolerance, 10 min retention time window). Peptides with confidence ≥ 99% and FDR ≤ 1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation. The extracted SWATH protein peak areas were analyzed by APAF in-house program for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry data, Quantitative proteomics, Protein profile, Garcinia mangostana linn., Swath analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia

### Submitter
Wan Aizat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Wan Mohd Aizat
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia


