### Accession
PXD023433

### Title
Stress-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of RtcB modulates IRE1 activity and signaling outputs.

### Description
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress is a hallmark of various diseases, which is dealt with through the activation of an adaptive signaling pathway named the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). This response is mediated by three ER-resident sensors and the most evolutionary conserved, IRE1α signals through its cytosolic kinase and endoribonuclease (RNase) activities. IRE1α RNase activity can either catalyze the initial step of XBP1 mRNA unconventional splicing or degrade a number of RNAs through Regulated IRE1-Dependent Decay (RIDD). The balance between these two activities plays an instrumental role in cells’ life and death decisions upon ER stress. Until now, the biochemical and biological outputs of IRE1α RNase activity have been well documented, however, the precise mechanisms controlling whether IRE1 signaling is adaptive or pro-death (terminal) remain unclear. This prompted us to further investigate those mechanisms and we hypothesized that XBP1 mRNA splicing and RIDD activity could be co-regulated by the IRE1α RNase regulatory network. We showed that a key nexus in this pathway is the tRNA ligase RtcB which, together with IRE1α, is responsible for XBP1 mRNA splicing. We demonstrated that RtcB is tyrosine phosphorylated by c-Abl and dephosphorylated by PTP1B. Moreover, we identified RtcB Y306 as a key residue which, when phosphorylated, perturbs RtcB interaction with IRE1α, thereby attenuating XBP1 mRNA splicing and favoring RIDD. Our results demonstrate that the IRE1α RNase regulatory network is dynamically fine-tuned by tyrosine kinases and phosphatases upon various stresses and that the nature of the stress determines cell adaptive or death outputs.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase assays - To perform an in vitro kinase assay, we used 0.36-0.5μg of human recombinant His-tagged ABL (His-ABL1 or c-Abl: 126 kDa) from Carna Biosciences as the tyrosine kinase and 1μg of human recombinant GST-tagged RtcB (GST-C22orf28: 81.6 kDa) (P01) from Abnova as the substrate. These were incubated in 1x kinase buffer (25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10mM MgCl2, 1mM MnCl2, 0.5mM DTT, 10μM ATP, 0.1 mM Na3VO4 and 5mM β-glycerophosphate) in a total volume of 30μl at 37°C for 30 min or at RT for 2 hours. Upon completion of the reaction, 5x LSB was added to the reaction samples which were heated to 100°C and applied in a 6% SDS-PAGE. Mass spectrometry analysis - Samples for the mass spectrometry analysis came from a scaled-up in vitro kinase reaction containing 0.9μg of human recombinant His-c-Abl (His-ABL1 or c-Abl: 126 kDa) and 5μg of human recombinant GST-RtcB in the same conditions as described in the above section. The difference is that the samples were ran on a pre-cast 8% polyacrylamide gel (Eurogentec), which was afterwards stained with 10% CBB and decoloured to be sent for the analysis. At the proteomics platform, the gel was re-stained with Page Blue Protein Staining Solution (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). In-gel digestion was then performed with trypsin (cleavage site = K/R) or lysC (cleavage site = K) and TiO2 purification (10% not purified as control) followed. For the MS analysis, the recovery volume was 15µl 0.1%TFA and the injection volume was 5µl. The instrument LTQ Velos and the PepMap 25cm or Orbitrap ELITE / C18 Accucore 50cm columns were used. 1 hour run MSA and HCD method was used.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Sequest HT / Percolator) was used with the thresholds of 1% FDR, ptmRS for site assignation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upr, Endoplasmic reticulum, Xbp1s

### Affiliations
CNRS
Centre Eugène Marquis - INSERM U1242, University of Rennes, France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chevet
Centre Eugène Marquis - INSERM U1242, University of Rennes, France


