### Accession
PXD026738

### Title
LKB1 drives stasis and C/EBP-mediated reprogramming to an alveolar type II fate in lung cancer

### Description
LKB1 is among the most frequently altered tumor suppressors in lung adenocarcinoma. Inactivation of Lkb1 accelerates the growth and progression of oncogenic KRAS-driven lung tumors in mouse models. However, the molecular mechanisms by which LKB1 constrains lung tumorigenesis and whether the aggressive cancer state that stems from Lkb1 deficiency can be reverted remains unknown. To identify the processes governed by LKB1 in vivo, we generated an allele which enables Lkb1 inactivation during tumor development and subsequent Lkb1 restoration in established tumors. Restoration of Lkb1 in oncogenic KRAS-driven lung tumors suppressed proliferation and promoted tumor stasis. Lkb1 restoration activated targets of C/EBP transcription factors and drove the transition of neoplastic cells from a progenitor-like state to a less proliferative alveolar type II cell-like state. We show that C/EBP transcription factors govern a subset of genes that are induced by LKB1 and depend upon NKX2-1. We also demonstrate that a defining factor of the alveolar type II lineage, C/EBPα, constrains oncogenic KRAS-driven lung tumor growth. Thus, we uncover a role for a critical tumor suppressor in the regulation of key lineage-specific transcription factors, thereby constraining lung tumor development through the enforcement of differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of sorted neoplastic cells were stored at 80˚C and later resuspended in PBS prior to loading on a Whatman QM-A Quartz Microfiber Filter (GE Life Science: 1851-047) microreactor tip. Samples were then lysed, digested with trypsin/lys-c (Promega: V5073), and de-salted using C18 (Empore: 320907D) stage tips as described previously (Myers, et al. 2019 Molecular Cell). Eluted samples were dried and resuspended with Solution A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) for mass spectrometry analysis.   Samples were analyzed on the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics), an ion-mobility spectrometry quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer. Specifically, a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) high pressure nanoflow system was connected to the timsTOF Pro. Peptides were delivered to reversed-phase analytical columns (25 cm x 75 μm i.d., Ionopticks: AUR2-25075C18A-CSI). Liquid chromatography was performed at 40°C, and peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 120 min gradient (solvent A: 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 0.1% FA, in ACN) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. A linear gradient was applied for 60 min to 15%, 30 min to 23%, 10 min to 35%, followed by a step to 80% B in 10 min and held for 10 min for wash. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.60 V·s/cm2, End 1.6 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS, Scheduling Target intensity 500000, CID collision energy 10eV.

### Data Protocol
Bruker raw data files were analyzed by msfragger using the tool FragPipe (Kong, et al. 2017 Nature Methods). Msfragger was run using the default modifications with an error tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and +/- 40 ppm for fragments.  We used a mouse protein database downloaded from RefSeq on 06/18/2018. Peptide and protein identifications were validated using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet and quantitation was done using IonQuant with 'match between runs' and selecting the MaxLFQ method. Samples were also processed Byonic (protein Metrics Inc) with standard settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse model, Lkb1, Lung adenocarcinoma, Tumor suppressor

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175, USA

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Jackson, Peter, K.
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175, USA


