### Accession
PXD012589

### Title
Sweet and sour Ehrlichia: glycoproteomics and phosphoproteomics reveal new players in Ehrlichia ruminantium physiology and pathogenesis

### Description
Unraveling which proteins and PTMs affect bacterial pathogenesis and physiology in diverse environments is a tough challenge. Herein, we used mass spectrometry-based assays to study protein phosphorylation and glycosylation in Ehrlichia ruminantium Gardel virulent (ERGvir) and attenuated (ERGatt) variants and, how they can modulate Ehrlichia biological processes. The characterization of the S/T/Y phosphoproteome revealed that both strains share the same set of phosphoproteins (n=58), 36% being overexpressed in ERGvir. The percentage of tyrosine phosphorylation is high (23%) and 66% of the identified peptides are multi-phosphorylated. Glycoproteomics revealed a high percentage of glycoproteins (67% in ERGvir) with a subset of glycoproteins being specific to ERGvir (n=64/371) and ERGatt (n=36/343). These glycoproteins are involved in key biological processes such as protein, amino-acid and purine biosynthesis, translation, virulence, DNA repair and replication. Label-free quantitative analysis revealed over-expression in 31 proteins in ERGvir and 8 in ERGatt.  While further PNGase digestion confidently localized 2 and 5 N-glycoproteins in ERGvir and ERGatt, respectively, western blotting suggests that many glycoproteins are O-GlcNAcylated. Twenty three-proteins were detected in both the phospho- and glycoproteome, for the two variants.  This work represents the first comprehensive assessment of PTMs on Ehrlichia biology, rising interesting questions regarding ER-host interactions. Phosphoproteome characterization demonstrates an increased versatility of ER phosphoproteins to participate in different mechanisms. The high number of glycoproteins and the lack of glycosyltransferases-coding genes highlight ER dependence on the host and/or vector cellular machinery for its own protein glycosylation. Moreover, these glycoproteins could be crucial to interact and respond to changes in ER environment. PTMs crosstalk between of O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation could be used as a major cellular signaling mechanism in ER. As little is known about the Ehrlichia proteins/proteome and its signaling biology, the results presented herein provide a useful resource for further hypothesis-driven exploration of Ehrlichia protein regulation by phosphorylation and glycosylation events.

### Sample Protocol
PHOSPHOPEPTIDE ENRICHMENT: Proteins extracts (250 µg per biological replicate) were trypsin digested and then diluted in 60% ACN with 1% TFA. TiO2 beads (0.50 mg/µl) were equilibrated in 1 M glycolic acid, 80% ACN and 1% TFA. For an effective peptide binding to TiO2 beads, 0.6 mg TiO2 per 100 µg of peptides was used. Solution was incubated during 20 min at RT and then centrifuged at 15600 g, 2 min, RT; supernatant containing non-phosphorylated peptides was discarded. TiO2 beads with phosphopeptides were loaded on in-house constructed C18 stage tips. After 2 washes with 60% ACN and 1% TFA, bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 5% NH4OH and then with 10% NH4OH with 25% ACN. Eluted phosphopeptides were evaporated, resuspended in 0.1% FA and stored at -20°C until further analysis.   GLYCOPROTEIN ENRICHMENT:  Proteins extracts (500 µg per biological replicate) were solubilized using the coupling buffer NP40 [PBS with 1% NP40 and 0.1% SDS, pH 7.2]. The suspension was split in two for oxidative and non-oxidative (control) sample preparation conditions. The control sample was treated like the oxidized sample but without the addition of NaIO4. For the oxidation of the sugar moieties, 15 mM NaIO4 was added to the solution, and proteins were incubated in the dark for 30 min with end-over-end agitation. NaIO4 was removed using microcon-10kDa centrifugal unit and 3 washing steps with NP40 buffer was made. A brief sonication step on ice was made to reduce protein aggregation. Afterwards, 250 μl of previously prepared Ultralink Hydrazide resin was added, and the coupling reaction was shaken overnight at RT. After coupling, beads were washed 3 times with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing 2% SDS and once with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Glycoproteins conjugated to hydrazide beads were denatured by adding 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced by adding 100 mM DTT with 1h incubation at RT with agitation. After 3 washing steps with 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, the proteins were alkylated by adding 50 mM IAA (prepared in 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3) at RT and kept in dark for 30 min, with agitation. Then, beads were washed 3 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3. After washing, trypsin was added to the samples at a ratio of protein:trypsin 30:1, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 18 h in 50 mM NH4HCO3. The tryptic peptides were collected and desalted with C18 zip-tips. The beads were washed sequentially with 0.5% Triton X100 in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 5 M NaCl, 100 mM Na2CO3 (pH 12), and 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 3 times. N-linked glycopeptides were released by adding 2 μl of PNGase F and incubated at 37 °C overnight with agitation. Deglycosylated peptides were also collected and desalted with C18 zip-tip.   nLC-MS/MS: Digests (from trypsin or PNGase F digestion) were analyzed using a linear ion trap Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Instrument control was performed using Xcalibur software package, version 2.2.0. Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC system with a two-linear-column system. All are from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Digests were loaded onto a trapping guard column (EASY-column, 2 cm long, ID 100 μm and packed with Reprosil C18, 5 μm particle size) at 4 µL/min. Then, samples were eluted from the analytical column (EASY-column, 10 cm long, ID 75 μm and packed with Reprosil, 3 μm particle size). Separation was achieved by using a mobile phase from 0.1% FA (Buffer A) and 99.9% ACN with 0.1% FA (Buffer B) and applying a linear gradient from 0 to 35% of buffer B for 60 min for phosphopeptide analysis and from 3 to 35% of buffer B for 90 min for peptides obtained from the glycoprotein enrichment analysis at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Ions were generated applying a voltage of 1.9 kV to a stainless steel nano-bore emitter, connected to the end of the analytical column, on a nano-spray flex ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (from m/z 300 to 1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the linear ion trap when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Accumulation of ions for both MS and MS/MS scans was performed in the linear ion trap, and the AGC target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time was 500 and 200 ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10 ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses a window of 20 ppm and isolation width of 2 Da was defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
MS DATA PROCESSING: All raw files were searched against the UniprotKB Ehrlichia ruminantium database (Bateman et al., 2017) (downloaded on January 2017 with 4148 entries and updated on December 2017) with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, (Cox and Mann, 2008)). The parameters were set as follows:   (a) For phosphoproteome: search criteria included a fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and variable modifications of oxidation on methionine residues, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues were searched. Search was performed with trypsin digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false-discovery rates (FDR) of proteins, peptides, and phosphosites were set at 0.01. The minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. A site localization probability of 0.75 was used as the cutoff for localization of phosphorylation sites. For advanced identification, the Second Peptide Search (SPS) in MS2 spectra and the Match Between Runs (MBR) feature were enabled. (b) For whole proteome and glycoproteome: common search criteria included a fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of oxidation on methionine residues. Search was performed with trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The FDR from proteins and glycoproteins was set at 0.01. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. For advanced identification the SPS in MS2 spectra and the MBR feature were enabled. Samples numbers correspond to: 1 – ERG p17; 2 – ERG p19; 3 – ERG p24; 4 – ERG p240; 5 – ERG p242 and 6 – ERG p244. (c) For N-Glycoproteins: parameters were similar to glycoproteomics (main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; digestion: trypsin/P, max. 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification: cysteines carbamidomethylation; variable modification in the tryptic peptide fraction: methionine oxidation, FDR set at 0.01, SPS and MBR were enabled). For PNGase F fractions, variable modifications were: methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation. Label-free quantification of proteins with normalization was done in MaxQuant. Samples numbers correspond to: 1 – ERG p17; 2 – ERG p19; 3 – ERG p24; 4 – ERG p240; 5 – ERG p242 and 6 – ERG p244.   BIOINFORMATICS: Known contaminants from MaxQuant database and reverse identified peptides/proteins were discarded. All the statistical analyses of the MaxQuant output tables were performed with the Perseus program (version 1.5.6.0), which is a component of the MaxQuant distribution. The tables were filtered to remove contaminants and reversed sequences. Intensities were log(2) transformed and the missing values of intensities were replaced by normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 SDs and a width of 0.3 SDs. The differentially expressed proteins between ERGvir and ERGatt were identified by the P value (p<0.05), which is significant based on a two-sample t test with a permutation-based FDR cutoff 0.05 with S0 set on 0.2 for all data sets.  Furthermore, to identify N-glycosylated proteins, only modified asparagines (N) within the canonical sequence motif of N-glycosylation defined by the consensus motif N-X-S/T (X=!P), were accepted as true glycosylation sites. For identification of phosphorylation site motifs, we used the Sequence Logos algorithm in Perseus. Predicted Gene Ontology (GO) cellular functions of identified proteins with high confidence from the two ER variants were obtained from Uniprot and using Perseus Annotation tools. Whenever an identified protein had an unknown function and/or localization, manual reannotation was performed using several databases such as KEGG, Interproscan, etc.

### Publication Abstract
Unraveling which proteins and post-translational modifications (PTMs) affect bacterial pathogenesis and physiology in diverse environments is a tough challenge. Herein, we used mass spectrometry-based assays to study protein phosphorylation and glycosylation in <i>Ehrlichia ruminantium</i> Gardel virulent (ERGvir) and attenuated (ERGatt) variants and, how they can modulate <i>Ehrlichia</i> biological processes. The characterization of the S/T/Y phosphoproteome revealed that both strains share the same set of phosphoproteins (<i>n</i> = 58), 36% being overexpressed in ERGvir. The percentage of tyrosine phosphorylation is high (23%) and 66% of the identified peptides are multi-phosphorylated. Glycoproteomics revealed a high percentage of glycoproteins (67% in ERGvir) with a subset of glycoproteins being specific to ERGvir (<i>n</i> = 64/371) and ERGatt (<i>n</i> = 36/343). These glycoproteins are involved in key biological processes such as protein, amino-acid and purine biosynthesis, translation, virulence, DNA repair, and replication. Label-free quantitative analysis revealed over-expression in 31 proteins in ERGvir and 8 in ERGatt. While further PNGase digestion confidently localized 2 and 5 <i>N</i>-glycoproteins in ERGvir and ERGatt, respectively, western blotting suggests that many glycoproteins are <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated. Twenty-three proteins were detected in both the phospho- and glycoproteome, for the two variants. This work represents the first comprehensive assessment of PTMs on <i>Ehrlichia</i> biology, rising interesting questions regarding ER-host interactions. Phosphoproteome characterization demonstrates an increased versatility of ER phosphoproteins to participate in different mechanisms. The high number of glycoproteins and the lack of glycosyltransferases-coding genes highlight ER dependence on the host and/or vector cellular machinery for its own protein glycosylation. Moreover, these glycoproteins could be crucial to interact and respond to changes in ER environment. PTMs crosstalk between of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation could be used as a major cellular signaling mechanism in ER. As little is known about the <i>Ehrlichia</i> proteins/proteome and its signaling biology, the results presented herein provide a useful resource for further hypothesis-driven exploration of <i>Ehrlichia</i> protein regulation by phosphorylation and glycosylation events. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD012589.

### Keywords
Ehrlichia species; phosphoproteins; s/t/y phosphorylation; n-glycoproteins; o-glcnacylated proteins; bacteria physiology; pathogenesis

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Guadeloupe
ASTRE, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier, France & CIRAD, UMR ASTRE, F-34398, Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Isabel Marcelino

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Vachiery
ASTRE, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier, France & CIRAD, UMR ASTRE, F-34398, Montpellier, France


