### Accession
PXD037002

### Title
Integrated Proteomic and Metabolomic Profiling of Urine of Renal Anemia Patients Uncovers Molecular Mechanisms of Roxadustat

### Description
Roxadustat (FG-4592) is a HIF-PHI for patients with low hemoglobin associated with chronic kidney disease. Due to the variety of HIF-mediated adaptive responses, FG-4592 has garnered growing therapeutic interest for use against various diseases, such as kidney and lung injury, obesity and related complications, hypertension, etc. However, the advanced applications of Roxadustat in clinical were limited due to its uncovered mechanisms. In this study, by un-targeted metabolomic and label-free proteomic combining with LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified the differentially expressed proteins and their potential regulatory networks which were correlated with altered metabolites under treatment of Roxadustat, we further performed co-joint analysis, and explored the involved underlying molecular mechanisms of Roxadustat on renal anemia patients.  A total of 46 proteins (including 15 up-regulated and 31 down-regulated proteins) and 207 metabolites were significantly altered after Roxadustat treatment on the urine sample obtained from renal anemia patients. Then, the changed proteins were further validated by PRM, by which LTF, CHGA, and RARRES2 were on an upregulated trend, and LRG1, PI16, and VMO1 were on a downregulated trend. Finally, the co-analysis of proteomics combined with metabolomics revealed that the Ras signaling pathway, Cysteine and methionine metabolism, Arginine and proline metabolism, and Cholesterol metabolism are the main affected pathways that are altered by Roxadustat treatment. The multi-omics analysis revealed that Roxadustat can alter the abnormal levels of protein expression and reverse the potential metabolic changes to exert its potential roles in hypotensive, lipid metabolic regulation, and renal functional protection effects in clinical.

### Sample Protocol
1 Patient assessments and sample collection A total of 12 urine samples were retrieved from 6 patients with renal anemia at the Shenzhen People’s Hospital. Moreover, all patients with anemia due to other causes, other obvious complications, or severe primary diseases, such as cardiovascular, anaphylactoid purpura, liver diseases, existing urinary tract infection, and serious gynecological disorders were excluded. The study was conducted by the declaration of Helsinki and the proposal has been approved by the Ethics Committee of the Second Clinical Medical College (Shenzhen People’s Hospital) of Jinan University. All subjects had signed the informed consent. The urine samples (50ml for each patient before and after 1 month of medication, 6 patients in total) were centrifuged at 4℃ for approximately 10 min at 1000g (Centrifuge 5427 R, Eppendorf) and the supernatant was transferred to new tubes and stored at -80°C. At the same time, clinical and biological variables were collected.  2 Proteomics Analysis 2.1 Protein extraction Total samples were removed from -80° C storage. Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) was added to all samples to a final concentration of 50 mM. Then, the supernatant was removed following centrifugation at 1000 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation (17,000×g, 4 °C) for 10 min and, after an equal volume of methanol and a 1/4 volume of chloroform was added, was vortexed vigorously for 15 s and placed at room temperature for 5 min. After centrifugation at 12000 × g for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded, then an equal volume of methanol was added and shocked 15sec.  The previous step was repeated and added 80 μl lysate (containing 1% SDC) to reconstitute. Finally, the protein concentration was defined by a BCA kit (Beyotime, P0010) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 2.2 Trypsin digestion Each sample was taken in equal amounts for enzymatic digestion, and the volume of each sample was adjusted with the lysis buffer. The lysed protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C. Then the protein solution was alkylated with 11 mM Iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was diluted by adding triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a urea concentration of less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After the second 4h enzymatic hydrolysis, the reaction was terminated by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution and adjusting the pH to 2-3. Then, the peptides were desalted by the C18 SPE column. Desalted peptides were frozen, drained off, and dissolved by mass spectrometry mobile phase A. Finally, peptides were taken to put on the machine.  2.3 LC-MS/MS analysis The digested peptides were dissolved by liquid chromatography mobile phase A (containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and separated by EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (packed with 1.9μm/120 Å ReproSil-PurC18 resins (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany)). The mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set as follows: 0-68 min, 4%~20%B; 68-82min, 20%~32%B; 82-86 min, 32%~80%B; 86-90 min, 80%B. The flow rate used was 500 nl/min. The peptides were injected into the NSI source for ionization and then analyzed using Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). The voltage settings of the ion source were 2.3 kV, FAIMS compensation voltage was set 8 / 29 to -45 V and -70 V. Orbitrap was used to detect and analyze the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments. The first-order mass scans were performed with 60,000 resolutions, and the m/z range for the MS scans was 400–1200. The secondary mass spectrometry scan range had a fixed starting point of 110 m/z, and the secondary scan resolution was set to 30,000. TurboTMT was set to Off. The data acquisition mode was based on the data-dependent scan (DDA) mode. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrum, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 75% and then the signal threshold was set to 10,000 ions/s and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
1. Database search  Secondary mass spectral data were retrieved using PD2.4 (v2.4.1.15). Retrieval parameter settings: The database was Homo sapiens (78,120 sequences), the anti-library was added to calculate the false-positive rate (false discovery rate [FDR]); the digestion method was set to trypsin (Full); the number of missed cleavages was set to 2; The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the maximum length was set to 3 amino acids; the tolerance values of the mass error for the primary precursor ion was set to 10 ppm, and the error tolerance of the mass of the second fragment ion was to 0.02 Da; Carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) was set as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-terminus), Met-loss (M), Met-loss + acetyl (M), Deamidated(N, Q) as a variable modification. and the FDR for the protein identification and peptide-spectrum matches identification was adjusted to 1%.  2. Bioinformatics methods Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories as follows: molecular function, biological process, and cellular component. The protein domain functional descriptions identified in this study were annotated by InterProScan, which analyzes the data through both the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and the protein sequence alignment. The pathway analysis was performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway (KEGG protein database: http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.html). The KEGG database was used in this study to identify enriched pathways and to test the enrichment of the different proteins against all identified proteins by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. The pathways with corrected P values < 0.05 were considered significant and were separated into individual categories. All differentially expressed protein accession numbers or sequences were examined thoroughly by the STRING database (version 10.5) for convenient presentation and protein-protein interaction analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Roxadustat (FG-4592) is a hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor (HIF-PHI) prescribed to patients with low hemoglobin associated with chronic kidney disease. Due to the various HIF-mediated adaptive responses, FG-4592 has attracted significant interest for therapeutic use against various diseases. However, the clinical application of Roxadustat remains limited due to a lack of understanding of its underlying mechanisms. Herein, we performed label-free quantitative liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) proteomics and un-targeted metabolomics to study the protein and metabolite alterations in the urine of renal anemia patients before and after Roxadustat therapy. The results were validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). A total of 46 proteins (including 15 upregulated and 31 downregulated proteins) and 207 metabolites were significantly altered after Roxadustat treatment in urine samples obtained from renal anemia patients. Then, the altered proteins were further validated by PRM. Finally, proteomics combined with metabolomics analysis revealed that the Ras signalling pathway, cysteine and methionine metabolism, arginine and proline metabolism, and cholesterol metabolism were the main pathways altered by Roxadustat treatment. The multi-omics analysis revealed that Roxadustat could alter the protein expression and reverse the potential metabolic changes to exert hypotensive, lipid metabolic regulation, and renoprotective effects in clinical practice.

### Keywords
Hif, Proteomic, Metabolomic, Roxadustat, Fg-4592

### Affiliations
Shenzhen People’s Hospital
The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University

### Submitter
Xiaoe You

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoe You
The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University


