### Accession
PXD008673

### Title
Neisseria gonorrhoeae MlaA inversely influences gonococcal virulence and membrane vesicle production

### Description
The six-component maintenance of lipid asymmetry (Mla) system is responsible for retrograde transport of phospholipids, ensuring the barrier function of the Gram-negative cell envelope. Located within the outer membrane MlaA (VacJ) likely acts as a channel to shuttle phospholipids from the outer leaflet, bypassing the inner leaflet. In Neisseria gonorrhoeae, we previously discovered MlaA, encoded by the ngo2121 genetic locus, as a proteome-derived new vaccine and therapeutic target against this serious public health threat. Our follow-up with phenotype microarrays linked the loss of MlaA with an extensive chemical sensitivity phenome. For the current study, we investigated the role of gonococcal MlaA in bacterial physiology and pathogenicity. Quantitative proteomics were applied to cell envelopes and membrane vesicles derived from wild type and ∆mlaA bacteria to examine the alterations in protein composition induced by the loss of MlaA from the outer membrane, as well as to determine whether the abundance of known or potential virulence factors was altered in the mutant. We determined that membrane vesicles were more highly affected by the loss of MlaA than were cell envelopes, and that both cell envelopes and membrane vesicles derived from the ∆mlaA mutant were enriched with adhesins and other virulence factors.

### Sample Protocol
GC FA1090 cells were grown in GCBL and pelleted at mid log phase of growth and suspended in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing Pierce Protease Inhibitors Mini Tablets, EDTA-Free (Thermo) and lysed by passing four times through French Press (1200 psi). To remove cell debris, the obtained whole cell lysates were spun down at 6,000 × g for 20 min and additionally filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filters (VWR). The clarified cell lysate (8 mL) was mixed with 42 mL of ice cold 0.1 M sodium carbonate and incubated with rotation for 1 h at 4 °C. Solutions were subjected to sonication for 30 s at 5 W (Qsonica) at 0, 30 and 60 min. The cell envelope fractions were obtained by ultracentrifugation at 150,000 x g for 1 h. Membrane protein pellets were washed with PBS and spin at 150,000 x g for 30 min and finally reconstituted in PBS with 0.2% SDS. Protein concentrations were measured using 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). The naturally released MVs were obtained from the same GC cultures used for cell envelope extractions, were first passed through the 0.22 μm filter units (ThermoFisher Scientific) and to prevent proteolysis, Complete Protease inhibitor mixture tablet EDTA-free was added. Subsequently, the supernatants were subjected to ultracentrifugation at 210,000 × g, 3 h, 4 °C in a Beckman Type 45 Ti rotor. The pellets containing MVs fraction were washed with PBS and finally reconstituted in PBS containing 0.2% SDS. The total protein concentration in MVs and cell envelpes was measured using 2D Quant Kit. Proteins were digested with trypsin and labeled with TMT reagent following manufacturer recommendations. Samples isolated from wild type were labeled with 126, 128 tags and 128, 130 tags for cell envelopes and membrane vesicles proteins (respectively). Samples isolated from Δngo2121 were labeled with 127, 129 tags and 129, 131 tags for cell envelopes and membrane vesicles proteins (respectively). Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography was used to separate iTRAQ-labeled peptides. Desalted SCX fractions were analyzed by LC/ESI MS/MS with a ThermoScientific Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) nano HPLC coupled to a hybrid Orbitrap Elite ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. In-line de-salting was accomplished using a reversed-phase trap column (100 µm × 20 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-µm 200 Å resin; Michrom Bioresources) followed by peptide separations on a reversed-phase column (75 µm × 250 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-µm 100 Å resin; Michrom Bioresources) directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. A 90-minute gradient from 7% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/minute was used for chromatographic separations. The heated capillary temperature was set to 300 C and a spray voltage of 2250 V was applied to the electrospray tip. The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode, switching automatically between MS survey scans in the Orbitrap (AGC target value 1,000,000, resolution 60,000, and injection time 250 milliseconds) and MS/MS scans in the OrbiTrap (AGC target value of 50,000, 15,000 resolution and injection time 250 milliseconds). The 15 most intense ions from the survey scan were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 40%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds with a list size of 500 and exclusion mass by mass width +/- 0.5.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The data were searched against N. gonorrhoeae FA1090 database (downloaded on December 12, 2012) and cRAP.fasta, a database of common contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). This common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, cRAP, creates a list of proteins commonly found in proteomics experiments that are present either by accident or through unavoidable contamination of protein samples. The types of proteins included fall into three general classes: 1) common laboratory proteins; 2) proteins added by accident through dust or physical contact; and 3) proteins used as molecular weight or mass spectrometry quantitation standards. The current version of cRAP in FASTA format can be obtained from the GPM FTP site, using the URL ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP. Among common laboratory proteins are bovine, trypsin, chymotrypsin while dust/contact proteins include for instance human keratin. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance and the fragment ion tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Static modifications included TMT6plex (+229.163 Da) on any N-Terminus and lysine, carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteine. Dynamic modifications included oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984 Da) on asparagine and glutamine. Data were searched using Sequest HT. All search results were run through Percolator for scoring. Quantification was performed using the canned TMT6plex method through Proteome Discoverer. Proteins identified with 1% FDR based on at least one unique peptide with ≥95% confidence were recorded. For protein quantification, solely proteins with associated p-values corresponding to the calculated TMT ratios were included. The TMT ratios were averaged and proteins were designated as downregulated or upregulated when the values were below 0.67 or above 1.5 respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The six-component maintenance of lipid asymmetry (Mla) system is responsible for retrograde transport of phospholipids, ensuring the barrier function of the Gram-negative cell envelope. Located within the outer membrane, MlaA (VacJ) acts as a channel to shuttle phospholipids from the outer leaflet. We identified Neisseria gonorrhoeae MlaA (ngo2121) during high-throughput proteomic mining for potential therapeutic targets against this medically important human pathogen. Our follow-up phenotypic microarrays revealed that lack of MlaA results in a complex sensitivity phenome. Herein we focused on MlaA function in cell envelope biogenesis and pathogenesis. We demonstrate the existence of two MlaA classes among 21 bacterial species, characterized by the presence or lack of a lipoprotein signal peptide. Purified truncated N. gonorrhoeae MlaA elicited antibodies that cross-reacted with a panel of different Neisseria. Little is known about MlaA expression; we provide the first evidence that MlaA levels increase in stationary phase and under anaerobiosis but decrease during iron starvation. Lack of MlaA resulted in higher cell counts during conditions mimicking different host niches; however, it also significantly decreased colony size. Antimicrobial peptides such as polymyxin B exacerbated the size difference while human defensin was detrimental to mutant viability. Consistent with the proposed role of MlaA in vesicle biogenesis, the &#x394;mlaA mutant released 1.7-fold more membrane vesicles. Comparative proteomics of cell envelopes and native membrane vesicles derived from &#x394;mlaA and wild type bacteria revealed enrichment of TadA-which recodes proteins through mRNA editing-as well as increased levels of adhesins and virulence factors. MlaA-deficient gonococci significantly outcompeted (up to 16-fold) wild-type bacteria in the murine lower genital tract, suggesting the growth advantage or increased expression of virulence factors afforded by inactivation of mlaA is advantageous in vivo. Based on these results, we propose N. gonorrhoeae restricts MlaA levels to modulate cell envelope homeostasis and fine-tune virulence.

### Keywords
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Membrane vesicles, Mlaa

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA

### Submitter
Aleksandra Sikora

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra E. Sikora
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA


