### Accession
PXD005582

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Lysine Succinylation in oryza sativa

### Description
By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine succinylome analysis was performed. Altogether, 742 lysine succinylation sites in 382 protein groups were identified. Intensive bioinformatic analyses were then carried out to annotate those identified lysine succinylated targets in response to drug treatment, including GO annotation, domain annotation, subcellular localization, KEGG pathway annotation, functional cluster analysis, etc. Based on the results, further studies following the lysine succinylome analysis were suggested

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM NAM, 3 µM TSA and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.3.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniprotKB oryza sativa database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Succinylation on Lys and Succinylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as ≥ 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine succinylation has been recognized as a post-translational modification (PTM) in recent years. It is plausible that succinylation may have a vaster functional impact than acetylation because of bulkier structural changes and more significant charge differences on the modified lysine residue. Currently, however, the quantity and identity of succinylated proteins and their corresponding functions in cereal plants remain largely unknown. In this study, we estimated the native succinylation occupancy on lysine was between 2% to 10% in developing rice seeds. Eight hundred fifty-four lysine succinylation sites on 347 proteins have been identified by a thorough investigation in developing rice seeds. Six motifs were revealed as preferred amino acid sequence arrangements for succinylation sites, and a noteworthy motif preference was identified in proteins associated with different biological processes, molecular functions, pathways, and domains. Remarkably, heavy succinylation was detected on major seed storage proteins, in conjunction with critical enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism and starch biosynthetic pathways for rice seed development. Meanwhile, our results showed that the modification pattern of <i>in vitro</i> nonenzymatically succinylated proteins was different from those of the proteins isolated from cells in Western blots, suggesting that succinylation is not generated via nonenzymatic reaction in the cells, at least not completely. Using the acylation data obtained from the same rice tissue, we mapped many sites harboring lysine succinylation, acetylation, malonylation, crotonylation, and 2-hydroxisobutyrylation in rice seed proteins. A striking number of proteins with multiple modifications were shown to be involved in critical metabolic events. Given that these modification moieties are intermediate products of multiple cellular metabolic pathways, these targeted lysine residues may mediate the crosstalk between different metabolic pathways via modifications by different moieties. Our study exhibits a platform for extensive investigation of molecular networks administrating cereal seed development and metabolism via PTMs.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa succinylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology & Plant Pathology
company

### Submitter
Jones Macke

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoxi Meng
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology & Plant Pathology


