### Accession
PXD027353

### Title
Variability in the Glycosylation Patterns of gp120 Proteins from Different Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Isolates Expressed in Different Host Cells

### Description
The mature HIV-1 envelope (Env) glycoprotein is composed of gp120, the exterior subunit, and gp41, the transmembrane subunit assembled as trimer by noncovalent interaction. There is a great body of literature to prove that gp120 binds to CD4 first, then to the co-receptor. We have recently demonstrated that gp120 cannot bind to the co-receptor without first interacting with CD4. Previous studies provided different glycomic maps for the HIV-1 gp120. Here, we build on previous work to report that the use of LC-MS/MS, in conjunction with hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) enrichment to glycosylation sites, is associated with the assorted neutralizing or binding events of glycosylation targeted antibodies from different clades or strains. In this study, the microheterogeneity of the glycosylation from 4 different clades of gp120s is deeply investigated. Aberrant glycosylation patterns were detected on gp120 originated from different clades, viral sequences and host cells. The results of this study may help provide better understanding of the mechanism of how the glycans participate in antibody neutralizing process that target glycosylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to proteolytic digestion as recently described 57. Briefly, 10-µg aliquots of the four gp120s described above were prepared in 50 mM phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Denaturation was performed at 65o C for 10 min. The samples were then reduced by adding a 1.25-µl aliquot of 200 mM DTT prior to incubation at 60o C for 45 min. The reduced samples were then alkylated with the addition of a 5-µl aliquot of 200 mM IAA and incubated at 37.5o C for 45 min in the dark. Excess IAA was consumed through the addition of a second 1.25-µl aliquot of 200 mM DTT. The reaction was allowed to proceed at 37.5o C for 30 min in the dark. The trypsin/lysC mix was added into the samples using an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 w/w and subjected to overnight incubation at 37o C for 18 hours. Another enzyme, endoproteinase gluC, was added into the samples at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 w/w followed by another overnight incubation at 37o C for 18 hours. To complete enzymatic digestion, samples were subjected to microwave digestion at 45o C and 50W for 30 min. Finally, the enzymatic digestion was quenched by adding a 0.5-µl aliquot of neat formic acid to the samples.  Deglycosylation of tryptically digested samples was then performed. Briefly, 3-µg aliquots of the digested gp120s were transferred into microcentrifuge tubes. Next, 0.5-µl aliquots of diluted PNGase F solution corresponding to 25 units of PNGase F (prepared by 10-time dilution of the stock solution purchased from vendor using PBS buffer) was added into the samples and subjected to incubation at 37o C for 18 hours. The deglycosylated samples were also subjected to microwave digestion using the conditions described above, before the reaction was quenched by adding 0.5-µl aliquots of neat formic acid. Finally, the deglycosylated samples were dried and suspended in 0.1% formic acid for the subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. HILIC Enrichment Using Cotton Packed Tips  For trypsin/lysC/gluC digests, HILIC enrichment was applied to enrich glycopeptides using cotton materials. The method used was modified from Selman et al.58 We increased the amount of cotton, the size of the tip used, and the incubation time. Briefly, 5-mg aliquots of cotton wool were packed into 200-µl pipette tips. The cotton-packed tips were washed with 100 µl of 10% ACN/0.1% formic acid three times and conditioned with 100 µl of 80% ACN five times by aspirating and dispensing the solutions. Next, 2-µg aliquots of digests were suspended in 80% ACN to make the final volume of 100 µl. Samples were transferred to the cotton-packed tips, and the sample loading through the packed tips was repeated 20 times by recycling the flow-through and loading to the packed tips. After the final sample loading, the end and the top of the cotton-packed tips were sealed with parafilm to minimize sample loss. The samples were then allowed to set in the cotton packed tip for two hours, after which the cotton tips were washed with a 100-µl aliquot of 80% ACN/0.1% formic acid. The wash was repeated three times. The glycopeptides were eluted with 100 µl of 10% ACN/0.1% formic acid five times. The collected eluents were finally dried and resuspended in 6-µl aliquots of 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The exact sequences of four gp120s were first confirmed with the possible sequences obtained from the HIV data base (http://www.hiv.lanl.gov). According to the origins of the samples as shown in Table 1, potential sequences were searched through the HIV database, and then raw files of the peptides were subjected to a MASCOT database search.  The tandem MS identification of glycopeptides was then achieved by GlyPID, GlycanSequencing, and manual search with the identified gp120 sequences. GlyPID 59 and GlycanSequencing (available at darwin.informatics.indiana.edu/col/GlycanSeq) were developed by Dr. Tang’s group at Indiana University in collaboration with our group. The software calculates glycan fragments from CID MS/MS to determine the glycan structures associated with a Y1 ion, and/or it uses the presence of oxonium ions from HCD MS/MS as a filter for glycopeptides. Additionally, the structures of identified glycopeptides were manually confirmed. We searched for glycopeptides from the MS scan by creating theoretical m/z values based on matching retention times. The mass accuracy was within 10 ppm. The m/z values were based on every theoretical peptide backbone sequence using the Glycomod tool, which is available at ExPASy (web.expasy.org/glycomod/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Gp120, Glycopeptides, Hiv isolates, Microheterogeneity

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Yifan Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


