### Accession
PXD002005

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the effect of aluminum oxide nanoparticles on soybean root under flooding stress

### Description
Flooding stress has a negative impact on the soybean cultivation in early growth stages. In order to understand the effect of aluminum oxide nanoparticles on the soybean growth under flooding stress, quantitative proteomics technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were flooded without or with flooding 50 ppm Al2O3 nanoparticles for 0, 1, 2, and 3 days. Proteins were extracted from root including hypocotyl. For proteomics, protein samples were cleaned with chloroform/metahnol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm, NTTC-360/75-3 nanoLC capillary column; Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) nanoparticles are used in agricultural products and cause various adverse growth effects on different plant species. To study the effects of Al2O3 nanoparticles on soybean under flooding stress, a gel-free proteomic technique was used. Morphological analysis revealed that treatment with 50 ppm Al2O3 nanoparticles under flooding stress enhanced soybean growth compared to ZnO and Ag nanoparticles. A total of 172 common proteins that significantly changed in abundance among control, flooding-stressed, and flooding-stressed soybean treated with Al2O3 nanoparticles were mainly related to energy metabolism. Under Al2O3 nanoparticles the energy metabolism was decreased compared to flooding stress. Hierarchical clustering divided identified proteins into four clusters, with proteins related to glycolysis exhibiting the greatest changes in abundance. Al2O3 nanoparticle-responsive proteins were predominantly related to protein synthesis/degradation, glycolysis, and lipid metabolism. mRNA expression analysis of Al2O3 nanoparticle-responsive proteins that displayed a 5-fold change in abundance revealed that NmrA-like negative transcriptional regulator was up-regulated, and flavodoxin-like quinone reductase was down-regulated. Moreover, cell death in root including hypocotyl was less evident in flooding-stressed with Al2O3 nanoparticles compared to flooding-treated soybean. These results suggest that Al2O3 nanoparticles might promote the growth of soybean under flooding stress by regulating energy metabolism and cell death.

### Keywords
Roots, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Aluminum oxide nanoparticles

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan.

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan.


