### Accession
PXD006093

### Title
DDX54 regulates transcriptome dynamics during DNA damage response, pSILAC

### Description
The cellular response to genotoxic stress is a well-characterized network of DNA surveillance pathways. The contribution of posttranscriptional gene regulatory networks to the DNA damage response (DDR) has not been extensively studied. Here, we systematically identified RNA-binding proteins differentially interacting with polyadenylated transcripts upon exposure of human breast carcinoma cells to ionizing irradiation (IR). Interestingly, more than 260 proteins showed increased binding to poly(A) RNA in IR-exposed cells and were comprised of many nucleolar proteins. The functional analysis of DDX54, a candidate genotoxic stress responsive RNA helicase, revealed that DDX54 is an immediate-to-early DDR regulator required for the splicing efficacy of its target IR-induced pre-mRNAs. Upon IR exposure, DDX54 acts by increased interaction with a well defined class of pre-mRNAs which harbor introns with weak acceptor splice sites, as well as by protein-protein contacts within components of U2 snRNP and spliceosomal B complex, resulting in lower intron retention and higher processing rates of its target transcripts. Since DDX54 promotes survival after exposure to IR its expression and/or mutation rate may impact DDR-related pathologies. Our work indicates the relevance of many uncharacterized RBPs potentially involved in the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
DDX54 knockdowns and mock transfections were performed in a 6-well format as described above in the presence of standard DMEM formulation containing "light" L-arginine and L-lysine for 48 h. Afterwards, cells were exposed to IR (10 Gy) or left untreated and the media was changed to a SILAC DMEM formulation containing 2 mM L-glutamine, 10 % dialyzed fetal bovine serum and either "medium-heavy" amino-acids (0.398 mM 13C6 L-arginine and 0.798 mM 4,4,5,5-D4 L-lysine) or "heavy" amino-acids (0.398 mM 13C6,15N4 L-arginine and 0.798 mM 13C6,15N4 L-lysine, all from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). For 2 replicates of mock or siDDX54 samples each, the media for control cells was exchanged from "light" to "medium-heavy" and for IR-exposed cells from "light" to "heavy". The opposite applied to 1 "label-swap" replicate. Twenty-four hours after the medium was exchanged, cells were washed three times and scraped off in ice cold PBS. "Medium-heavy" and "heavy" cells were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, pelleted and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were processed for MS as described above.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were analyzed and processed by MaxQuant (v1.5.1.2) Default settings were kept except that ‘match between runs’ was turned on. Re-quantify was off. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidymethyl fixed modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm. Database search was performed with Andromeda against UniProt/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on 2012-06) with common serum contaminants and enzyme sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide and at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular response to genotoxic stress is mediated by a well-characterized network of DNA surveillance pathways. The contribution of post-transcriptional gene regulatory networks to the DNA damage response (DDR) has not been extensively studied. Here, we systematically identified RNA-binding proteins differentially interacting with polyadenylated transcripts upon exposure of human breast carcinoma cells to ionizing radiation (IR). Interestingly, more than 260 proteins, including many nucleolar proteins, showed increased binding to poly(A)<sup>+</sup> RNA in IR-exposed cells. The functional analysis of DDX54, a candidate genotoxic stress responsive RNA helicase, revealed that this protein is an immediate-to-early DDR regulator required for the splicing efficacy of its target IR-induced pre-mRNAs. Upon IR exposure, DDX54 acts by increased interaction with a well-defined class of pre-mRNAs that harbor introns with weak acceptor splice sites, as well as by protein-protein contacts within components of U2 snRNP and spliceosomal B complex, resulting in lower intron retention and higher processing rates of its target transcripts. Because DDX54 promotes survival after exposure to IR, its expression and/or mutation rate may impact DDR-related pathologies. Our work indicates the relevance of many uncharacterized RBPs potentially involved in the DDR.

### Keywords
Human, Psilac, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft

### Submitter
Koshi Imami

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft


