### Accession
PXD024317

### Title
Proteomics characterization of the neuroprotective effects of low-dose methamphetamine on rats with traumatic brain injury (TBI)

### Description
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) causes hospitalizations and mortality worldwide with no approved neuroprotective treatments available, partly due to a poor understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying TBI neuropathology and neuroprotection. We previously reported that the administration of low-dose methamphetamine (MA) induced significant functional/cognitive improvements following severe TBI in rats. We further demonstrated that MA mediates neuroprotection in part, via dopamine-dependent activation of the PI3K-AKT pathway. Here, we further investigated the proteomic changes within the rat cortex and hippocampus following mild TBI (TM), severe TBI (TS), or severe TBI plus MA treatment (TSm) compared to sham operated controls (n=78 in total). We quantified >7,000 unique proteins in total and identified 402 and 801 altered proteins (APs) with high confidence in cortical and hippocampal tissues, respectively. The overall profile of APs observed in TSm rats more closely resembled those seen in TM rather than TS rats. Pathway analysis suggested beneficial roles for acute signaling through IL-6, TGFβ, and IL-1β. Moreover, changes in fibrinogen levels observed in TSm rats suggested a potential role for these proteins in reducing/preventing TBI-induced coagulopathies. These data facilitate further investigations to identify specific pathways and proteins that may serve as key targets for the development of neuroprotective therapies.

### Sample Protocol
TBI was induced on male Wistar rats using the lateral fluid percussion injury (FPI) procedure. Neurological Severity Scoring (NSS) was performed by a blinded observer at 6 h post TBI to define the severity of TBI in individual rats with a score ranging from 0 to 18. Rats were then divided into mild TBI (TS, n=11), severe TBI (TS, n=9), and severe TBI + MA treatment (TSm, n=9) groups, along with craniectomy-only Sham group (SH, n=10). TSm rats received an IV bolus of MA at a dose of 0.425 mg/kg, dissolved in sterile saline, followed by continuous IV infusion of MA at 0.5 mg/kg/h for 24 h. SH, TM, and TS rats received a similar infusion with sterile saline only. Rats were sacrificed 24 hr after drug administration (32 h after TBI) to procure the whole brain. Cortex and hippocampus (ipsilateral to the injury) were separated subjected to a surfactant cocktail-aided precipitation/on-bead digestion (SEPOD) procedure for protein extraction and digestion. Derived tryptic peptides were analyzed by a well-optimized trapping nano LC-Orbitrap mass spectrometry system for high-resolution OT MS1 and HCD-OT MS2 analysis. Proteomic quantification was accomplished by IonStar, an in-house developed MS1 ion current-based quantitative proteomics method.

### Data Protocol
Database searching: MS-GF+; Search result integration: IDPicker 3.0; Identification criteria: < 1% protein/peptide FDR with ≥2 unique peptides; Quantification: IonStar

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Large-scale proteomics, Traumatic brain injury, Methamphetamine, Ionstar

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York


