### Accession
PXD002265

### Title
Active Site Specificity Profiling of the Matrix Metalloproteinase Family: Proteomic Identification of 4,300 Cleavage Sites by MMPs 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, and 14.

### Description
Background: The active site of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is highly conserved, complicating the rational design of specific substrates and inhibitors for individual family members. Results: Active site specificity profiles of 9 MMPs were determined using high throughput Proteomic Identification of protease Cleavage Sites (PICS). Conclusion:  Subtle specificity divergences distinguish individual MMP family members. Significance: Understanding individual MMP cleavage site specificities will bolster the design of MMP specific activity assays and targeted inhibitory drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Human proteome-derived peptide libraries for MMP assays were prepared as following: Cell pellets collected from a human lymphoblast cell line K-562 (ATCC # CCL-243) were lysed in 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl) piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.5, supplemented with 0.1 % (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate and protease inhibitors (1x Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail supplemented with 10 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride), and centrifuged to remove cell debris (26,000 g, 1 h, 4 °C). Proteins in the supernatant were denatured with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and cysteine side chains were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (1 h, 37 °C) and then protected with 40 mM iodoacetamide (3 h, 20 °C). It is notable that whereas most synthetic peptide libraries do not incorporate cysteine, in PICS libraries cysteine is present as a carbamidomethylated form. Cell lysate proteins were subsequently purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation, air-dried, re-suspended in 100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid, 5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5, and digested with trypsin (TPCK treated, Sigma-Aldrich) or GluC (Staphylococcus aureus protease V8, Worthington) at a protease to proteome ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h, 37 °C. After deactivation of trypsin or GluC with 1.0 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (30 min, 20 °C), N-terminal and lysine primary amines were blocked by reductive dimethylation with 30 mM formaldehyde and 15 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3, Sterogene) for 16 h at 20 °C. The resulting peptides were desalted by size exclusion chromatography (Sephadex G-10 columns, 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 2.7, 10% (v/v) methanol), and after methanol removal by vacuum concentration (SpeedVac, Thermo), further purified by reversed-phase chromatography (RESOURCE RPC column, GE Healthcare; wash step with 0.3% (v/v) formic acid; elution in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile). Eluates were concentrated to a minimal volume by vacuum concentration, re-suspended in water, and stored at -80 °C as peptide libraries of 200 to 400 µg in concentrations of 5 to 15 mg/ml. All reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise specified. PICS cleavage assays were performed by incubation of 200 to 400 µg peptide library with active recombinant MMP at a protease to peptide library ratio of 1:100 (w/w) in 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid, 150 mM NaCl and 5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4. Cleaved peptides presenting neo N-termini generated by MMP cleavage were biotinylated by incubation with 0.5 mM Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (sulfosuccinimidyl-2-[biotinamido]ethyl-1,3-dithiopropionate; an amine-reactive biotinylation reagent with a cleavable disulfide linker; Life Technologies) for 2 h at ambient temperature. Biotinylated prime-side cleavage products were affinity purified from uncleaved peptides by incubation with 300-µl streptavidin Sepharose slurry (GE Healthcare) for 2 h at ambient temperature with mild agitation. After extensive washing, biotinylated peptides were eluted with 20 mM dithiothreitol (2 h, 22 °C), desalted using reversed-phase solid phase extraction (Sep-Pak C18, Waters) with binding and washing in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and elution in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. The eluates were vacuum dried to near dryness and stored at -80 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LC Packings capillary LC system (Dionex) coupled online to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (QSTAR XL, Applied Biosystems, operated by the UBC Centre for Blood Research Mass Spectrometry Suite, or QSTAR Pulsar I, Applied Biosystems, operated by the UBC Proteomics Core Facility). Samples were diluted in 0.3% (v/v) formic acid and loaded onto a column packed with Magic C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources). Peptides were eluted using a 2 to 80% (v/v) gradient of organic phase over 95 min. Buffer A was 2% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. MS/MS data were acquired automatically, using the Analyst QS software, v1.1 (Applied Biosystems) for information-dependent acquisition based on a 1 s MS survey scan from 350 m/z to 1500 m/z, followed by up to 3 MS/MS scans of 2 s each.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were converted to the mzXML format and peptides identified from the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database containing canonical and isoform protein sequences (downloaded October 2013), using X!TANDEM in conjunction with PeptideProphet as implemented in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v4.3 at an estimated false discover rate of 1%. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 200 ppm for the parent ion and 0.2 Dalton (Da) for the fragment ions, allowing up to two missed cleavages, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02 Da) and dimethylation of lysine Ɛ-amines (+28.03 Da) as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation (+15.99), dimethylation (+28.03 Da) and thioacylation (+88.00 Da) of peptide N-termini were set as variable.  Peptides identified by MS/MS represent the prime-side MMP cleavage products. The complete cleavage sites were reconstructed using the open web-based program WebPICS (http://clipserve.clip.ubc.ca/pics/). WebPICS generates a non-redundant list of identified cleavage sites in peptides by matching each non-redundant prime side peptide sequence to the human IPI database (v3.69, 174784 entries; EMBL-EBI, UK) and extracting the non-prime cleavage side sequence up to the next cleavage site of the enzyme used for library generation, i.e. to the next N-terminal Arg or Lys in the case of trypsin-generated libraries or the next N-terminal Asp or Glu for GluC-libraries. Nonprime subsite positions with ambiguous information coming from different protein isoforms are omitted, but the prime side sequence is still analyzed in the pool. Identified cleavage sites were summarized as heat maps (Gnuplot; www.gnuplot.info) showing relative occurrence and fold-change over natural abundance of amino acids and as iceLogos, displaying percent difference compared to natural amino acid abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Secreted and membrane tethered matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key homeostatic proteases regulating the extracellular signaling and structural matrix environment of cells and tissues. For drug targeting of proteases, selectivity for individual molecules is highly desired and can be met by high yield active site specificity profiling. Using the high throughput Proteomic Identification of protease Cleavage Sites (PICS) method to simultaneously profile both the prime and non-prime sides of the cleavage sites of nine human MMPs, we identified more than 4300 cleavages from P6 to P6' in biologically diverse human peptide libraries. MMP specificity and kinetic efficiency were mainly guided by aliphatic and aromatic residues in P1' (with a ~32-93% preference for leucine depending on the MMP), and basic and small residues in P2' and P3', respectively. A wide differential preference for the hallmark P3 proline was found between MMPs ranging from 15 to 46%, yet when combined in the same peptide with the universally preferred P1' leucine, an unexpected negative cooperativity emerged. This was not observed in previous studies, probably due to the paucity of approaches that profile both the prime and non-prime sides together, and the masking of subsite cooperativity effects by global heat maps and iceLogos. These caveats make it critical to check for these biologically highly important effects by fixing all 20 amino acids one-by-one in the respective subsites and thorough assessing of the inferred specificity logo changes. Indeed an analysis of bona fide MEROPS physiological substrate cleavage data revealed that of the 37 natural substrates with either a P3-Pro or a P1'-Leu only 5 shared both features, confirming the PICS data. Upon probing with several new quenched-fluorescent peptides, rationally designed on our specificity data, the negative cooperativity was explained by reduced non-prime side flexibility constraining accommodation of the rigidifying P3 proline with leucine locked in S1'. Similar negative cooperativity between P3 proline and the novel preference for asparagine in P1 cements our conclusion that non-prime side flexibility greatly impacts MMP binding affinity and cleavage efficiency. Thus, unexpected sequence cooperativity consequences were revealed by PICS that uniquely encompasses both the non-prime and prime sides flanking the proteomic-pinpointed scissile bond.

### Keywords
Mmps, Pics, Webpics, Mass spectrometry, Ecm, Specificity profiling

### Affiliations
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ulrich ECKHARD

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Christopher Mark Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


