### Accession
PXD001681

### Title
HA-mSLX4 wild type and SIMdependent interactors

### Description
SUMOylation is known to play important roles in the DNA damage response, however, a role for SUMOylation in interstrand crosslink repair remains enigmatic.  We report on the regulation of the SLX4 nuclease scaffold protein by SUMOylation. SLX4 contains three SUMO-Interaction Motifs (SIMs). Mutating all three SIMs abrogated the binding of SLX4 to SUMO-2 and covalent SLX4 SUMOylation. We attempt to identify which protein interaction are SIM dependent.

### Sample Protocol
After immunoprecipitation, EZview™ Red Anti-HA Affinity Gel beads were washed three times with ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM pH 8. Then the beads were resuspended in 250 µL ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM pH 8 and 0.25 µg of sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega). Samples were incubated overnight at 37ºC while shaking. Then the supernatant was separated from the beads and passed through a pre-washed 0.45 µm filter (Millipore) and samples were transferred to Epperdorf LoBind 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were acidified with 2% Trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma). Then samples were desalted with C-18 stage tips

### Data Protocol
Samples were anaylsed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.2. Matching runs, N-term acetylation, oxidation and phosphorylation as modifications,digested with tripsin with 2 maximum missing cleveages, minimum peptide lenght of 6, and minimum delta score of 40 for modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation plays important roles in the DNA damage response. However, whether it is important for interstrand crosslink repair remains unknown. We report that the SLX4 nuclease scaffold protein is regulated by SUMOylation. We have identified three SUMO interaction motifs (SIMs) in SLX4, mutating all of which abrogated the binding of SLX4 to SUMO-2 and covalent SLX4 SUMOylation. An SLX4 mutant lacking functional SIMs is not recruited to PML nuclear bodies nor stabilized at laser-induced DNA damage sites. Additionally, we elucidated a novel role for PARylation in the recruitment of SLX4 to sites of DNA damage. Combined, our results uncover how SLX4 is regulated by post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Slx4, Sumo, Fanconi anemia, Dna repair

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C O Vertegaal
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.


