### Accession
PXD012753

### Title
Young, old, OVX mouse Skin LC-MSMS, 3M Urea extraction

### Description
Ageing compromises the mechanical properties of skin, with increased fragility and coincident slowing of the healing process making aged skin susceptible to chronic wounding. The ageing process is driven by an aggregation of damage to cells and extracellular matrix, compounded by regulatory changes, including age-associated hormonal dysregulation. Here we report on the correlation between mechanical properties and composition of skin from ovariectomised and chronologically aged mice, to assess the extent to which estrogen deprivation drives dermal ageing. We found that age and estrogen abrogation affected skin mechanical properties in contrasting ways: ageing lead to increased tensile strength and stiffness while estrogen deprivation had the opposite effect. Mass spectrometry proteomics showed that the quantity of extractable fibrillar collagen-I decreased with ageing, but no change was observed in ovariectomised mice. This observation, in combination with measurements of tensile strength, was interpreted to reflect changes to the extent of extracellular matrix crosslinking, supported by a significant increase in the staining of advanced glycation endpoints in aged skin. Loss of mechanical strength in the ovariectomy model was consistent with a loss of elastic fibres. Other changes in extracellular matrix composition broadly correlated between aged and ovariectomised mice, indicative of the role of estrogen-related pathways in ageing. This study offers a coherent picture of the relationship between tissue composition and mechanics, but suggests that the deleterious effects of intrinsic skin ageing are compounded by factors beyond hormonal dysregulation.

### Sample Protocol
Ventral skin was shaved and scraped to remove hair, then dissected into ~1 mm3 pieces and solubilised in 100 μL of 8 M urea (Fisher Scientific), or 3 M NaCl (Fisher Scientific), in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 25 mM dithiothretol (DTT, Sigma), protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), sodium fluoride (Sigma) and sodium orthovanadate (Sigma). Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance Inc.) were added to the tube and samples were homogenised with a Bullet Blender (Next Advance Inc.) at maximum speed for 3 minutes. Resulting homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10000 rpm, 5 minutes). Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 μL of 113 digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in AB (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, Sigma)) and 50 μL of matrix extract and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4 μL x 500 mM dithiothretol, Sigma, in AB; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 μL x 500 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma, in AB; 30 min. shaking at room temperature). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 μL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (2 x addition of 200 μL ethyl acetate, Sigma). Peptides were desalted using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in deionized water) were adjusted to 300 ng/μL. Digested samples were analysed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Dionex Corporation) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL/min, using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SwissProt and TREMBL mouse databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Fold change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different samples were calculated by linear model fitting as has been described previously (Choi, et al. 2014; Clough, et al. 2009), using code written in Matlab (MathWorks, USA). Briefly, raw ion intensities from peptides from proteins with fewer than 3 unique peptides per protein were excluded from quantification. Remaining intensities were logged and normalized by the median intensity of ECM peptides, enabling comparison between samples and thus making quantification of ECM components an intensive measure (i.e. independent of the quantity of sample). Peptides assigned to different isoforms were 142 collected into a single “protein group” by gene name. Only peptides observed in at least 2 samples were used in quantification. Missing values were assumed as missing due to low abundance (Goeminne, et al. 2016) and were imputed randomly at the peptide level from a normal distribution centred on the apparent limit of detection for the experiment. The limit of detection was determined by taking the mean of all minimum logged peptide intensities and down-shifting it by 1.6σ, where σ is the standard deviation of minimum logged peptide intensities. The width of this normal distribution was set to 0.3σ (Tyanova, et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovx, Mouse, Ageing, Skin

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


