### Accession
PXD012355

### Title
Proteomic changes in the milk of water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) with intramammary infection by Staphylococcus aureus and by non-aureus staphylococciProteomic changes in the milk of water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) with intramammary infection by Staphylococcus aureus and by non-aureus staphylococci

### Description
The study reports a differential proteomic analysis of the Mediterranean buffalo milk to evaluate the changes induced by Staphylococcus spp. during a subclinical intramammary infection (IMI). A number of 12 quarter milk samples, 6 of which with somatic cell count (SCC) < 50,000 cells/mL and culture-negative, and the other 6 with SCC ˃ 3,000,000 cells/mL and culture-positive to Staphylococcus aureus (SAU, n=3), SAU, or non-aureus staphylococci (NAS, n=3) was selected. Samples were analyzed using a shotgun proteomics approach, based on filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) followed by LC-MS/MS and label-free analysis. Here, the largest buffalo milk protein dataset described so far was reported. Moreover, the results demonstrated that staphylococcal IMI mostly affected proteins involved in structural functions and in innate immune defense, with changes in their abundance that were generally more intense in SAU than in NAS samples. Further, an increase in the abundance of different cathelicidins was observed, as already reported for other animals with mastitis disease (1,2). (1) Addis MF, Pisanu S, Marogna G, Cubeddu T, Pagnozzi D, Cacciotto C, et al. Production and release of antimicrobial and immune defense proteins by mammary epithelial cells following Streptococcus uberis infection of sheep. Infect Immun. 2013;81: 3182–3197. (2) Addis MF, Tedde V, Dore S, Pisanu S, Puggioni GMG, Roggio AM, et al. Evaluation of milk cathelicidin for detection of dairy sheep mastitis. J Dairy Sci. Elsevier; 2016;99: 6446–6456.  In conclusion, our results provide the first in depth characterization of buffalo milk proteins, describe the changes induced by SAU and NAS subclinical intramammary infection and suggest indications to reveal subclinical staphylococcal mastitis in buffalo by the milk proteome investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples were collected from 12 Mediterranean buffalo, classified according to the SCC and California Mastitis Test (CMT) results and immediately stored at -80°C until their use. After centrifugation at 800 x g at 4°C for 10 min to remove fat, each sample was diluted 1:1 with lysis buffer (2% SDS, 0.4% Tween-20, 130 mM DTT, 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO)), incubated at 95°C for 10 min and then sonicated in a refrigerated water bath for 10 min. The suspensions were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. For shotgun proteomic analysis, extracts were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described previously (3). (3) Pisanu S, Cubeddu T, Pagnozzi D, Rocca S, Cacciotto C, Alberti A, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps in sheep mastitis. Vet Res. BioMed Central Ltd; 2015;46: 59. All peptide mixtures were analyzed on a Q-Exactive interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnanoLC system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), as described by Pisanu et al. (4). (4) Pisanu S, Biosa G, Carcangiu L, Uzzau S, Pagnozzi D. Comparative evaluation of seven commercial products for human serum enrichment/depletion by shotgun proteomics. Talanta. 2018;185: 213–220.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific) was used for protein identification using Sequest-HT as search engine and percolator as algorithm to improve assignment between correct and incorrect spectrum identifications (4). The database was customized by merging Bos taurus and Bubalus bubalis databases downloaded from Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL. Label-free quantitation was assessed by the spectral counting (SpC) approach, as describe by Pisanu et al.(3).

### Publication Abstract
Subclinical mastitis by Staphylococcus aureus (SAU) and by non-aureus staphylococci (NAS) is a major issue in the water buffalo. To understand its impact on milk, 6 quarter samples with &gt;3,000,000 cells/mL (3 SAU-positive and 3 NAS-positive) and 6 culture-negative quarter samples with &lt;50,000 cells/mL were investigated by shotgun proteomics and label-free quantitation. A total of 1530 proteins were identified, of which 152 were significantly changed. SAU was more impacting, with 162 vs 127 differential proteins and higher abundance changes (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0005). The 119 increased proteins had mostly structural (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;43, 28.29%) or innate immune defence functions (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;39, 25.66%) and included vimentin, cathelicidins, histones, S100 and neutrophil granule proteins, haptoglobin, and lysozyme. The 33 decreased proteins were mainly involved in lipid metabolism (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;13, 59.10%) and included butyrophilin, xanthine dehydrogenase/oxidase, and lipid biosynthetic enzymes. The same biological processes were significantly affected also upon STRING analysis. Cathelicidins were the most increased family, as confirmed by western immunoblotting, with a stronger reactivity in SAU mastitis. S100A8 and haptoglobin were also validated by western immunoblotting. In conclusion, we generated a detailed buffalo milk protein dataset and defined the changes occurring in SAU and NAS mastitis, with potential for improving detection (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD012355).

### Keywords
Mastitis, Buffalo milk, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Sardinia, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche,
Alghero, Sardinia, Italy.

### Submitter
Salvatore Pisanu

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Pagnozzi
Porto Conte Ricerche, Alghero, Sardinia, Italy


