### Accession
PXD011120

### Title
mouse Nedd4-2 KO and control tissue

### Description
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease that shares key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue specimen from left lungs of conditional Nedd4-2-/- mice and littermate controls frozen in liquid nitrogen were ground with a Mikro-Dismembrator S (Sartorius) and lysed using 4 M urea in 250 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 0.1% Rapigest (Waters). Whole tissue lysates were sonicated and the soluble fraction was reduced (10 mM DTT) and alkylated (15 mM IAA). Proteins were digested with LysC for 4 hours (Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 followed by sample dilution to 1.5 M urea and overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were purified using stage-tips containing C18 material (Empore C18 47 mm Extraction Disc, 3M) as described previously21. Samples were measured using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by direct injection into a 40 cm 75 µm inner diameter column (New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 µm particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). A five-hour 0–35% acetonitril gradient was used. Top-20 method was applied for MS scans in an m/z range of 400–1600 with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.8.0 with the Andromeda search engine. Protein sequence reviewed fasta files downloaded from Swiss-Prot on 21.12.2016 for mouse (16000 entries) was used in the search. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and hydroxyproline as variable modifications. A decoy database was created reversing original sequences. 1% FDR for both peptide and protein identification was chosen. A minimum of one unique peptide was required. The LFQ algorithm with skipped normalization and minimum ratio count of two was applied. The resulting MaxQuant output file “protein groups” was used for protein quantification.
Control animals are the samples with identifiers: 4833, 4841, 4835, 3839, 4582, 4557, 4584, 4452, 4448, 4864, 5608, 5609, 4874
Conditional Nedd4-2-/- mice are the samples with identifiers: 4832, 4842, 4834, 4450, 4447, 4583, 4556, 4559, 3841, 4873, 4870

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic progressive interstitial lung disease characterized by patchy scarring of the distal lung with limited therapeutic options and poor prognosis. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2 (Nedd4l) in lung epithelial cells in adult mice produces chronic lung disease sharing key features with IPF including progressive fibrosis and bronchiolization with increased expression of Muc5b in peripheral airways, honeycombing and characteristic alterations in the lung proteome. NEDD4-2 is implicated in the regulation of the epithelial Na<sup>+</sup> channel critical for proper airway surface hydration and mucus clearance and the regulation of TGF&#x3b2; signaling, which promotes fibrotic remodeling. Our data support a role of mucociliary dysfunction and aberrant epithelial pro-fibrotic response in the multifactorial disease pathogenesis. Further, treatment with the anti-fibrotic drug pirfenidone reduced pulmonary fibrosis in this model. This model may therefore aid studies of the pathogenesis and therapy of IPF.

### Keywords
Nedd4-2

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany


