### Accession
PXD012891

### Title
Proteome allocation of budding yeast under different growth rates

### Description
Metabolism is at the core of cellular function as it provides free energy and building blocks required for cellular growth, and it has evolved to contain extensive regulation to adjust the activity of each pathway to the cellular needs at a given time. Here we used yeast as model to study how flux through the metabolic network is controlled. Using a systems biology approach, where we combined multi-omics analysis with metabolic modelling, we could classify overall regulatory patterns in key cellular pathways. We conclude that whereas transcriptional regulation is dominant for most metabolic pathways, there is increased enzyme saturation for increased specific growth rates, but glycolysis stands out as having far more complex regulation, which involves both protein-phosphorylation and metabolite-enzyme interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were breaked with sonication and mechanical bead beating, and the samples were precleared and centrifuged to remove cell debris. Samples were spiked at 1:1 ratio with the heavy lysine labelled standard. For absolute quantification, 6 µg of heavy standard was spiked separately with 1.1 µg of UPS2 protein mix (Sigma Aldrich). After extraction, proteins were digested with 1:50 (enzyme to protein) Lys-C overnight at room temperature. The peptides were desalted. 2 µg of peptides were injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system. Peptides were separated at 200 nL/min with a 5-40% B 240 and 480 min gradient for spiked and heavy standard samples, respectively. Eluted peptides were sprayed to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray ionization source and a spray voltage of 2.5 kV.  The MS instrument was operated with a top-10 data dependent MS/MS acquisition strategy. One 350-1400 m/z MS scan was followed by MS/MS of the 10 most-intense ions using higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation. The MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 3 × 106 (50 ms) and 5 × 104 (50 ms), respectively. Dynamic exclusion time was limited to 70 s and 110 s for spiked samples and heavy standard runs, respectively. Only charge states +2 to +6 were subjected to MS/MS. The heavy standard was analyzed with three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were identified and quantified with the MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. For heavy-spiked samples the labelling state (multiplicity) was set to 2, and Lys8 was defined as the heavy label. Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Search was performed against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C reference proteome database (version from July 2016) using the LysC digestion rule. Only protein identifications with a minimum of 1 peptide with 7 amino acids long were accepted, and transfer of peptide identifications between runs was enabled. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach with reversed sequences as decoys.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to controlled expression of genes by specific regulatory circuits, the abundance of proteins and transcripts can also be influenced by physiological states of the cell such as growth rate and metabolism. Here we examine the control of gene expression by growth rate and metabolism, by analyzing a multi-omics dataset consisting of absolute-quantitative abundances of the transcriptome, proteome, and amino acids in 22 steady-state yeast cultures. We find that transcription and translation are coordinately controlled by the cell growth rate via RNA polymerase II and ribosome abundance, but they are independently controlled by nitrogen metabolism via amino acid and nucleotide availabilities. Genes in central carbon metabolism, however, are distinctly regulated and do not respond to the cell growth rate or nitrogen metabolism as all other genes. Understanding these effects allows the confounding factors of growth rate and metabolism to be accounted for in gene expression profiling studies.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Q exactive, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
East China University of Science and Technology
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
Jianye Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Chalmers University of Technology


