### Accession
PXD013811

### Title
OC-MS/MS -  HSP60-regulated Mitochondrial Proteostasis and Protein Translation Promote Tumor Growth of Ovarian Cancer

### Description
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecological carcinoma because of the lack of early diagnostic markers and effective drug targets. Discovery of new therapeutic targets in OC to improve the treatment outcome is urgently needed. Patients with recurrent EOC after initial therapy have few treatment options that greatly compromises their quality of life and life expectancy. Discovery of new therapeutic targets in EOC to improve the treatment outcome is urgently needed. Proteomic analysis is one of the approaches to identify therapeutic targets in OC.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis based on liquid chromatography − tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) was carried out as previously described.Briefly, equal amounts of proteins (100 μg) extracted from the clinical samples or cell lines were reduced by dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by digestion with trypsin at 37 °C

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 3.0 software. Proteomic analysis of cell lines was carried out in biological quadruplicates. The MS/MS spectra were cross-referenced against the UniProt human database using the SEQUEST search engine from Proteome Discoverer Software (version 2.1).

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecological carcinoma due to the lack of diagnostic markers and effective drug targets. Discovery of new therapeutic targets in OC to improve the treatment outcome is urgently needed. We performed proteomic analysis of OC specimens and the paired normal tissues and revealed that proteins associated with mitochondrial proteostasis and protein translation were highly expressed in ovarian tumor tissues, indicating that mitochondria are required for tumor progression of OC. Heat shock protein 60 (HSP60), an important mitochondrial chaperone, was upregulated in ovarian tumors. HSP60 silencing significantly attenuated growth of OC cells in both cells and mice xenografts. Proteomic analysis revealed that HSP60 silencing downregulated proteins involved in mitochondrial functions and protein synthesis. Metabolomic analysis revealed that HSP60 silencing resulted in a more than 100-fold increase in cellular adenine levels, leading to increased adenosine monophosphate and an activated AMPK pathway, and consequently reduced mTORC1-mediated S6K and 4EBP1 phosphorylation to inhibit protein synthesis that suppressed the proliferation of OC cells. These results suggest that HSP60 knockdown breaks mitochondrial proteostasis, and inactivates the mTOR pathway to inhibit OC progression, suggesting that HSP60 is a potential therapeutic target for OC treatment.

### Keywords
Oc, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
Tsinghua University, China

### Submitter
Jianying Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
Tsinghua University, China


