### Accession
PXD028613

### Title
Muc2-dependent microbial colonization of the jejunal mucus layer is diet sensitive and confers resistance to enteric pathogen infection

### Description
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of mucosal infections; however, the mechanistic basis of this phenomenon remains incompletely defined. Intestinal mucus barrier systems normally prevent infections, but are sensitive to changes in the luminal environment. Here we demonstrate that mice exposed to an obesogenic Western-style diet (WSD) suffer regiospecific failure of the mucus barrier in the small intestinal jejunum caused by diet-induced mucus condensation, which occurs independently of microbiota alterations. Mucus barrier disruption due to either WSD exposure or chromosomal Muc2 deletion results in collapse of the commensal jejunal microbiota, which in turn sensitises mice to atypical jejunal colonization by the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium. We identify the jejunal mucus layer as a microbial habitat, and link the regiospecific mucus dependency of the microbiota to fundamental properties of the jejunal niche. Together, our data identifies a symbiotic mucus-microbiota relationship that normally prevents jejunal pathogen colonization, but is highly sensitive to disruption by exposure to a Western-style diet.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus samples were reduced overnight in 6 M guanidinum hydrochloride, 0.1 M Tris/HCl (pH 8.5), 5 mM EDTA, 0.1 M DTT (Merck) followed by filter aided sample (FASP) preparation with 10 kDa cut-off filters. Proteins on the filter were alkylated and sequentially digested with LysC (Wako) and trypsin (Promega). Peptides were then cleaned with StageTip C18 columns. NanoLC–MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher), connected to a QExactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated using in-house packed reverse-phase column (150x0.075 mm inner diameter, C18-AQ 3um) by a 60-min gradient from 5 to 40% of buffer B ( A:0.1% formic acid, B:0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile)using a flow rate of 200 mL/min. Mass spectra were acquired from 320-1600 m/z at resolution 70000, and the 12 peaks with highest intensity were fragmented to acquire the tandem mass spectrum with a resolution of 35000 and using automatic dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using MaxQuant (v.5.7.4) searching the mouse UniProt protein database (downloaded 2018/07/11) supplemented with human and mouse mucin sequences database version 2.0 (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). Searches used full tryptic specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavages, 20 ppm precursor tolerance for recalibration search followed by 7 ppm for the final search, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Modifications were set as carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation (variable) and protein N-terminal (variable). The FDR was set to 1% both for peptide and protein levels and minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Proteins were quantified using label-free quantification (LFQ) using at least two peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal mucus barriers normally prevent microbial infections but are sensitive to diet-dependent changes in the luminal environment. Here we demonstrate that mice fed a Western-style diet (WSD) suffer regiospecific failure of the mucus barrier in the small intestinal jejunum caused by diet-induced mucus aggregation. Mucus barrier disruption due to either WSD exposure or chromosomal Muc2 deletion results in collapse of the commensal jejunal microbiota, which in turn sensitizes mice to atypical jejunal colonization by the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium. We illustrate the jejunal mucus layer as a microbial habitat, and link the regiospecific mucus dependency of the microbiota to distinctive properties of the jejunal niche. Together, our data demonstrate a symbiotic mucus-microbiota relationship that normally prevents jejunal pathogen colonization, but is highly sensitive to disruption by exposure to a WSD.

### Keywords
Obesity, Q-exactive, Mouse, Proteomics, Mucus

### Affiliations
Proteomics laboratory, Mucin Biology Groups, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Proteomics laboratory, Mucin Biology Groups, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


