### Accession
PXD023203

### Title
Strain-specific peptide (SSP) standard: A genetically encoded quality control standard for isobaric tagging strategies

### Description
Isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing strategies are extensively used for global protein abundance profiling. However, such analyses are often confounded by ratio compression resulting from the co-isolation, co-fragmentation, and co-quantification of co-eluting peptides, termed “interference.” Recent analytical strategies incorporating ion mobility and real-time database searching have helped to alleviate interference, yet further assessment is needed. Here, we present the Strain-Specific Peptide (SSP) standard, a TMTpro-tagged reference sample that leverages the genetic variation in the proteomes of eight phylogenetically divergent mouse strains. Typically, a peptide with a missense mutation will have a different mass and retention time than the reference or native peptide. TMT reporter ion signal for the native peptide in strains that encode the mutant peptide suggests interference which can be quantified and assessed using the interference-free index (IFI). We showcase the SSP standard by investigating interference in three common data acquisition methods and by testing the improvements in the IFI when using ion mobility-based gas phase fractionation. In addition, we provide a user-friendly, online viewer to visualize the data and streamline calculation of the IFI. The SSP standard will aid in developing and optimizing isobaric tag-based experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Mice and tissue preparation. The murine liver tissue was provided by The Jackson Laboratory for the following strains: 129S1/SvlmJ (129), A/J (AJ), C57BL/6 J (B6), CAST/EiJ (CAST), NOD/ShiLtJ (NOD), NZO/H1LtJ (NZO), PWK/PhJ (PWK), and WSB/EiJ (WSB).   Tandem mass tag labeling. TMTpro reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 6 μL was added to the peptides (50 µg in 50 µL of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) with 14 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Mouse peptides were combined at a 1:1 ratio across the 16 channels. This final sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all canonical mouse entries from Uniprot (November, 2019). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da for hrMS2 and 1 Da for SPS-MS3 and RTS-MS3. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) and TMTpro labels on the N-terminus and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. PSMs were collapsed to a 1% peptide FDR and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Data were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel and R (v 4.0.2) using the shiny, DT, dplyr, and ggplot2 packages.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing strategies are extensively used for global protein abundance profiling. However, such analyses are often confounded by ratio compression resulting from the co-isolation, co-fragmentation, and co-quantification of co-eluting peptides, termed "interference." Recent analytical strategies incorporating ion mobility and real-time database searching have helped to alleviate interference, yet further assessment is needed. Here, we present the strain-specific peptide (SSP) interference reference sample, a tandem mass tag (TMT)pro-labeled quality control that leverages the genetic variation in the proteomes of eight phylogenetically divergent mouse strains. Typically, a peptide with a missense mutation has a different mass and retention time than the reference or native peptide. TMT reporter ion signal for the native peptide in strains that encode the mutant peptide suggests interference which can be quantified and assessed using the interference-free index (IFI). We introduce the SSP by investigating interference in three common data acquisition methods and by showcasing improvements in the IFI when using ion mobility-based gas-phase fractionation. In addition, we provide a user-friendly, online viewer to visualize the data and streamline the calculation of the IFI. The SSP will aid in developing and optimizing isobaric tag-based experiments.

### Keywords
Eclipse, Sps-ms3, Rts-ms3, Tmtpro16, Faims, Founder strains

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Cell Biology Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Cell Biology Boston, MA, USA


