### Accession
PXD002070

### Title
Comprehensive protein interactome analysis of a key RNA helicase: the detection of novel stress granule proteins

### Description
We conducted an unbiased large-scale study to map the protein-protein interactome of DDX6 using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of cell lines: pENTR constructs were generated by PCR amplification of the respective coding sequences (CDS) from Flp-In 293 T-REx derived cDNA, followed by restriction digest and ligation into pENTR4 backbone (Invitrogen). Cells were selected by exchanging zeocin for 100 µg/ml hygromycin, and monoclonal colonies were isolated. Cell culture – HEK-293 cells (ATCC) and derivatives were cultured in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2, in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% FBS (Atlanta Biologicals) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin-Fungizone (Life Technologies). Cells were treated with arsenite and doxycycline for DDX6-FLAG-HA induction. Immunoprecipitation – Cells were harvested and lysed. The lysates were first incubated for 1 hour at 4oC with anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma) for the tandem immunoprecipitation, or with Protein G Dynabeads (Life Technologies) bound to an antibody recognizing GRAN2 (Sigma, HPA045542). The beads were washed 3 times in wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40). At this point, some samples were incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature with 250 units benzonase (Sigma). For the tandem immunoprecipitation, protein complexes were eluted from the beads by 2 incubations with 3XFLAG peptide (Sigma, 100 ug/mL) for 5 minutes each. The resulting eluate was incubated with Protein G Dynabeads bound to an anti-HA antibody (Sigma, H3663) for 45 minutes at 4oC.  Western blot – Lysates were prepared as for immunoprecipitation. Equal protein amounts were run on SDS-PAGE gels, transferred via wet electroblotting, and blocked in 5% milk in TBS-T (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20). The following primary antibodies were incubated with the blots overnight at a dilution of 1:1000 unless otherwise noted: anti-DDX6 (Abcam, 4967), anti-FLAG (Sigma, F3165), anti-beta-actin (Cell Signaling, 4967), anti-HA (Sigma, H6908), anti-NUFIP2 (Sigma, HPA017344, 1:250), anti-GRAN2 (Sigma, HPA045542, 1:250), anti-GRAN1 (ProteinTech, 20808-1-AP), anti-SUMO1 (Abcam, ab32058). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were used at a dilution of 1:5000 for one hour (GE Healthcare). Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis – A single anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation step was performed as described above, including elution with the 3X FLAG peptide. Eluates were separated using the NativePAGE system (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, on a 1 mm 3-12% Bis-Tris gel. Gel bands from the entire lane were cut with a width of 2 mM from a GelCode Blue-stained gel (Pierce Biotechnology), and processed for analysis by mass spectrometry as described below. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry – For immunoprecipitation-derived samples, bead-bound proteins from immunoprecipitation experiments were digested and eluted by direct incubation with 50 ng trypsin in ABC overnight at 37oC. The eluate was then reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to final concentrations of 0.1% and 5% respectively. For gel slices, samples were destained in a buffer containing acetonitrile and ABC, reduced with DTT and then alkylated with IAA. The gel slices were dehydrated with acetonitrile, then resuspended with a trypsin digestion solution (100 ng trypsin per sample). Samples were digested overnight at 37oC. All samples were cleaned with Aspire desalting tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions as the final step before mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry - Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Absciex). Samples were run on a 180 min (entire immunoprecipitation samples) or 30 min (gel slices) nonlinear gradient from 2% to 41% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Survey full-scan mass spectra were acquired from 300–2000 m/z, with a resolution of 60,000. The top 20 most intense ions from the survey scan were isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35 eV). The dynamic exclusion list (n = 500) used a retention time of 90 seconds and a repeat duration of 45 seconds (repeat count = 1), and preview scan mode was enabled. Ions of charge state = 1 or unassigned charge states were rejected. Immunofluorescence imaging – Cells were grown on fibronectin-coated coverslips (BD Biosciences), and fixed for 15 minutes in 4% paraformaldehyde followed by 10 minutes in cold methanol [74]. Primary antibodies were incubated for 1 hour or overnight at the following concentrations: DDX6 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-376433, 1:25), DCP1a (Abcam, ab47811), HA (Roche, 11867423001), NUFIP2 (Sigma, HPA017344, 1:250), GRAN1 (ProteinTech, 20808-1-AP, 1:250), GRAN2 (Sigma, HPA045542, 1:500), PABPC1 (Abcam, ab6125, 1:1000). Fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 hour at a 1:1000 dilution (Molecular Probes).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics and data analysis – Evidence for previously established protein-protein interactions was taken from the BioGRID and INTACT databases, and searches of the literature. Functional enrichment of gene lists by GO annotation was performed using the ProfCom_GO statistical framework. Western blots were quantified via the ImageJ program using standard densitometry techniques.  All MS/MS data were searched against a uniprot-based human protein sequence database including protein sequences of common contaminants by MaxQuant version 1.3.0.3. For the searches, trypsin was defined as the protease. The search included carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification and
N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion and peptide had to be fully tryptic. Sumoylation bioinformatics analysis -  A FASTA file of the human reference proteome was obtained from UniProt (06-2012, 20,231 entries). The software SUMOsp was used to identify sumoylation sites, with the “high-confidence” cutoff values. Statistical significance of enrichment of both sumoylated proteins and sumoylation sites was calculated using hypergeometric distributions.

### Publication Abstract
DDX6 (p54/RCK) is a human RNA helicase with central roles in mRNA decay and translation repression. To help our understanding of how DDX6 performs these multiple functions, we conducted the first unbiased, large-scale study to map the DDX6-centric protein-protein interactome using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Using DDX6 as bait, we identify a high-confidence and high-quality set of protein interaction partners which are enriched for functions in RNA metabolism and ribosomal proteins. The screen is highly specific, maximizing the number of true positives, as demonstrated by the validation of 81% (47/58) of the RNA-independent interactors through known functions and interactions. Importantly, we minimize the number of indirect interaction partners through use of a nuclease-based digestion to eliminate RNA. We describe eleven new interactors, including proteins involved in splicing which is an as-yet unknown role for DDX6. We validated and characterized in more detail the interaction of DDX6 with Nuclear fragile X mental retardation-interacting protein 2 (NUFIP2) and with two previously uncharacterized proteins, FAM195A and FAM195B (here referred to as granulin-1 and granulin-2, or GRAN1 and GRAN2). We show that NUFIP2, GRAN1, and GRAN2 are not P-body components, but re-localize to stress granules upon exposure to stress, suggesting a function in translation repression in the cellular stress response. Using a complementary analysis that resolved DDX6's multiple complex memberships, we further validated these interaction partners and the presence of splicing factors. As DDX6 also interacts with the E3 SUMO ligase TIF1&#x3b2;, we tested for and observed a significant enrichment of sumoylation amongst DDX6's interaction partners. Our results represent the most comprehensive screen for direct interaction partners of a key regulator of RNA life cycle and localization, highlighting new stress granule components and possible DDX6 functions-many of which are likely conserved across eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Helicase, Sumo, Splicing, Rna, Gw bodies, Gran1, Translation regulation, Gran2, Mrna decay, Stress granules, Decapping, Nufip2, Fam195b, Processing bodies, Fam195a, Sumoylation, Post-transcriptional regulation, P bodies, Mass spectrometry, Ddx6

### Affiliations
New York University, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York NY USA.
New York University

### Submitter
Nerea Cuevas Polo

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
New York University, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York NY USA.


