### Accession
PXD009587

### Title
Identification of candidate biomarkers for the early detection of radiation induced cutaneous erythema by quantitative proteomic analysis using a Data Independent Mass Spectrometry

### Description
This work is an effort to identify a set of changes in serum protein expression levels during the early post-irradiation phase of patients treated with radiotherapy because of brain cancer. We performed a comparative proteomic analysis based on a DIA-MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
-Serum samples were Albumin depleted  -Proteins were reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin/LysC

### Data Protocol
MSMS library was created from Protein Discoverer 2.1 output file Database searches for the spectral library generation was performed with MASCOT and SEQUEST Label free analysis was performed with MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 DIA analysis was performed with Pinnacle

### Publication Abstract
The purpose of the present study is to analyze the serum proteome of patients receiving Radiation Therapy (RT) at different stages of their treatment to discovery candidate biomarkers of the radiation-induced skin lesions and the molecular pathways underlying the radiation signatures. Six stages of RT treatment were monitored from patients treated because of brain cancer: before starting the treatment, during the treatment (four time points), and at 4 weeks from the last RT dose. Serum samples were analyzed by a proteomics approach based on the Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry (MS). RT induced clear changes in the expression levels of 36 serum proteins. Among these, 25 proteins were down- or up-regulated significantly before the emergence of skin lesions. Some of these were still deregulated after the completion of the treatment. Few days before the appearance of the skin lesions, the levels of some proteins involved in the wound healing processes were down-regulated. The pathway analysis indicated that after partial body irradiation, the expression levels of proteins functionally involved in the acute inflammatory and immune response, lipoprotein process and blood coagulation, were deregulated.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Radiotherapy, Dia

### Affiliations
ESPCI-CNRS
Spectrométrie de Masse Biologique & Protéomique ESPCI PARIS PSL/CNRS

### Submitter
Giovanni Chiappetta

### Lab Head
Dr Joelle Vinh
Spectrométrie de Masse Biologique & Protéomique ESPCI PARIS PSL/CNRS


