### Accession
PXD028126

### Title
The expression of virulence and antimicrobial related proteins in different Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia pseudomallei isolates

### Description
Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia pseudomallei are both potential biological threats agents. Melioidosis caused by B. pseudomallei is endemic in Southeast Asia and Northern Australia, while glanders caused by B. mallei infections are rare. Here we studied the proteomes of different B. mallei and B. pseudomallei isolates to determine species specific characteristics. Analyzing the expressed proteomes of B. mallei and B. pseudomallei revealed differences between B. mallei and B. pseudomallei but also between isolates from the same species. Expression of multiple virulence factors and proteins of several PKS/NRPS clusters was demonstrated. Proteome analysis can be used not only to identify bacteria but also to characterize the expression of important factors that putatively contribute to pathogenesis of B. mallei and B. pseudomallei.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was executed using a modified filter aided sample preparation (FASP). The bacteria were harvested from a blood agar culture plate. After the blood agar culture plate was incubated overnight at 35 oC a small sample of the culture material was resuspended in 300 µL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8). Sample cleanup was executed using ZipTip (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The sample was eluted two times with 10 µL 50% acetonitrile/0,1% TFA in water in a new low binding tube (Final volume 20 µL). Finally, the liquid was evaporated off with the SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Munich, Germany). The resulting pellet was resuspended in 50 µl 1 % TFA for LC-HRMS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC- HRMS/MS measurements were carried out on a RSLC nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample were loaded on a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID ×5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and desalted for 8 min using a flow rate of 20 µL 0.1% TFA (in water)/min. The trap column was switched online with the analytical column (C18 PepMap, 75 µm ID × 250 mm, 1.8 µm particle and 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient: 4%–38% solvent B in 90 minutes, where solvent A consists of 0.1% aqueous formic acid in water and solvent B consists of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% aqueous formic acid. Column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and column oven temperature to 40°C. For mass spectrometry detection a data-dependent acquisition method was used: a high resolution survey scan from 375 to 1,500 Th was performed in the Orbitrap (value of target of automatic gain control AGC 4e5; resolution 120,000 at 400 m/z; lock mass was set to 445.120025 Th (protonated (Si(CH3)2O)6). Based on this survey scan, most intense ions were consecutively isolated and fragmented until a duty cycle duration of 3 s was reached (‘Top speed’ setting). Settings for MS/MS fragmentation were: AGC target set to 1e4 ions (50 ms maximal fill time); isolation width of 1.6 u; fragmentation by HCD applying 30% normalized collision energy; detection of fragment ions in the linear ion trap. After precursors were selected for MS/MS, they were excluded within a tolerance range of 10 ppm for further MS/MS analysis for 1 min. The obtained MS spectra were assigned to peptides using PEAKS 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) and a custom database (BPC-DB). The custom database contained all unique proteins of B. mallei and B. pseudomallei in the SwissProt database (BPC-DB) (2018-October-17). Furthermore, filters were used to exclude duplicate peptides and advanced missed cleavage handling. Only peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 0.1% were included in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Burkholderia mallei burkholderia pseudomallei proteome lc-ms/ms colony

### Affiliations
TNO
Research Manager, TNO, Department CBRN protection, The Netherlands (lab head)

### Submitter
Armand Paauw

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. ir. A.M.J. (Annette) Kliphuis
Research Manager, TNO, Department CBRN protection, The Netherlands (lab head)


