### Accession
PXD034477

### Title
Hepatic deletion of Mtfp1 enhances oxidative phosphorylation and cell death resistance to confer protection against liver disease _ REVISION

### Description
Mitochondria are paramount to the metabolism and survival of cardiomyocytes.  Here we show that Mitochondrial Fission Process 1 (MTFP1) is essential for cardiac structure and function.  Constitutive knockout of cardiomyocyte MTFP1 in mice resulted in adult-onset dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) characterized by sterile inflammation and cardiac fibrosis that progressed to heart failure and middle-aged death.  Failing hearts from cardiomyocyte-restricted knockout mice displayed a general decline in mitochondrial gene expression and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) activity. Pre-DCM, we observed no defects in mitochondrial morphology, content, gene expression, OXPHOS assembly nor phosphorylation dependent respiration. However, knockout cardiac mitochondria displayed reduced membrane potential and increased non-phosphorylation dependent respiration, which could be rescued by pharmacological inhibition of the adenine nucleotide translocase ANT. Primary cardiomyocytes from pre-symptomatic knockout mice exhibited normal excitation-contraction coupling but increased sensitivity to programmed cell death (PCD), which was accompanied by an opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP). Intriguingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts deleted for Mtfp1 recapitulated PCD sensitivity and mPTP opening, both of which could be rescued by pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the mPTP regulator Cyclophilin D.  Collectively, our data demonstrate that contrary to previous in vitro studies, the loss of the MTFP1 promotes mitochondrial uncoupling and increases cell death sensitivity, causally mediating pathogenic cardiac remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Same as PXD032385 Total Proteome analysis ; Heart extract proteins were extracted and denatured in RIPA buffer. Samples were sonicated using a Vibracell 75186 and a miniprobe 2 mm (Amp 80% // Pulse 10 off 0.8, 3 cycles) and further centrifuged. Protein assay was performed on supernatant (Pierce 660 nm, according to manufacturer instructions) and 100 µg of each extract was delipidated and cleaned using a Chloroform / Methanol / Water precipitation method. Briefly, 4 volume of ice-cold methanol were added to the sample and vortex, 2 volume of ice-cold chloroform were added and vortex and 3 volume of ice-cold water was added and vortex. Samples were centrifuged 5 min at 5000 g. The upper layer was removed and proteins at the interface were kept. Tubes were filled with ice-cold methanol and centrifuged at max speed for 5 min. Resulting protein pellet was air-dried and then dissolved in 130 µl of 100mM NaOH before adding 170 µl of Tris 50 mM pH 8.0, tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) 5 mM and chloroacetamide (CAA) 20 mM. The mixture was heated 5 min at 95 °C and then cooled on ice. Endoprotease LysC (1µg) was use for a 8h digestion step at (37° C) followed with a trypsin digestion (1 µg) at 37°C for 4 h. Digestion was stopped adding 0.1% final of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 stage tips strategy (Elution at 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) on Empore C18 discs stacked in a P200 tips) and 30 µg of peptides were further fractionated in 4 fractions using poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) stage-tips method as described in Rappsilber et al and Kulak et al. Four serial elutions were applied as following: elution 1 (80 mM Ammonium formate (AmF), 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA)), elution 2 (110 mM AmF, 35% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), elution 3 (150 mM AmmF, 50% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA) and elution 4 (80% (v/v) ACN, 5 % (v/v) ammonium hydroxide). All fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA before injection.  LC-MS/SM analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 50 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 3% to 7% in 8 min, 7% to 23% in 95 min, 23% to 45% in 45 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 170 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Same as PXD032385 Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine REF against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (53449 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 24th of July 2018). The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. All 4 fractions per sample were gathered and the iBAQ intensity was used to estimate the protein abundance within a sample REF. The match between runs features was allowed for bi3ological replicate only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lfq, Liver disease

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Mitochondrial biology group, Institut Pasteur, Paris

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Timoty Wai
Mitochondrial biology group, Institut Pasteur, Paris


