### Accession
PXD015480

### Title
The effects of PhACL silencing on protein acetylation in petunia the effects of acetyl-CoA

### Description
Acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) is a central metabolite and the acetyl source for protein acetylation. The formation of cytosolic acetyl-CoA is catalyzed by ATP-citrate lyase (ACL) from citrate. However, the effects of acetyl-CoA on protein acetylation were not well known. In this study, four genes, PhACLA1, PhACLA2, PhACLB1, PhACLB2, encoding ACLA and ACLB submits in petunia (Petunia hybrida) were identified. VIGS-mediated PhACLA1-A2 and PhACLB1-B2 silencing leads to abnormal leave and flower development and reduced total anthocyanins content, while silencing of any single PhACL gene did not result in visible phenotype change. We quantitatively investigated the petunia proteome, acetylome, and the association between them in petunia corollas treated with pTRV2-PhACLB1-B2 and pTRV2. In total, 6200 protein groups were identified from petunia, among which 5343 proteins were quantified. A total of 345 proteins were up-regulated and 182 proteins were down-regulated (with a threshold of 1.2-fold) in PhACLB1-B2-silenced plant compared with the control (P <0.05).  A total of 2210 lysine acetylation sites in 1148 protein groups were identified, among which 1744 sites in 921 proteins were accurately quantified (Additional file 2: Table S7). We subsequently used the quantification results of the global proteome to normalize the acetylome quantification data. From these, 68 sites in 54 lysine acetylation proteins were quantified as up-regulated targets and 40 sites in 38 lysine acetylation proteins were quantified as down-regulated targets at a threshold of 1.2 (P < 0.05). The global proteome and acetylome were negatively correlated, implying that proteome expression levels were negatively regulated by acetylation in PhACLB1-B2-silenced plants compared with the control.

### Sample Protocol
The flowers were harvested at anthesis (corollas 90° reflexed) and immediately placed in tap water. All tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C until used. All experiments were conducted at least three times with independently collected and extracted tissues unless otherwise noted. Petunia corollas were ground in liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three biology replicates were performed. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. LC-MS/MS Analysis was performed according to previously described protocols(Wu et al., 2015). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 85% in 4 min then holding at 85% for the last 4min, all at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a database (40,341 sequences) made from RNA sequencing of petunias in this study. For proteomic peptides, Trypsin/P was used as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K) were specified as fixed modifications, and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and peptide ion score was set to > 20. For Kac peptides, Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. First, the search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, and the main search range was set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and GlyGly on lysine and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification method was LFQ, and FDR was adjusted to < 1%, while the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Bioinformatic Analysis Bioinformatic analysis was performed according to previously described protocols (Wu et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015). GO term association and enrichment analysis were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). The KEGG online service tool KAAS was used to annotate the proteins’ KEGG database descriptions. The annotation results were mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tool KEGG Mapper. The domain annotation was performed with InterProScan on the InterPro domain database via web-based interfaces and services. WoLF PSORT was used for predicting subcellular localization (Horton et al., 2007). The CORUM database was used to annotate protein complexes. Motif-X software was used to analyze the models of the sequences with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (ten amino acids upstream and downstream of the Kac site) in all of the protein sequences. In addition, the petunia proteome was used as the background database, and the other parameters were set to the default values. The setting parameters for searching motifs using Motif-X software were ‘occurrences 20’ and ‘the Bonferroni corrected P = 0.005’. Protein–protein interaction networks were analyzed with the IntAct database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/). The protein–protein interaction network map was generated with the Cytoscape software (Shannon et al., 2003). Protein quantitative ratio analysis Protein quantitative ratio was calculated as median of all unique peptides’ ratio. Student's t test was performed to investigate differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) effects. In order to meet the condition of student's t test, logarithmic transformation was performed to achieve the ratio of all peptides. Then, Student's t test was explored to calculate the p value.

### Publication Abstract
Cytosolic acetyl-CoA is an intermediate of the synthesis of most secondary metabolites and the source of acetyl for protein acetylation. The formation of cytosolic acetyl-CoA from citrate is catalysed by ATP-citrate lyase (ACL). However, the function of ACL in global metabolite synthesis and global protein acetylation is not well known. Here, four genes, PaACLA1, PaACLA2, PaACLB1, and PaACLB2, which encode the ACLA and ACLB subunits of ACL in Petunia axillaris, were identified as the same sequences in Petunia hybrida 'Ultra'. Silencing of PaACLA1-A2 and PaACLB1-B2 led to abnormal leaf and flower development, reduced total anthocyanin content, and accelerated flower senescence in petunia 'Ultra'. Metabolome and acetylome analysis revealed that PaACLB1-B2 silencing increased the content of many downstream metabolites of acetyl-CoA metabolism and the levels of acetylation of many proteins in petunia corollas. Mechanistically, the metabolic stress induced by reduction of acetyl-CoA in PaACL-silenced petunia corollas caused global and specific changes in the transcriptome, the proteome, and the acetylome, with the effect of maintaining metabolic homeostasis. In addition, the global proteome and acetylome were negatively correlated under acetyl-CoA deficiency. Together, our results suggest that ACL acts as an important metabolic regulator that maintains metabolic homeostasis by promoting changes in the transcriptome, proteome. and acetylome.

### Keywords
Petunia; acl; metabolome; acetylome

### Affiliations
South China Agricultural University
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China

### Submitter
Yixun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
South China Agricultural University


