### Accession
PXD002226

### Title
Caenorhabditis elegans mRBPome

### Description
This project aims to identify novel RNA binding proteins in the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. Since interactions between RNAs and proteins may be transient, these animals were crosslinked with UV light at 254 nm which promotes the covalent link between proteins and RNAs. After this, polyadenylated mRNAs were purified via oligo(dT) coupled to magentic beads under stringent conditions. Finally, samples were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. To rule out the possibility of RNA-independent binding we also analysed other samples: i) samples digested with RNase one; ii) samples where we performed competition assays with polyadenylic acid

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans cultures and apoptosis induction. N2 worms were cultured at 20 °C on NGM plates (0.3% NaCl, 1.7% agar, 0.25% peptone, 1 mM CaCl2, 5 µg/ml cholesterol, 1 mM MgSO4, 25 mM KPO4 buffer, pH 6.0) seeded with OP50 strain E.coli according to standard procedures (http://www.wormbook.org). Synchronization was reached by bleaching gravid adults. To induce germ cell death, 120,000 worms were synchronized in late L4 and treated with 5 mM of N-Nitroso-N-ethylurea (ENU, Sigma, N3385) in 4 ml M9 buffer (0.3% KH2PO4, 0.6% Na2HPO4, 0.5% NaCl, 1 mM MgSO4) in 15 ml falcon tubes for 4 h with constant rotation. In vivo capture of mRBPs in C. elegans. 120,000 worms were pelleted and washed 3 times in M9 buffer, followed by 15 min incubation with 15 ml M9 buffer in rotatory wheel to remove any potential bacterial trace. Then, worms were transferred to a NGM plate and exposed to 300 mJ/cm2 of 254 nm UV in a Stratalinker 1800 (Stratagene). Cells were collected in M9 buffer and resuspended in lysis buffer [100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.75% IGEPAL, 1 mM DTT, 20 U ml-1 DNase I (Promega), 100 U ml-1 RNasin (Promega), complete EDTA-free protease-inhibitor cocktail (Roche)]. The worms were frozen in liquid nitrogen, and lysate was prepared by grinding the frozen animals to a powder in a mortar filled with liquid nitrogen. The powder was thawed on ice, and the lysate including the fat layer was clarified at 14,000 g for 10 min and passed through a 0.45 μm filter (Millipore). For the controls, worm extracts were either treated with 100 U RNase ONE (Promega) or 20 mg of poly(A) (Sigma) was added for competition experiments. The poly(A) RNA and crosslinked RBPs were isolated from 1.25 ml (~12 mg) of mixed-stage and 1 ml (~10 mg) of synchronized L4 worm extracts in three sequential rounds as described for yeast with minor modification: the volumes of beads and buffers were up-scaled in relation to the amount of input extract; and 500 mM LiCl was used in wash buffers. We subjected 18 samples for MS analysis: three biological replicates of mixed staged worms as well as two RNase ONE treated and one poly(A) competitor control respectively; and three biological replicates of synchronized larvae stage 4 (L4) matched with three biological replicates of synchronized L4 treated with 5 mM ENU along with their corresponding three poly(A) competition controls .). 50 μl of the samples (~ 8-10 μg of protein) were run on a 4–12% NuPAGE Novex acrylamide gel (Life Sciences). The gel lane was cut into one slice and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit (Digilab UK). The resulting peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Dionex). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Dionex) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58min, 32-40% B over 3 min, 40-90% B over 1 min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.1 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250 °C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The Orbitrap was set to analyse the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 2,000 and the top twenty multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap. Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30s; exclusion list size, 500) was used. Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were as follows: normalized collision energy, 40%; activation q, 0.25; activation time 10 ms; and minimum ion selection intensity, 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the SwissProt SPECIES database using the Mascot algorithm (Version 2.4). Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy the false discovery rates (FDR) of 1%. To define a list of proteins referred to as the C. elegans  mRBPome, we initially considered the 1,016 proteins that were enriched in at least one of the nine samples with a FDR of at least 1% at the protein identification and quantification level. Of these, we selected 691 proteins that were identified with at least 2 peptides, and for which data was obtained in two out of nine samples, leaving 594 proteins. . 43 of these proteins were also seen in at least one of our 9 negative control samples, but they were not excluded from the mRBPome because the number of peptides for respective proteins was at least 2-fold lower in the negative controls compared to RBP samples.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are essential for post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Recent high-throughput screens have dramatically increased the number of experimentally identified RBPs; however, comprehensive identification of RBPs within living organisms is elusive. Here we describe the repertoire of 765 and 594 proteins that reproducibly interact with polyadenylated mRNAs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans, respectively. Furthermore, we report the differential association of mRNA-binding proteins (mRPBs) upon induction of apoptosis in C. elegans L4-stage larvae. Strikingly, most proteins composing mRBPomes, including components of early metabolic pathways and the proteasome, are evolutionarily conserved between yeast and C. elegans. We speculate, on the basis of our evidence that glycolytic enzymes bind distinct glycolytic mRNAs, that enzyme-mRNA interactions relate to an ancient mechanism for post-transcriptional coordination of metabolic pathways that perhaps was established during the transition from the early 'RNA world' to the 'protein world'.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Rbp, Lc-ms/ms, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Surrey
Dept. of Microbial and Cellular Sciences Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Surrey Stag Hill Campus 19 AX 01 Guildford, GU2 7XH U.K.

### Submitter
Ana Matia Gonzalez

### Lab Head
Dr André P. Gerber
Dept. of Microbial and Cellular Sciences Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences University of Surrey Stag Hill Campus 19 AX 01 Guildford, GU2 7XH U.K.


