### Accession
PXD003176

### Title
Unique insights in cervicovaginal Lactobacillus iners and L. crispatus proteome changes associated with microbiome dysbiosis

### Description
Cervicovaginal lavage (CVL)supernatants were heat inactivated for 30 minutes at 56°C before further processing. Total protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Sample protein content and volume were normalised with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Soluble proteins were precipitated using an equal volume of ice cold 30% (w/v) TCA in acetone and incubated at -20⁰C for 2 hours. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 minutes (4⁰C) to pellet proteins. Pellets were washed three times with ice cold acetone and allowed to air dry. Further sample processing was performed as previously described (Armstrong et al, 2014) with minor modifications. Briefly, protein pellets were resuspended in 25 mM ABC, 0.05%(w/v) rapigest (Waters), reduced and alkylated. Digestion was performed with proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1. Rapigest was precipitated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The gradient of the analytic column (nanoACQUITY UPLCTM BEH130 C18 15cm x 75µm, 1.7µm capillary column) consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 90 min then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 5min.

### Sample Protocol
Cervicovaginal lavage (CVL) supernatant protein content and volume were normalized before mass spectrometry analyses. Proteins were digesting with trypsin. Mass spectrometry was performed using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Runs were time aligned using default settings of Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +7. Peptide intensities were normalized against the reference run. Peptide identification was performed using Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK). Tandem mass spectrometry data were searched against three databases: a human proteins database (UniProt reviewed, version February 2014, containing 20,276 sequences) and two micro-organism protein databases that we compiled ourselves as follows: one database containing all NCBI reference sequences (March 2015) of L. iners, L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasseri, L. vaginalis and ‘Lactobacillus multispecies’, and one database containing sequences (reference sequences where possible; March 2013) of 23 non-Lactobacillus vaginal bacterial species, Trichomonas vaginalis, Candida albicans, and Candida glabrata . Search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da, false discovery rate <1%, and individual ion scores >13 (indicating identity or extensive homology at p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label free proteomics, Cervicovaginal microbiome dysbiosis

### Affiliations
Infection Biology
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool. Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK.

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool. Liverpool, L3 5RF, UK.


