### Accession
PXD030726

### Title
Arsenic toxicity is regulated by queuine availability and oxidation-induced reprogramming of the human tRNA epitranscriptome

### Description
Cells respond to environmental stress by regulating gene expression at the level of both transcription and translation. The ~50 modified ribonucleotides of the human epitranscriptome contribute to the latter, with mounting evidence that dynamic regulation of tRNA wobble modifications leads to selective translation of stress response proteins from codon-biased genes. Here we show that the response of human HepG2 cells to arsenite exposure is regulated by the availability of queuine, a micronutrient and essential precursor to the wobble modification queuosine (Q) on tRNAs reading GUN codons. Among oxidizing and alkylating agents at equitoxic concentrations, arsenite exposure caused an oxidant-specific increase in Q that correlated with up-regulation of proteins from codon-biased genes involved in energy metabolism. Limiting queuine increased arsenite-induced cell death, altered translation, increased reactive oxygen species levels, and caused mitochondrial dysfunction. In addition to revealing a new epitranscriptomic facet of arsenite toxicity and response, our results highlight the mechanistic links between environmental exposures, stress tolerance, and micronutrients.

### Sample Protocol
Biological triplicates of NaAsO2-exposed and control HepG2 cells were lysed on ice using cold urea lysis buffer (1 mL per 15 cm dish; 8 M urea and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, Na3VO4) by pipetting up and down. The protein concentration was subsequently determined using a BCA assay. In preparation for LC-MS, protein disulfides were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating at 56 °C for 1 h. Samples were cooled to 23 °C and alkylated using iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 55 mM for 1 h in the dark while rotating. Ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) (pH 8) was then added to the samples to dilute urea to a final concentration of <1 M. Protein was then digested using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme-to-protein ration of 1:50 by rotating overnight at ambient temperature. After digestion, formic acid was added to a final concentration of 5 % and samples were desalted using Pierce Peptide desalting spin columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted peptide solutions were divided into 400 µg aliquots, concentrated to ~1-5 µL, and frozen at -80 °C. Peptide digests were labeled with TMT-6plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) as follows: TMT-126 – control 1; TMT-127 – control 2; TMT-128 – control 3; TMT-129 – NaAsO2-treated 1; TMT-130 - NaAsO2-treated 2; TMT-131 - NaAsO2-treated 3. The samples were dissolved in 150 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 100 µl) by vortexing for 1 min and subsequent centrifugation for 1 min at 15,500 x g. Anhydrous acetonitrile (30 µl) was added to each TMT tube followed by vortexing for 1 min and centrifugation for 1 min at 15,500 x g. The reconstituted TMT reagents were then transferred to the appropriate sample tubes, vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged for 1 min at 15,500 x g. The samples were then incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After TMT-labelling the samples were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were resuspended in 50 μL 0.1% formic acid and 6 μL were loaded on a precolumn and separated by reverse-phase HPLC using an EASY-nLC1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) over 140 min at 200 nL/min with a gradient at 5 min from 10-30% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 100 min, followed by a 14 min gradient up to 40% B, 5 min to 60% B and 2 min to 100% B where the buffer was held for 10 min before a re-equilibration at 0% B. The eluant was directly injected into a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with electrospray ionization and operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS: resolution of 70,000 across 350 – 2000 m/z, AGC target at 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with an NCE of 32 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Resolution was set at 35,000, AGC 1e5, maximum IT 300 ms, isolation window 2 m/z, and minimum AGC target at 1e3.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) against the human SwissProt database. Mascot search parameters were: 15 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.015 Da fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 6plex modification of lysines and peptide N-termini; variable modifications were methionine oxidation, tyrosine phosphorylation, and serine/threonine phosphorylation. Only the peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the quantitative data analysis. TMT quantification was obtained using Proteome Discoverer and isotopically corrected as per manufacturer's instructions. The TMT values were normalized to the mean relative protein quantification ratios obtained from a total protein analysis. Without fractionation, we were able to identify 544 proteins, 286 of which satisfied the filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Cells respond to environmental stress by regulating gene expression at the level of both transcription and translation. The &#x223c;50 modified ribonucleotides of the human epitranscriptome contribute to the latter, with mounting evidence that dynamic regulation of transfer RNA (tRNA) wobble modifications leads to selective translation of stress response proteins from codon-biased genes. Here we show that the response of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells to arsenite exposure is regulated by the availability of queuine, a micronutrient and essential precursor to the wobble modification queuosine (Q) on tRNAs reading GUN codons. Among oxidizing and alkylating agents at equitoxic concentrations, arsenite exposure caused an oxidant-specific increase in Q that correlated with up-regulation of proteins from codon-biased genes involved in energy metabolism. Limiting queuine increased arsenite-induced cell death, altered translation, increased reactive oxygen species levels, and caused mitochondrial dysfunction. In addition to demonstrating an epitranscriptomic facet of arsenite toxicity and response, our results highlight the links between environmental exposures, stress tolerance, RNA modifications, and micronutrients.

### Keywords
Human hepg2 arsenic epitranascriptome proteome

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Peter Dedon

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Dedon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


