### Accession
PXD036521

### Title
Mouse peritoneal macrophages SWATH-MS.

### Description
Study that examines macrophage proteome changes after different preconditioning ('trained macrophages') prior to M1 / M2 activation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed by the FASP method and digested with LysC/trypsin. For spectral library preparation, 40 samples distributed across all experimental conditions were pooled and fractionated by HpH into 13 fractions. The library fractions and study samples were then analyzed by nano-LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo) coupled to TTOF 6600+ (Sciex) in DDA mode (library, 98 min gradient) and SWATH mode with 100 variable window setup (samples, 63 min gradient).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Spectronaut 16 (Biognosys) in library-based mode with default settings. Data were filtered by 1% FDR cutoff on the peptide and protein level, while quantification and interference correction were performed on the MS2 level. Deep Learning-Assisted iRT Regression was set as iRT reference strategy for RT to iRT calibration with minimum R2 set to 0.8. Data were normalized using a global regression strategy, while statistical testing of differential protein abundance was done using t-tests with multiple testing correction after Storey.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Macrophages, Swath-ms, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Maciej Suski
Chair of Pharmacology Faculty of Medicine Jagiellonian University Medical College


