### Accession
PXD022542

### Title
Identification of chromatin-associated proteins occupying the promoter region of CDKN1A

### Description
The p21 protein, encoded by CDKN1A, plays a vital role in the induction of senescence, and its transcriptional control by p53 tumour supressor is well-established. However, p21 can also be regulated in a p53-independent manner, by mechanisms that remain poorly understood. Therefore, we here used a chromatin-directed proteomic approach and identified ZNF84 as a novel regulator of p21 in various p53-deficient cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
PICh protocol with modifications was carried out based on Rafiee MR doctoral dissertation (Chapter 5). Briefly, cells were detached from culture dishes by rubber policeman and DNA-protein complexes were crosslinked by incubating cells in 1,5% formaldehyde in PBS for 14 minutes. Crosslinking was stopped by adding glycine solution to the final concentration of 120 mM and incubating for 5 minutes, then cells were spinned down, washed and counted. In total, 48 x106 cells were used per one experiment, of which 24x x106 cells were used for CDKN1A gene promoter isolation and the remaining 24x x106 for negative control. Cell pellet was suspended in IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton, 0.5% NP40) with protease inhibitors (Roche) and incubated for 15min in 37°C with RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with gentle agitation (400 rpm). After spinning down (2 minutes, 2000 x g), pellet was suspended in DNAzol (Thermo Fisher Scientific), briefly vortexed and centrifuged (2 minutes, 2000 x g, 4°C). Then DNAzol treatment procedure was repeated. The pellet, containing DNA with crosslinked proteins, was suspended in freshly-prepared 25mM NaOH and incubated in 37°C  for 30 minutes to facilitate denaturation. Then, the sample was sonicated using Bioruptor Pico device in dedicated tubes (Diagenode, Belgium) (5 cycles of 30 seconds ON and 30 seconds OFF, high mode) in order to obtain DNA fragments of mostly ~200-500 bp. Each sample (corresponding to 24 millions cells) was incubated with 6 pmol of either CDKN1A targeting  (“F2”, GTAAACCTTAGCCTGTTACTCTGAACAGGGTATGTGATCTGCCAGCAGAT) or reversed, negative control probe (TAGACGACCGTCTAGTGTATGGGACAAGTCTCATTGTCCGATTCCAAATG), denatured prior to use by incubation in 95°C and immediate cooling on ice. Then mixtures of samples with probes were transfered to 3k Amicon ultrafilteration columns and spun at 12000 x g in 4°C for 2.5 minutes to concentrate the sample. Contents of the Amicon inserts were then transfered to 30k Amicon columns and spun at 12000 x g in 4°C for 5 minutes. One volume of BW buffer (10mM TrisCl pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 0,1% Triton X100, 1M NaCl) was added to each insert to promote renaturation and spun again for 8 minutes in the same conditions. Another volume of BW buffer was added, samples were transferred to tubes, incubated for 5 min in 70°C, then left it in RT for 15min to slowly cool down. Samples were transfered to 15ml tubes, mixed with BW buffer to the final volume of 10ml and 100ul of streptavidin beads was added to each of the tubes. Samples were incubated in RT overnight on a rotator wheel. On the next day  the washes were performed using magnaetic stand: twice in 7ml of SDS Wash buff 1 (10mM Tris.Cl, 1mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 500mMNaCl), once in 5ml of SDS Wash buff 2 (10mM Tris.Cl, 1mM EDTA,, 1% SDS, 200mMNaCl) and twice in 7ml of  Isopropanol wash buff (20% 2-propanol  in water, 500mM NaCl). The beads were resuspended in 1,5ml of Isporopanol wash buffer, transferred to 2ml tube, separated on the magnetic stand, resuspended again in Isopropanol wash buffer (80ul) and transfered to PCR tubes. The liquid was discarded and the beads resuspended in 13ul digestion buffer (10mM TrisCl, 1mM EDTA, 0,1% SDS). In the pilot experiment at this point de-crossslinking was performed in order to perform RT-PCR aiming to evaluate the efficiency of isolation of the DNA fragment around CDKN1A TSS. To this end samples were incubated in 65°C overnight. For RT-PCR the following primers were used: CDKN1A_F CTTTCTGGCCGTCAGGAACA, CDKN1A_R ATCAGATCCCAGCCCTGTCGCA and control primers targeting unrelated FOSL1 gene (FOSL1_F TCCCACATCCAACTCCAGCAAC, FOSL1_R AAGCTGGCTCTACTGTGAAGCAC). After resuspending samples in digestion buffer, they were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis. To this end 1μl of 100mM DTT was added to the samples, which then were incubated at 95°C for 20 min. Afterwards iodoacetamide was added (1μl of 200mM IAA) and samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min. After addition of another 1μl of 100mM DTT, beads were removed and cells were incubated for 14 hours at 37°C with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) (3μl). Afterwards the samples were cleaned with the SP3 protocol prior to proteomic analysis. Single-run proteome analysis was performed on a Qexactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by Max Quant software using defult parameters.The proteinGroups.txt table was filtered to remove entries in ‘potential contaminants’ and ‘reverse' columns.

### Publication Abstract
The p21<sup>WAF1/Cip1</sup> protein, encoded by <i>CDKN1A</i>, plays a vital role in senescence, and its transcriptional control by the tumour suppressor p53 is well-established. However, p21 can also be regulated in a p53-independent manner, by mechanisms that still remain less understood. We aimed to expand the knowledge about p53-independent senescence by looking for novel players involved in <i>CDKN1A</i> regulation. We used a chromatin-directed proteomic approach and identified ZNF84 as a novel regulator of p21 in various p53-deficient cell lines treated with cytostatic dose of doxorubicin. Knock-down of ZNF84, an as-yet un-characterized protein, inhibited p21 gene and protein expression in response to doxorubicin, it attenuated senescence and was associated with enhanced proliferation, indicating that ZNF84-deficiency can favor senescence bypass. ZNF84 deficiency was also associated with transcriptomic changes in genes governing various cancer-relevant processes e.g., mitosis. In cells with ZNF84 knock-down we discovered significantly lower level of H2AX Ser139 phosphorylation (&#x3b3;H2AX), which is triggered by DNA double strand breaks. Intriguingly, we observed a reverse correlation between the level of ZNF84 expression and survival rate of colon cancer patients. In conclusion, ZNF84, whose function was previously not recognized, was identified here as a critical p53-independent regulator of senescence, opening possibilities for its targeting in novel therapies of p53-null cancers.

### Keywords
Znf84, Chromatin-associated proteins, Cdkn1a

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Medical Faculty, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Mahmoudreza Rafiee

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Medical Faculty, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany


