### Accession
PXD001190

### Title
Similar is not the same: Differences in the function of the (hemi-)cellulolytic regulator XlnR (Xlr1/Xyr1) in filamentous fungi

### Description
The transcriptional activator XlnR (Xlr1/Xyr1) is a major regulator in fungal xylan and cellulose degradation as well as in the utilization of d-xylose via the pentose catabolic pathway. XlnR homologs are commonly found in filamentous ascomycetes and often assumed to have the same function in different fungi. However, a comparison of the saprobe Aspergillus niger and the plant pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae showed different phenotypes for deletion strains of XlnR. In this study wild type and xlnR/xlr1/xyr1 mutants of five fungi were compared: Fusarium graminearum, M. oryzae, Trichoderma reesei, A. niger and Aspergillus nidulans. Growth profiling on relevant substrates and a detailed analysis of the secretome as well as extracellular enzyme activities demonstrated a common role of this regulator in activating genes encoding the main xylanolytic enzymes. However, large differences were found in the set of genes that is controlled by XlnR in the different species, resulting in the production of different extracellular enzyme spectra by these fungi. This comparison emphasizes the functional diversity of a fine-tuned (hemi-)cellulolytic regulatory system in filamentous fungi, which might be related to the adaptation of fungi to their specific biotopes.

### Sample Protocol
Reference and XlnR/Xlr1/Xyr1 deletion mutant strains of Magnaporthe oryzae, Fusarium graminearum, Trichoderma reesei, Aspergillus nidulans and Aspergillus niger were pre-grown in complete medium and transferred to minimal medium containing 1% beechwood xylan. Samples of culture supernatant were taken after 48 h, centrifuged and stored at -20. Samples were concentrated and separated 2-3 cm on a SDS-PAGE gel, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Each lane was cut into to two bands, proteins were reduced alkylated and digested. Sample were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Raw files corresponding to one sample were merged into one result file. Proteins found with a peptide-spectrum match (PSM) value >1 in both biological replicates were included in the analysis. Correction for differences in total production of proteins for each species was performed. Ratios (fold changes) of reference versus mutant strains were calculated and proteins were considered differential when the average ratio value was higher than 2 or lower than -2. Functional annotation was performed by mapping the proteins to CAZy databases (www.cazy.org). Information from genome annotations as well as manual curation and phylogenetic analysis was used to identify putative enzyme functions.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional activator XlnR (Xlr1/Xyr1) is a major regulator in fungal xylan and cellulose degradation as well as in the utilization of d-xylose via the pentose catabolic pathway. XlnR homologs are commonly found in filamentous ascomycetes and often assumed to have the same function in different fungi. However, a comparison of the saprobe Aspergillus niger and the plant pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae showed different phenotypes for deletion strains of XlnR. In this study wild type and xlnR/xlr1/xyr1 mutants of five fungi were compared: Fusarium graminearum, M. oryzae, Trichoderma reesei, A. niger and Aspergillus nidulans. Growth profiling on relevant substrates and a detailed analysis of the secretome as well as extracellular enzyme activities demonstrated a common role of this regulator in activating genes encoding the main xylanolytic enzymes. However, large differences were found in the set of genes that is controlled by XlnR in the different species, resulting in the production of different extracellular enzyme spectra by these fungi. This comparison emphasizes the functional diversity of a fine-tuned (hemi-)cellulolytic regulatory system in filamentous fungi, which might be related to the adaptation of fungi to their specific biotopes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001190.

### Keywords
Xylan degradation, Xlnr, Aspergillus, Xylanase regulator, Fusarium graminearum, Magnaporthe oryzae, Trichoderma reesei

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group
1CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Peter de Vries
1CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands


