### Accession
PXD008727

### Title
Nut interactome in round/elongating spermatids

### Description
NUT, nuclear protein in testis is the universal fusion partner of BRD4 in the highly aggressive NUT Midline Carcinoma (NMC), but its physiological function was unknown. Here we show that Nut is exclusively expressed in post-meiotic spermatogenic cells, at the time of genome-wide histone hyperacetylation. Inactivation of Nut induces a spermatogenesis arrest at the histone-to-protamine replacement stage, leading to male infertility. Subsequent molecular investigations show that Nut sustains global histone H4 hyperacetylation in post-meiotic cells. Additionally, Nut mediates a p300/CBP-dependent gene expression program and, by enhancing acetylation of H4 at both K5 and K8 sites, provides binding sites for the first bromodomain of Brdt, which drives histone removal. Nut’s major function is therefore to use the ubiquitous HATs p300/CBP to direct a cell-type specific histone hyperacetylation. Its ectopic activity in NMC recreates a forced p300-induced histone hyperacetylation / bromodomain binding loop that normally operates in post-meiotic spermatogenic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble extracts of enriched round/early elongating spermatids from WT (2 replicates) and Nut KO mice (5.106 cells) were obtained in LSBD500 (Hepes 50 mM pH7, MgCl2 3 mM, KCl 500 mM, Glycerol 20%, DTT 1mM, TSA 100ng/ml, Protease Cocktail Inhibitor). Extracts were immediately diluted with an equal volume of LSBD0 (no KCl) buffer and incubated with 2.5 micrograms of purified anti-Nut antibody for 16h at 4°C followed by incubation with protein A Sepharose beads for 6h at 4°C under rotation. After two washing steps in LSBD250 (250 mM KCl) buffer and two with PBS, DTT 1mM, TSA 100ng/ml, Protease Cocktail Inhibitor, proteins were eluted by boiling in Laemmli buffer. After separation in SDS-PAGE and staining with in Coomassie blue, each sample was cut in 6 pieces for MS-based analyses. Proteins were in-gel digested using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Casabona MG et al., Proteomics, 2013). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6.0) through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Mus musculus taxonomy, August 2017 version), classical contaminants database (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases. The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% as calculated on peptide scores by employing the reverse database strategy, minimum peptide score of 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group) before performing a compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear protein in testis (Nut) is a universal oncogenic driver in the highly aggressive NUT midline carcinoma, whose physiological function in male germ cells has been unclear. Here we show that expression of Nut is normally restricted to post-meiotic spermatogenic cells, where its presence triggers p300-dependent genome-wide histone H4 hyperacetylation, which is essential for the completion of histone-to-protamine exchange. Accordingly, the inactivation of Nut induces male sterility with spermatogenesis arrest at the histone-removal stage. Nut uses p300 and/or CBP to enhance acetylation of H4 at both K5 and K8, providing binding sites for the first bromodomain of Brdt, the testis-specific member of the BET family, which subsequently mediates genome-wide histone removal. Altogether, our data reveal the detailed molecular basis of the global histone hyperacetylation wave, which occurs before the final compaction of the male genome.

### Keywords
Spermiogenesis, Nanolc-ms/ms, Binding partners, Nut

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


