### Accession
PXD003106

### Title
Label-free proteome analysis of plasma from patients with breast cancer: stage-specific protein expression

### Description
The breast cancer presents one of the most commonly diagnosed types of cancer among women and its mortality rates remain very high probably due to the diagnosis of this disease is hampered by the lack of an accurate detection method. Since that change of protein expression as well modifications in its glycosylation have been frequently reported in cancer development, the aim of this work was study the differential expression as well modifications of glycosylation of proteins from plasma of women with breast cancer at three different stages of disease. A proteomics approach was used that depleted albumin and IgG from plasma followed by glycoprotein enrichment using immobilized Moraceae lectin (frutalin)-affinity chromatography and data-independent label-free mass spectrometric analysis. As result, 57,016 peptides and 4,175 proteins among all samples were identified. From this, forty proteins present in unbound (PI – proteins that not interacted with lectin) and bound (PII – proteins that interacted with lectin) fractions, were differentially expressed. High levels of apolipoprotein A-II were detected here that were elevated significantly in the early and advanced stages of the disease. Apolipoprotein C-III was detected in both fractions, and its level was increased slightly in the PI fraction of patients with early-stage breast cancer and expressed at higher levels in the PII fraction of patients with early and intermediate stages. Clusterin was present at higher levels in both fractions of patients with early and intermediate stages breast cancer. Our findings reveal a correlation between alterations in protein glycosylation, lipid metabolism, and the progression of breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were adjusted to the same protein concentration, dried, and digested with trypsin as described below. Each pooled sample (100 µg) was denatured, digested with trypsin, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. The samples were diluted in 50-mM ammonium bicarbonate, denatured in the presence of 0.2% RapiGEST SF at 80 °C for 15 min in a dry bath (Waters, Milford, USA), reduced with 100-mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 60 min followed, then alkylated with 300-mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The samples were digested with a modified trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of enzyme:protein = 1:100 (w/w) at 37 °C and incubated overnight. The reaction was stopped using 10 µl of 5% trifluoroacetic acid, mixed, incubated for 90 min at 37 °C, centrifuged, and the supernatant was transferred to a Waters Total Recovery vial (Waters). Tryptic peptides of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) were added to a final concentration of 50 fmol/µl as an internal standard to estimate the amount of each sample injected into the column for absolute quantification. The final protein concentration was approximately 1 µg/µl. Tryptic peptides were separated using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) equipped with an HSS T3 C18 reverse-phase column (1.8 µm, 75 µm × 20 mm) for 110 min using a 0% to 40% gradient (see below) for 90 min, 40% to 85% for 5 min, then the column was re-equilibrated for 15 min at 35 oC. The flow rate was 0.35 µl/min, and the mobile phases A and B contained 0.1 % formic acid in water and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. All samples (n = 10) were injected at least in triplicate for each condition.  Data-independent analysis (MSE) of tryptic peptides was performed using a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (nanoESI-Qq-oaTOF) (Waters, Manchester, UK). The instrument was operated in electrospray positive-ion mode nanoESI (+) and in “V” mode with a precursor double-charge resolution ≥10,000 full width at half maximum. The mass spectrometer data were acquired using a NanoLockSpray probe channel infusion of Glu-Fib ([Glu1] derived from fibrinopeptide B human) [M + 2H]2+ = 785.2486, and the MS/MS Glu-Fib fragments were used for final calibration of the instrument. All analyses were performed using a Glu-Fib mass channel at 30-s intervals. The exact mass retention times of nanoLC-MSE data were collected with alternative lower (3 eV) and elevated collision ramp energies (15–50 eV) applied to the argon collision cell using a scan time of 1.5 s with a 0.2-s interscan delay for each MS scan from m/z 50 to 2000. The RF offset (MS profiles) was adjusted such that LC/MS data were effectively acquired from m/z 300 to 2000, which ensured that any mass observed in the LC/MSE data < m/z 300 arose from dissociations in the collision cell.

### Data Protocol
LC/MSE data were processed and proteins were identified using ProteinLynxGlobalServer v.2.4 software (PLGS) with the UNIPROT (2014_09) reverse Homo sapiens annotated database. For searching spectra and the database, we used the default parameters of PLGS followed by a maximum of one missed trypsin-cleavage, a fixed carbamidomethyl modification and a variable oxidation modification. The absolute quantification of each run was calculated according to the three most intense peptides (label-free Hi3 method) using ADH peptides as internal standards. Further, for relative quantification of identified proteins from each expression group, we selected an internal common housekeeping protein alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (UNIPROT (AACT_HUMAN) and alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT_HUMAN) for normalizing expression levels, which was performed using PLGS ExpressionE software (Waters, UK). The average quantitative values of all samples was calculated, and the standard deviations (p < 0.05) calculated using ExpressionE software refer to the differences between biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed types of cancer among women. Breast cancer mortality rates remain high probably because its diagnosis is hampered by inaccurate detection methods. Since changes in protein expression as well as modifications in protein glycosylation have been frequently reported in cancer development, the aim of this work was to study the differential expression as well as modifications of glycosylation of proteins from plasma of women with breast cancer at different stages of disease (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) compared to healthy women (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;10). A proteomics approach was used that depleted albumin and IgG from plasma followed by glycoprotein enrichment using immobilized Moraceae lectin (frutalin)-affinity chromatography and data-independent label-free mass spectrometric analysis. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003106. As result, 57,016 peptides and 4,175 proteins among all samples were identified. From this, 40 proteins present in unbound (PI-proteins that did not interact with lectin) and bound (PII-proteins that interacted with lectin) fractions were differentially expressed. High levels of apolipoprotein A-II were detected here that were elevated significantly in the early and advanced stages of the disease. Apolipoprotein C-III was detected in both fractions, and its level was increased slightly in the PI fraction of patients with early-stage breast cancer and expressed at higher levels in the PII fraction of patients with early and intermediate stages. Clusterin was present at higher levels in both fractions of patients with early and intermediate stages of breast cancer. Our findings reveal a correlation between alterations in protein glycosylation, lipid metabolism, and the progression of breast cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-mse, Plasma, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Dr. professor
Center of Experimental Biology (Nubex), University of Fortaleza (UNIFOR), Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil

### Submitter
FREDERICO MORENO

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Cristina de Oliveira Monteiro-Moreira
Center of Experimental Biology (Nubex), University of Fortaleza (UNIFOR), Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil


