### Accession
PXD033615

### Title
Drosophila variant Polycomb complex subunits LC-MS

### Description
Our proteomics anaylsis in Drosophila embryos revealed alternative forms of PRC2 and several distinct variant PRC1 types which are similar to polycomb complexes in mammals

### Sample Protocol
12 to 24 hr old embryos of BioTAP and split-tag transgenic fly lines were collected and stored for up to 3 days at 4°C. Embryonic nuclei were cross-linked with 3% formaldehyde, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at −80°C. These steps were repeated until nuclear extracts from ∼40 g embryos were pooled. After sonication of extracts, the first purification step of interaction between IgG-agarose beads and Protein A was followed by the second step binding between Streptativdin-conjugated beads and biotin to purify the tagged bait proteins along with their protein interaction partners and associated genomic DNA. Bound protein complexes were trypsinized on bead and peptides were desalted with C18-STAGE tips (3M) for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Most LC-MS files were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. Peptide identifications were filtered with XCorr ≥ 2 for z = 2 and ΔCorr ≥ 0.1. In the case of l(3)73Ah pull-down and its input, we used 0.03 Da for a fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
While a significant fraction of topological materials has been characterized using symmetry requirements<sup>1-4</sup>, the past two years have witnessed the rise of novel multi-gap dependent topological states<sup>5-9</sup>, the properties of which go beyond these approaches and are yet to be fully explored. Although already of active interest at equilibrium<sup>10-15</sup>, we show that the combination of out-of-equilibrium processes and multi-gap topological insights galvanize a new direction within topological phases of matter. We show that periodic driving can induce anomalous multi-gap topological properties that have no static counterpart. In particular, we identify Floquet-induced non-Abelian braiding, which in turn leads to a phase characterized by an anomalous Euler class, being the prime example of a multi-gap topological invariant. Most strikingly, we also retrieve the first example of an 'anomalous Dirac string phase'. This gapped out-of-equilibrium phase features an unconventional Dirac string configuration that physically manifests itself via anomalous edge states on the boundary. Our results not only provide a stepping stone for the exploration of intrinsically dynamical and experimentally viable multi-gap topological phases, but also demonstrate periodic driving as a powerful way to observe these non-Abelian braiding processes notably in quantum simulators.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Prc2.2, Biotap-xl, Polycomb, Drosophila vprc1

### Affiliations
Brigham Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School
Department of Genetics & Medicine Brigham &Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Hyuckjoon Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Mitzi I. Kuroda
Department of Genetics & Medicine Brigham &Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School


