### Accession
PXD008083

### Title
Proteomic analyses identify ARH3 as a serine mono-ADP-ribosylhydrolase

### Description
ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational modification that exists in monomeric and polymeric forms. Whereas the writers (e.g. ARTD1/PARP1) and erasers (e.g. PARG, ARH3) of poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation) are relatively well described, the enzymes involved in mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) have been less well investigated. While erasers for the MARylation of glutamate/aspartate and arginine have been identified, the respective enzymes with specificity for serine are still missing. Here, we report that in vitro, ARH3 specifically binds and demodifies proteins and peptides that are MARylated. Molecular modeling and site-directed mutagenesis of ARH3 revealed that numerous residues are critical for both the mono- and the poly-ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity of ARH3. Notably, a mass spectrometry approach showed that ARH3-deficient MEFs are characterized by a specific increase in serine-ADP-ribosylation in vivo under untreated conditions as well as following hydrogen-peroxide stress. Together, our results establish ARH3 as a serine mono-ADP-ribosylhydrolase and as an important regulator of the basal and stress induced ADP-ribosylome.

### Sample Protocol
-Denaturing cell lysis -Af1521 enrichment of ADP-ribosylated peptides -PARG treatment to reduce poly-ADP-ribose to mono-ADP-ribose -as described in: Martello, R. et al. Proteome-wide identification of the endogenous ADP-ribosylome of mammalian cells and tissue. Nat Commun 7, 12917 (2016).

### Data Protocol
-Mascot, ADP-ribosylation(S,R,K,D,E) -as described in: Bilan, V., Leutert, M., Nanni, P., Panse, C. & Hottiger, M.O. Combining Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation and Electron-Transfer/Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation Fragmentation in a Product-Dependent Manner Confidently Assigns Proteomewide ADP-Ribose Acceptor Sites. Analytical chemistry 89, 1523-1530 (2017).

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational modification that exists in monomeric and polymeric forms. Whereas the writers (e.g. ARTD1/PARP1) and erasers (e.g. PARG, ARH3) of poly-ADP-ribosylation (PARylation) are relatively well described, the enzymes involved in mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) have been less well investigated. While erasers for the MARylation of glutamate/aspartate and arginine have been identified, the respective enzymes with specificity for serine were missing. Here we report that, in vitro, ARH3 specifically binds and demodifies proteins and peptides that are MARylated. Molecular modeling and site-directed mutagenesis of ARH3 revealed that numerous residues are critical for both the mono- and the poly-ADP-ribosylhydrolase activity of ARH3. Notably, a mass spectrometric approach showed that ARH3-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts are characterized by a specific increase in serine-ADP-ribosylation in vivo under untreated conditions as well as following hydrogen peroxide stress. Together, our results establish ARH3 as a serine mono-ADP-ribosylhydrolase and as an important regulator of the basal and stress-induced ADP-ribosylome.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Arh3, Parg, Mono-adp-ribosyl(-acceptor) hydrolases, Ethcd, Ptm, Hcd, Parp, Mef

### Affiliations
UZH
Departement of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Michael Hottiger

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Departement of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


