### Accession
PXD028124

### Title
Proteome dataset of liver from dairy cows experiencing negative or positive energy balance at early lactation

### Description
This article contains raw and processed data related to research published by Swartz et al. [1]. Proteomics data from liver of postpartum dairy cows were obtained by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry following protein extraction. Differential abundance between liver of cows experiencing either negative energy balance (NEB, n=6) or positive energy balance (PEB, n=4) at 17±3 DIM was quantified using MS1 intensity based label-free. There is a paucity of studies examining the associations of NEB with the liver proteome in early lactation dairy cows. Therefore, our objective was to characterize the differences in the liver proteome in periparturient dairy cows experiencing naturally occurring NEB compared to cows in PEB. In this study, multiparous Holstein dairy cows were milked either 2 or 3 times daily for the first 30 days in milk (DIM) to alter energy balance, and were classified retrospectively as NEB (n=18) or PEB (n=22). Liver biopsies were collected from 10 cows (n=5 from each milking frequency), that were retrospectively classified according to their energy balance (NEB, n=6; PEB, n=4). The liver proteome was characterized using label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. This novel dataset contains 2,741 proteins were identified, and 68 of those were differentially abundant between NEB and PEB (P≤0.05 and FC±1.5); these findings are discussed in our recent research article [1]. The present dataset of liver proteome can be used as either biological markers for disease or therapeutic targets to improve metabolic adaptations to lactation in postpartum dairy cattle.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations in samples were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay. Then, samples were subjected to tryptic digestion using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol. Samples were lysed in 1 mL SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris pH 7.6, DTT 100 mM) for 6 min at 95 °C, and cell debris was removed by centrifugation (16,000×g, 10 min). Following that, 50 μg of each sample was taken from the supernatant, mixed with 200 μL urea buffer I (8.0M urea in 0.1M Tris–HCl pH 8.0), loaded onto a 30-kDa molecular-weight-cutoff filter (vivacon 500, VN01H22, Sartorius, Göettingen, Germany) and then centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000×g. This was followed by one wash with urea buffer I and then centrifuged 30 min at 14,000×g. Iodoacetamide was added on the filter, incubated for 10 min and centrifuged 20 min at 14,000×g. Two washes were made using 200 μL ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (1 μg) in 40 μL ammonium bicarbonate was added, and samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Digested proteins were centrifuged, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid, and desalted in a solid-phase extraction column (Oasis HLB, Waters, Milford, MS, USA). Samples were stored at −80 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the bovine sequences from UniprotKB, version 2015_07, including both reviewed and unreviewed sequences and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, deamidation of N or Q. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.2.3. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the case versus control samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Bovine, Liver, Dairy

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences ARO, Volcani Center
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Maya Zachut
Institute of Animal Sciences ARO, Volcani Center


