### Accession
PXD020076

### Title
The spatial network of skeletal proteins in a stony coral

### Description
Coral skeletons are materials composed of inorganic aragonitic fibers, proteins, sugars and lipids that are highly organized to form a solid body upon which the animals live.  The skeleton contains more than 30 proteins, all of which are encoded in the animal genome and secreted during the biomineralization process. How these proteins are spatially related is unknown.  Using a combination of chemical crosslinking and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry, we identify, for the first time.  the spatial interactions of the skeletal proteins within a stony coral.  Our subsequent network analysis revealed several coral acid-rich proteins (CARPs) are invariably associated with carbonic anhydrase(s), alpha-collagen, cadherins and other calcium binding proteins. These interactions clearly show that protein-protein interactions in coral skeletons are highly coordinated and are key to understanding the formation and persistence of coral skeletons through time

### Sample Protocol
Study organism: Fragments of Stylophora pistillata were grown in an in-house 800-L flow-through system.   Cleaning coral skeleton: Skeletons were soaked overnight in 3% (wt/vol) sodium hypochlorite, copiously rinsed in deionized water, and dried overnight at 37°C. Dried skeletons were ground to <150 m diameter and then bleached, rinsed, and dried again. The dried powder was further ground to <60 m..  SOM extraction:  Cleaned skeletal powder for replicate samples was decalcified in 0.5 M EDTA at room temperature while shaking. Insoluble material was pelleted and washed in water followed by two washes in 10 mM PBS, pH 8.0, 10 M CaCl2; the final pellets were resuspended in 100 mM PBS, pH 8.0, 10 M CaCl2. The EDTA-soluble fractions were concentrated and washed twice in 10 mM PBS, pH 8.0, 10 M CaCl2 and then once in 100 mM PBS, pH 8.0, 10 M CaCl2 in 10 kDa Amicon centrifugal filter units (Millipore Sigma). At this stage samples were concentrated to 200 L and stored at -20 °C. Data from three biological replicates and up to three experimental replicates were pooled together to generate our final results.   Protein crosslinking:  Crosslinking reactions using BS3 (Proteochem) dissolved in mass spectrometry grade water were performed on the cleaned skeletal powders at 5 mM and 10 mM BS3 in PBS pH 7.4 for 1 h at room temperature.  The reaction was stopped using 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at room temperature. Pelleted skeleton containing cross-linked proteins were rinsed to remove any unreacted crosslinker before dissolution in EDTA as described above.

### Data Protocol
: Mass spectrometry generated files were first analyzed by MassMatrix version 2.4.2 using a ≤1% false discovery rate on a decoy search. Then, peptide matches from the first step are searched using MassMatrix’s search algorithm to identify the crosslinked peptides based on the BS3 range constraint (11.4 Å). In the third step, the quality of each peptide match is measured by a single p value calculated from probabilistic score obtained from the number of matched peak, a probabilistic score obtained from ion intensity distribution of matched peaks, and a probabilistic score obtained from consecutiveness of matched peaks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coral reefs, : biomineralization, Extracellular matrix (ecm) proteins, Bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (bs3)., Mass spectrometry, Protein crosslinking, Coral acid-rich proteins (carps)

### Affiliations
Distinguished Professor, Environmental Biophysics and Molecular Ecology lab, Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, New Jersey, U.S.A.
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Manjula Mummadisetti

### Lab Head
Dr Paul G. Falkowski
Distinguished Professor, Environmental Biophysics and Molecular Ecology lab, Department of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, New Jersey, U.S.A.


