### Accession
PXD001449

### Title
Validation of alternatively spliced protein isoforms in human mesenchymal stem cells

### Description
Alternative splicing of mRNA diversifies the function of human proteins, with tissue- and cell-specific protein isoforms being the most difficult to validate. While transcriptomic experiments enable the detection of many alternatively spliced transcripts, it is not known if these transcripts have protein-coding potential. We recently published the PG Nexus pipeline, which facilitates high confidence validation of exons and exon-exon junctions of spliced transcripts by integrating transcriptomics and proteomics data. Using the PG Nexus, we analyzed undifferentiated human mesenchymal stem cells and compared the number of protein isoforms validated using different protein sequence database, including public online databases and RNA-seq derived databases. With significant overlaps with other databases, we identified 8,011 exons and 3,824 splice junctions with the Ensembl database. Both exonic and junction peptides were important for protein isoform validation. The Ensembl database consistently outperformed the other data sources, but predicted open reading frames from RNA-seq derived transcripts were comparable, with only 6 less splice junctions validated. Using proteotypic and isoform-specific peptides, we validated 462 protein isoforms. This number increases to 1,083 if multiple proteotypic peptides per protein are included. Multiplexing proteotypic peptides in SRM assays or similar experiments will increase the confidence and coverage of protein isoform validation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
An immortalized bone marrow mesenchymal cell line was grown for 14 days with MEM media (Invitrogen, Taastrup, Denmark) and 10% FBS supplements (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min on rotation at 4°C and centrifuged for 20 min at 12,000 rpm. 25µg of protein lysate was added to a Nu-Page 4-12% BIS-TRIS gel (Life Technologies, Taastrup, Denmark) and run at 200V for 35mins. The gel was stained in Biosafe Comassie G-250 stain (Bio-Rad, Copenhagen, Denmark) and washed with distilled water for 1 h and 30 min respectively. Samples were run on 5 lanes and cut into 15 sections for analysis.  Polyacrylamide gel slices were destained, reduced and alkylated following the procedure described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). For each gel slice, 40 ng of trypsin (Promega) in 120µL of 0.1M NH4HCO3 was used for 16 h at 37°C. Solutions were then treated sequentially for 30min each with 80µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/67% (v/v) acetonitrile, and 80µL of 100% acetonitrile. Peptide solutions were then dried (Savant SPD1010, Thermofisher Scientific) before resuspending in 20µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Proteolytic peptide samples were separated by nano-LC using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands), and ionized using positive ion mode electrospray following experimental procedures described previously [37]. MS and MS/MS were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) hybrid linear ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Survey scans m/z 350–2000 were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution = 30 000 at m/z 400, with an initial accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions in the linear ion trap; lock mass applied to polycyclodimethylsiloxane background ions of exact m/z 445.1200 and 429.0887). MS/MS was performed via collision induced dissociation (CID) with an activation q = 0.25, an activation time of 30 ms, normalized collision energy of 30% and at a target value of 10 000 ions; fragment ions were mass analyzed in the linear ion trap. To increase the depth of proteome coverage, each proteolytic peptide sample was subjected to 5 rounds of LC-MS/MS. In the first round, up to the 15 most abundant ions (>5000 counts) with charge states of >+2 were sequentially isolated and fragmented via CID. The 4 subsequent rounds were performed using MS/MS exclusion lists, in conjunction with the data-dependent acquisition parameters employed in the first round. Specifically for each sample analysed in rounds 2 to 5 of LC-MS/MS, m/z values and retention times associated with ions selected for MS/MS in any previous round were incorporated into an MS/MS exclusion list; these ions were excluded from further MS/MS analysis using mass and retention time tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±1.5 min respectively. Day-to-day fluctuations in retention times were determined using a peptide standard mixture, and when necessary, these data were used to apply retention time corrections to exclusion lists.

### Publication Abstract
Human proteome analysis now requires an understanding of protein isoforms. We recently published the PG Nexus pipeline, which facilitates high confidence validation of exons and splice junctions by integrating genomics and proteomics data. Here we comprehensively explore how RNA-seq transcriptomics data, and proteomic analysis of the same sample, can identify protein isoforms. RNA-seq data from human mesenchymal (hMSC) stem cells were analyzed with our new TranscriptCoder tool to generate a database of protein isoform sequences. MS/MS data from matching hMSC samples were then matched against the TranscriptCoder-derived database, along with Ensembl and the neXtProt database. Querying the TranscriptCoder-derived or Ensembl database could unambiguously identify &#x223c;450 protein isoforms, with isoform-specific proteotypic peptides, including candidate hMSC-specific isoforms for the genes DPYSL2 and FXR1. Where isoform-specific peptides did not exist, groups of nonisoform-specific proteotypic peptides could specifically identify many isoforms. In both the above cases, isoforms will be detectable with targeted MS/MS assays. Unfortunately, our analysis also revealed that some isoforms will be difficult to identify unambiguously as they do not have peptides that are sufficiently distinguishing. We covisualize mRNA isoforms and peptides in a genome browser to illustrate the above situations. Mass spectrometry data is available via ProteomeXchange (PXD001449).

### Keywords
Human, Mesenchymal stem cell, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales

### Submitter
A Tay

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Wilkins
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales


