### Accession
PXD006408

### Title
Mus_Oocytes _LC-MS/MS -  Oocyte stage-specific effects of MTOR determine granulosa cell fate and oocyte quality in mice

### Description
A quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteome profiles of oocytes

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes for the experiment should be collected in  0.1% PVP-PBS and stored in -80 ℃.  After digestion of extracted proteins with trypsin, purified Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 6-plex-labelled peptides were pooled.All samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry, and raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5.

### Data Protocol
The spectra file were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5 to generate the result file.

### Publication Abstract
MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) is a widely recognized integrator of signals and pathways key for cellular metabolism, proliferation, and differentiation. Here we show that conditional knockout (cKO) of <i>Mtor</i> in either primordial or growing oocytes caused infertility but differentially affected oocyte quality, granulosa cell fate, and follicular development. cKO of <i>Mtor</i> in nongrowing primordial oocytes caused defective follicular development leading to progressive degeneration of oocytes and loss of granulosa cell identity coincident with the acquisition of immature Sertoli cell-like characteristics. Although <i>Mtor</i> was deleted at the primordial oocyte stage, DNA damage accumulated in oocytes during their later growth, and there was a marked alteration of the transcriptome in the few oocytes that achieved the fully grown stage. Although oocyte quality and fertility were also compromised when <i>Mtor</i> was deleted after oocytes had begun to grow, these occurred without overtly affecting folliculogenesis or the oocyte transcriptome. Nevertheless, there was a significant change in a cohort of proteins in mature oocytes. In particular, down-regulation of PRC1 (protein regulator of cytokinesis 1) impaired completion of the first meiotic division. Therefore, MTOR-dependent pathways in primordial or growing oocytes differentially affected downstream processes including follicular development, sex-specific identity of early granulosa cells, maintenance of oocyte genome integrity, oocyte gene expression, meiosis, and preimplantation developmental competence.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Quantitative, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 101 Longmian Rd, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 101 Longmian Rd, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China.


