### Accession
PXD034589

### Title
Lung tissue proteomic of Cynomolgus Macaques before and after exposure to SARS-CoV-2

### Description
In this study, we established the COVID-19 infection model in cynomolgus macaques (CMs), the differentially expressed proteins was analyzed in lung tissue collected from 3 untreated (NC1-3) and 4 CMs inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 for 7 days (nCoV1-4). The results showed the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) before and after exposure. The median CV values was analyzed to confirm the proteomics data with good degree of consistency and reproducibility (median<0.25). The histogram of GO terms enriched in biological process, cellular component and molecular function.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from the frozen lung samples by adding 4 times the volume of 10% TCA/acetone at -20°C and precipitating for more than 4 h. After centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min, the precipitate was collected and washed 2-3 times with pre-cooled acetone. Then, the pellet from each specimen was reconstituted with lysis buffer (8 M urea, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 1% protease inhibitor), and the protein concentration was determined by BCA kit. Equal amount of each protein sample was then enzymatically lysed and adjusted the volume to the same with the lysate. Then, samples were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated by 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 15 min in the dark, respectively. The alkylated sample was then transferred to an ultrafiltration tube and centrifuged at 12000 g at room temperature for 20 min, followed by replacement with 8 M urea and replacement buffer for 3 times. After that, protein samples were digested by incubation with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) for overnight. Finally, the fragmented peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 min at room temperature, and the peptides were recovered with ultrapure water once, and the two peptide solutions were combined. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% acetonitrile in water) and loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). The peptides were separated by eluting the column with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 35% in 14 min and reached up to 80% in 3 min, then keeping at 80% for 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were then subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro MS (Bruker Daltonics). The timsTOF Pro was operated in a parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode with the electrospray voltage 2.0 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, and the MS/MS scan ranged from 100 to 1700 m/z. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed by MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Macaca_mulatta_9544 database (45179 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in both First search and Main search, and fragment ions mass error tolerance was also set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) (strict) was adjusted to < 1%

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Cynomolgus macaques, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute

### Submitter
shengnan lv

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Liu
Changchun Veterinary Research Institute


