### Accession
PXD006002

### Title
Ambra1 spatially regulates Src activity and Src/FAK-mediated cancer cell invasion via trafficking networks

### Description
Here, using mouse squamous cell carcinoma cells, we report a completely new function for the autophagy protein Ambra1 as the first described ‘spatial rheostat’ controlling the Src/FAK pathway. Ambra1 regulates the targeting of active phospho-Src away from focal adhesions into autophagic structures that cancer cells use to survive adhesion stress. Ambra1 binds to both FAK and Src in cancer cells. When FAK is present, Ambra1 is recruited to focal adhesions, promoting FAK-regulated cancer cell direction-sensing and invasion. However, when Ambra1 cannot bind to FAK, abnormally high levels of phospho-Src and phospho-FAK accumulate at focal adhesions, positively regulating adhesion and invasive migration. Spatial control of active Src requires the trafficking proteins Dynactin 1 and IFITM3, which we identified as Ambra1 binding partners by interaction proteomics. We conclude that Ambra1 is a core component of an intracellular trafficking network linked to tight spatial control of active Src and FAK levels, and so crucially regulates their cancer-associated biological outputs.

### Sample Protocol
Squamous cell carcinoma FAK-WT and FAK-/- cells were lysed in RIPA buffer. For the immunoprecipitations, 2 mg cell lysates (samples in triplicates) were incubated with 2 μg of unconjugated antibodies (anti-Ambra1, anti-pSrc Y416 and rabbit-anti-IgG) or 10 μl of agarose-conjugated antibodies (FAK–agarose) at 4°C overnight with agitation. Unconjugated antibody samples were incubated with 20 μl of Protein A agarose for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed twice in lysis buffer and twice in PBS. Protein complexes were subjected to on-bead proteolytic digestion, followed by desalting and liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Label-free analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant. Peptide lists were searched against the mouse UniProtKB database and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in some LC runs were matched and transferred between runs. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, determined by searching a reversed database. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. Proteins matching to the reversed or common contaminants databases were omitted.

### Publication Abstract
Here, using mouse squamous cell carcinoma cells, we report a completely new function for the autophagy protein Ambra1 as the first described 'spatial rheostat' controlling the Src/FAK pathway. Ambra1 regulates the targeting of active phospho-Src away from focal adhesions into autophagic structures that cancer cells use to survive adhesion stress. Ambra1 binds to both FAK and Src in cancer cells. When FAK is present, Ambra1 is recruited to focal adhesions, promoting FAK-regulated cancer cell direction-sensing and invasion. However, when Ambra1 cannot bind to FAK, abnormally high levels of phospho-Src and phospho-FAK accumulate at focal adhesions, positively regulating adhesion and invasive migration. Spatial control of active Src requires the trafficking proteins Dynactin one and IFITM3, which we identified as Ambra1 binding partners by interaction proteomics. We conclude that Ambra1 is a core component of an intracellular trafficking network linked to tight spatial control of active Src and FAK levels, and so crucially regulates their cancer-associated biological outputs.

### Keywords
Fak, Dynactin 1, Ambra1, Src, Trafficking, Ifitm3, Invasion

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret C Frame
Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom


