### Accession
PXD037483

### Title
Proteomics analysis of plasma-derived exosomes unveils the aberrant complement and coagulation cascades in dermatomyositis/polymyositis

### Description
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis (DM/PM) are systemic autoimmune diseases characterized by proximal muscle weakness. The underlying pathogenetic mechanism of this disease remains elusive. Here, using proteomics analysis, a great overlap of differentially expressed plasma exosomal proteins involved in the complement and coagulation cascades pathway, including FGA, FGB, FGG, C1QB, C1QC and VWF, were identified in DM/PM patients versus HCs. Correlation analysis revealed that the expression levels of complement-associated proteins (C1QB and C1QC) correlated positively with CRP, ESR and platelet count. ROC curve analysis demonstrated that complement and coagulation cascade-associated proteins could be strong predictors for DM/PM. Additionally, we also identified several other proteins that were differentially expressed in DM and PM, respectively. And the selected candidate proteins were further validated by PRM. Together, these exosome-derived proteins might participate in microvascular damage in DM/PM through the activation of the complement and coagulation cascades pathway and function as biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of DM/PM.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome extraction For each sample, 1 ml plasma was taken from -80 °C. The plasma was centrifuged at 1500g for 10 minutes to remove cells and large particles and collect the supernatant. Then, the supernatant was re-centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min, and the collected supernatant is used to separate exosomes by a qEVS kit produced by iZON (70 nm original columns) according to the instructions.  In brief, the column was washed with eluting buffer (1x PBS),    and 500μL collected supernatant was loaded onto the qEV size exclusion columns. The first 3 ml was considered the void volume, and then PBS was added to the separation column to elute exosomes. After passing through the void volume, the collected 1.5mL liquid is high-purity exosomes. The isolated exosomes were identified by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and western blot, and the concentration was measured by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). Exosomes were lysed by ultrasonic lysis with a final concentration of 8 M urea and protease inhibitors, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit. LC–MS/MS analysis Exosomal proteins are digested into peptides by trypsin. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) of liquid chromatography and then separated using the NanoElute ultrahigh-performance liquid system. Mobile phase B was a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. Liquid gradient setting: 0-70 min, 6%~24% B; 70-84 min, 24%~35% B; 84-87 min, 35%~80% B; 87-90 min, 80% B, and the flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min. The peptides were separated by an ultrahigh-performance liquid system and then injected into the capillary ion source for ionization and then into the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set to 1.75 kV, and both the peptide precursor and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution TOF MS. The MS/MS scan range was 400 to 1500 m/z, and the data acquisition was performed in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states of 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The MS/MS data were processed by the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606 database (20366 entries) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. The method of cleavage enzyme was set to Trypsin/P; the number of missing cleavages was set to 2; the minimum peptide length peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues; the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 20 ppm in the main search; and the secondary fragment ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification, ['Acetyl (Protein N-term)', 'Oxidation (M)', 'Deamidation (NQ)'] was set as a variable modification. The quantitative method was set as LFQ, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. Data analysis The proteomics and PRM validation were performed with biological replicates. The relative quantitative value of each protein in the two comparison groups was tested by a T test, and a P value < 0.05 was taken to indicate statistical significance. Enrichment analysis for Gene Ontology was classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process (BP), cellular compartment (CC) and molecular function (MF). Enrichment analysis for KEGG was performed with the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) to identify enriched pathways. For each pathway, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. The GO and KEGG pathways were considered significant when the corrected P value was less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis (DM/PM) are systemic autoimmune diseases characterized by proximal muscle weakness. The underlying pathogenetic mechanism of this disease remains under-researched. Here, using proteomics analysis, a great overlap of differentially expressed plasma exosomal proteins involved in the complement and coagulation cascade pathway, including FGA, FGB, FGG, C1QB, C1QC, and VWF, was identified in DM/PM patients versus healthy controls. Correlation analysis showed that the expression levels of complement-associated proteins (C1QB and C1QC) correlated positively with CRP, ESR, and platelet count. ROC curve analysis demonstrated that complement and coagulation cascade-associated proteins could be strong predictors for DM/PM. In addition, we also identified several other proteins that were differentially expressed in DM and PM. The selected candidate proteins were further validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Together, our findings indicate that these exosome-derived proteins might participate in microvascular damage in DM/PM through the activation of the complement and coagulation cascade pathway and function as biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of DM/PM.

### Keywords
Dermatomyositis; polymyositis; exosomes; proteomics; complement and coagulation cascades.

### Affiliations
Shenzhen people's hospital 
Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen people's hospital,

### Submitter
Shuhui Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Shuhui Meng
Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Shenzhen people's hospital,


