### Accession
PXD039508

### Title
Single-cell division tracing and transcriptomics reveal cell types and differentiation paths in the regenerating lung

### Description
Understanding the molecular and cellular processes involved in lung epithelial regeneration may fuel the development of therapeutic approaches for lung diseases. We combine mouse models allowing diphtheria toxin-mediated damage of specific epithelial cell types and parallel GFP-labeling of functionally dividing cells with single-cell transcriptomics to characterize the regeneration of the distal lung. We uncover cell types, including Krt13+ basal and Krt15+ club cells, detect an intermediate cell state between basal and goblet cells, reveal goblet cells as actively dividing progenitor cells, and provide evidence that adventitial fibroblasts act as supporting cells in epithelial regeneration. We also show that diphtheria toxin-expressing cells can persist in the lung, express specific inflammatory factors, and transcriptionally resemble a previously undescribed population in the lungs of COVID-19 patients. Our study provides a comprehensive single-cell atlas of the distal lung that characterizes early transcriptional and cellular responses to concise epithelial injury, encompassing proliferation, differentiation, and cell-to-cell interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Subpopulations of healthy mouse lung mesenchymal cells were sorted based on surface markers and lysed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). SDS-PAGE gel-based protein purification was performed before trypsin digestion of the proteins on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG) according to an adapted protocol by Shevchenko et al. Peptides were separated on a cartridge trap column, packed with Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a three step, 180 min gradient from 3% to 40% ACN on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) carried out on a UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system. Eluting peptides were analyzed online by a coupled Q-Exactive-HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running in data depend acquisition mode, where one full scan at 120 k resolution (375-1500 m/z,3e6 AGC tagert, 54 ms maxIT) was followed by up to 35 MSMS scans at 15 k resolution (1e5 AGC tagert, 22 ms maxIT) of eluting peptides at an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a collision energy of 27% NCE. Unassigned and singly charged peptides were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec to prevent oversampling of same peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out with MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 using an organism-specific database extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings. Identified FDR cutoffs were 0.01 on peptide level and on protein level. The match between runs (MBR) option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z. The fractions were set in a way that MBR was only performed within each condition. LFQ quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm. A minimum of two quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification. Adapted from the Perseus recommendations, protein groups with a non-zero LFQ intensity in 70% of the samples of at least one of the conditions were used for statistics. LFQ values were normalized via variance stabilization normalization. Based on the Perseus recommendations, missing LFQ values being completely absent in one condition were imputed with random values drawn from a downshifted (2.2 standard deviation) and narrowed (0.3 standard deviation) intensity distribution of the individual samples. For missing LFQ values with no complete absence in one condition, the R package missForest v1.4 was used for imputation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal cells, Mouse, Adventitial fibroblasts, Lung, Alveolar fibroblasts

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Division of Applied Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

### Submitter
Claudia Scholl

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Scholl
Division of Applied Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.


