### Accession
PXD015298

### Title
Mapping phosphorylations on C-terminus of receptor

### Description
Characterization of interaction of a GPCR complex with beta-arrestin. The phosphorylation landscape of the receptor β2V2R's C-terminal is studied with LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion with trypsin, following extraction and analysis by Q-Exactive HF operating in postive mode. Samples were analyzed both in DDA mode and with PRM, targeting two petpides in both their nonphosphorylated and phosphorylated (1-4 phosphos) state.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant to identify phosphopeptides and calculate localization probalities. PRM data was analyzed with Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Classically, G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are thought to activate G protein from the plasma membrane and are subsequently desensitized by &#x3b2;-arrestin (&#x3b2;-arr). However, some GPCRs continue to signal through G protein from internalized compartments, mediated by a GPCR-G protein-&#x3b2;-arr 'megaplex'. Nevertheless, the molecular architecture of the megaplex remains unknown. Here, we present its cryo-electron microscopy structure, which shows simultaneous engagement of human G protein and bovine &#x3b2;-arr to the core and phosphorylated tail, respectively, of a single active human chimeric &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptor with the C-terminal tail of the arginine vasopressin type 2 receptor (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>V<sub>2</sub>R). All three components adopt their canonical active conformations, suggesting that a single megaplex GPCR is capable of simultaneously activating G protein and &#x3b2;-arr. Our findings provide a structural basis for GPCR-mediated sustained internalized G protein signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Gpcr complex, In-gel digestion, Arrestin

### Affiliations
Research Support Specialist
Proteomics Resource Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, 10065, NY, USA

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Molina
Proteomics Resource Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, 10065, NY, USA


