### Accession
PXD020909

### Title
USP22 controls necroptosis by regulating receptor interacting protein kinase 3 ubiquitination

### Description
Dynamic control of ubiquitination by deubiquitinating enzymes is essential for almost all biological processes. Ubiquitin-specific peptidase 22 (USP22) is part of the SAGA complex and catalyzes the removal of monoubiquitination from histone H2B, thereby regulating gene transcription. However, novel roles for USP22 have recently emerged, such as tumor development and cell death. Apart from apoptosis, the relevance of USP22 in other programmed cell death pathways still remains unclear. Here, we describe a novel role for USP22 in controlling necroptotic cell death in a variety of tumor cell lines. Loss of USP22 expression significantly delays TNF/Smac mimetic/zVAD.fmk (TBZ)-induced necroptosis, without affecting TNF-mediated NF-B activation or extrinsic apoptosis. Mass-spectrometric ubiquitin remnant profiling identified lysine 518 of Receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) as USP22-dependent ubiquitination target during necroptosis induction. Mutation of K518 in RIPK3 reduced necroptosisassociated RIPK3 ubiquitination and amplified necrosome formation and necroptotic cell death. In conclusion, we identify a novel role of USP22 in necroptosis and further elucidate the relevance of ubiquitination as crucial regulator of necroptotic cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently redissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Nielsen et al, 2008). Proteins were digested with endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5%, and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For ubiquitin remnant peptide enrichment, 20 mg of peptides were re-dissolved in IP buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride in 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2). Precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Modified peptides were enriched using 40 μl of di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were incubated with the antibodies for four hours at 4 °C on a rotation wheel. Beads were washed three times in ice-cold IP buffer followed by three washes in water. The enriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, fractionated in six fractions using micro-column-based strongcation exchange chromatography (SCX) (Weinert et al, 2013), and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Kelstrup et al, 2012; Michalski et al, 2011). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (15 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for two hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra (m/z 300-1,700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The ten most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al, 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states <+2, were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 88,473 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2016 using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008; Olsen et al, 2006). The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007). Di-glycine lysine-modified peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of six are reported and used for the analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic control of ubiquitination by deubiquitinating enzymes is essential for almost all biological processes. Ubiquitin-specific peptidase 22 (USP22) is part of the SAGA complex and catalyzes the removal of mono-ubiquitination from histones H2A and H2B, thereby regulating gene transcription. However, novel roles for USP22 have emerged recently, such as tumor development and cell death. Apart from apoptosis, the relevance of USP22 in other programmed cell death pathways still remains unclear. Here, we describe a novel role for USP22 in controlling necroptotic cell death in human tumor cell lines. Loss of USP22 expression significantly delays TNF&#x3b1;/Smac mimetic/zVAD.fmk (TBZ)-induced necroptosis, without affecting TNF&#x3b1;-mediated NF-&#x3ba;B activation or extrinsic apoptosis. Ubiquitin remnant profiling identified receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) lysines 42, 351, and 518 as novel, USP22-regulated ubiquitination sites during necroptosis. Importantly, mutation of RIPK3 K518 reduced necroptosis-associated RIPK3 ubiquitination and amplified necrosome formation and necroptotic cell death. In conclusion, we identify a novel role of USP22 in necroptosis and further elucidate the relevance of RIPK3 ubiquitination as crucial regulator of necroptotic cell death.

### Keywords
Cancer/mlkl/posttranslational modifications/ripk1/ubiquitin hydrolase

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Germany


