### Accession
PXD005894

### Title
Proteome changes as consequence of altered c-di-GMP metabolism in BCG

### Description
Pellicles, a type of biofilm, have gathered a renewed interest in the field of tuberculosis as a structure that mimics some characteristics occurring during M. tuberculosis infection, such as antibiotic recalcitrance and chronicity of infection. In other bacteria, it has been well documented that the second messenger c-di-GMP modulates the transition from planktonic cells to biofilm formation. In this work, we used two shotgun proteomics approaches, a label-free one to identify proteins present at two weeks of pellicle formation, and isobaric labeling to assess the differences in the proteome occurring among pellicles formed by three strains of M. bovis BCG: the parental strain (WT), a previously reported knock out in BCG1419c (∆PDE) gene and a new knock out in BCG1416c (∆DGC) gene, in order to unravel the role played by genes involved in the metabolism c-di-GMP during pellicle mode of growth. Our findings strongly suggest that in M. bovis BCG, c-di-GMP may positively correlate with enhanced tolerance to nitrosative stress and negatively to cell wall permeability, therefore suggesting hypothesis relevant for adaption to tolerance to several antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
∆DGC construction and complementation We constructed the ∆DGC strain by deleting the BCG1416c gene from M. bovis BCG Pasteur 1173P2. The entire open reading frame-ORF was replaced by homologous recombination with an allelic recombination substrate (3.7kb) constructed by cloning the adjacent regions of gene BCG1416c flanking the hyg gene in the plasmid pYUB854. Using oligonucleotides Rv1354c-ORF5 and Rv1354c-ORF3 we amplified the complete ORF and cloned it into pMV361 to restore a single copy of the gene into the deletion mutant. Pellicles were formed from stock cultures (OD600=0.6-0.8) diluted in Sauton’s media until a starting OD600 of 0.05. Pellicles were harvested and immediately frozen until protein extraction. Harvested pellicle was mixed with lysis buffer (10mM HEPES, 7% urea, 8% CHAPS, 2M thiourea, 10mM dithiotrietol and 1% PMFS) in a 2:1 (buffer:pellicle) v/v ratio. The resulting mixture was combined with glass beads and shaken 3X for 30 s in a BioSpec 3110BX Mini-BeadBeater-1. After centrifugation, the supernatant was added to 3 volumes of chilled acetone. The tubes were stored at -20°C overnight. The tubes were centrifuged at 12,000rpm at 4°C for 10min. The pellet was washed 4X with chilled absolute ethanol. The dried protein was resuspended in 10mM NH4HCO3 and quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay-BCA (Pierce).  Label free-characterization Lyophilized material from pellicle samples of WT, ΔPDE and ∆DGC (two replicates per strain from three independent experiments, N = 18) were resuspended in 10 mM NH4HCO3. The protein concentration was measured by BCA. 50µg of protein was digested. In solution digestion Sample was dried and resuspended in denaturing solution (6 M guanidine hydrochloride solution), reduced with 0.4M dithiothreitol (DTT) for 3 hours, and alkylated using 0.2 M iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. Samples were dialyzed into 10 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 4 °C using Slide-A-Lyzer® MINI Dialysis Units (Thermo Scientific). Then, samples were dried and digested with trypsin at a ratio 50:1 (sample:trypsin) in 10% of acetonitrile (ACN) overnight at 37 °C. Samples were desalted and purified using Omix C18 tips (Agilent) per manufacturer recommendation. Samples were eluted, dried and resuspended in solvent A (3% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) for LC-MS/MS analysis.  In Gel Digestion A 50 µg aliquot was dried and resuspended in 10 µl of 10 mM NH4HCO3 and proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Life Technologies) following manufacturer’s recommendations. The gels were stained with SimplyBlue Safe Stain (Invitrogen) for 1 hour. The entire contents of each lane was excised and cut into 1 mm3. After this, the gels were destained using 60% ACN at 37 °C for 30 min, twice. The samples were digested and processed as stated above. Labeling quantification  A total of 100 μg of protein for each sample was processed as described in the instructions of TMT sixplex Mass Tagging™ Kits and Reagents (Thermo Scientific™). Briefly, samples were denatured with 2% SDS, reduced with 200 mM TCEP and alkylated with 375 mM IAA. Proteins were precipitated with acetone at -20 °C overnight.  Protein pellets were resuspended in TEAB and digested with trypsin (1:40) overnight at 37 °C. This strategy was applied to each biological replicate and each set of replicates were pooled to create 6 final samples. The pooled samples were cleaned via Omix C18 tips and resuspended in solvent A prior to mass spectrometry.  Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Peptides were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (Thermo Scientific 5µm, 100 µm ID x 2cm C18 column).  Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (Thermo Scientific EASYnano-LC, 3µm, 75 µm ID x 100mm C18 column) using a 90 minute linear gradient from 5%-45% solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos) and spectra were collected over a m/z range of 400-2000 Da using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given peptide mass for 15s (exclusion duration of 60s).  Precursor measurements were acquired in the Orbitrap (30,000 resolution) while MS2 scans of the top ten most abundant peptides were fragmented with both CID (LTQ, normalized collision energy of 35kV) and HCD (Orbitrap, normalized collision energy of 45 kV and a resolution of 30K) for quality peptide fragmentation and liberation of the reporter ions, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based label-free peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm with <1% FDR. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides with less <1%FDR.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded Sep 22, 2014). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9). Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying a T-test with significance level p<0.05.  Similarly, Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.5.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantitate TMT Label Based Quantitation. peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability with <1%FDR by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability with <1%FDR and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA (Oberg, Ann L. et al., Journal of proteome research 7.1 (2008): 225–233). Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Of 7734 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 3195 (41%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying Mann-Whitney Test with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
Pellicles, a type of biofilm, have gathered a renewed interest in the field of tuberculosis as a structure that mimics some characteristics occurring during M. tuberculosis infection, such as antibiotic recalcitrance and chronicity of infection, and as a source of antigens for humoral response in infected guinea pigs. In other bacteria, it has been well documented that the second messenger c-di-GMP modulates the transition from planktonic cells to biofilm formation. In this work, we used the live vaccine Mycobacterium bovis BCG to determine whether deletion of genes involved in c-di-GMP metabolism would affect interaction with macrophages, capacity to induce immune response in a murine cell line and mice, and how the protein profile was modified when grown as surface pellicles. We found that deletion of the BCG1419c (Delta c-di-GMP phosphodiesterase, &#x394;PDE) gene, or deletion of the BCG1416c (Delta c-di-GMP diguanylate cyclase, &#x394;DGC) gene, altered production of TNF-&#x3b1;, IL-6, and IL-1&#x3b2;, in murine macrophages, and resulted in attenuation in intra-macrophage replication. Moreover, in addition to the improved immunogenicity of the BCG&#x394;BCG1419c mutant already reported, deletion of the BCG1416c gene leads to increased T CD4<sup>+</sup> and T CD8<sup>+</sup> activation. This correlated with protection versus lethality in mice infected with the highly virulent M. tuberculosis 5186 afforded by vaccination with all the tested BCG strains, and controlled the growth of the mildly virulent M. tuberculosis H37Rv in lungs by vaccination with BCG&#x394;BCG1419c during chronic late infection from 4 to 6&#x202f;months after challenge. Furthermore, when grown as surface pellicles, a condition used to manufacture BCG vaccine, in comparison to BCG wild type, both rBCGs changed expression of antigenic proteins such as DnaK, HbhA, PstS2, 35KDa antigen, GroEL2, as well as AcpM, a protein involved in synthesis of mycolic acids, molecules relevant to modulate inflammatory responses.

### Keywords
C-di-gmp, Mycobacteria, Pellicle, Proteome

### Affiliations
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Lab C210, Colorado State University, United States of America
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Gustavo Diaz

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Kruh-Garcia
Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Lab C210, Colorado State University, United States of America


