### Accession
PXD008292

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis revealed different regulatory mechanisms of Halothane and Rendement Napole genes in porcine muscle metabolism

### Description
Pigs with the Halothane (HAL) and Rendement Napole (RN) gene mutations have different muscle energy metabolism patterns. It is not completely understood how HAL and RN mutations regulate glucose and energy metabolism in muscle. In order to investigate potential signaling pathways and phosphorylation events regulating energy metabolism postmortem, muscle samples were collected at 45 min exsanguination from four genotypes of pigs: wildtype, RN, HAL and RN-HAL double mutations and subjected to quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis. The study led to the identification of 932 proteins from the non-modified peptide fractions and 1885 phosphoproteins with 9619 phosphorylation sites from the enriched phosphopeptide fractions. Among them, 128 proteins at total protein level and 323 phosphosites from 91 phosphoproteins were significantly regulated in at least one genotype compared to other genotypes. The quantitative analysis revealed that the RN mutation mainly affected the protein expression abundance in muscle. Specifically, it greatly increased the abundance of proteins related to mitochondrial respiratory chain and energy metabolism, thereby enhancing the muscle oxidative capacity. The higher content of UGP2 in RN mutant animals may contribute to high glycogen storage. However, presence of the HAL mutation resulted in major effects on the regulation of protein phosphorylation. Most affected phosphoproteins in HAL mutant related muscle were determined with up-regulated phosphorylation sites, and related to calcium signaling, muscle contraction, glycogen, glucose and energy metabolism, and cellular stress. The increase phosphorylation of CAMK2 was detected in HAL mutation, it may lead to activation of CAMK2 as well as its downstream signaling cascades. The phosphorylation changes may contribute to accelerated glyocogen metabolism, acute stress response, muscle fiber hypertrophy and hyperacute rigor mortis in HAL mutant animals. Our findings identify a set of protein targets in two disparate pig mutations known to alter muscle energy metabolism and provide additional insight into the regulatory mechanisms underlying postmortem energy metabolism in pig muscle.

### Sample Protocol
In order to compare and investigate the difference of protein abundance and phosphorylation in porcine muscle from these four genotypes of pigs, the LC–MS/MS based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic strategies were applied in this work (Figure 2). The schematic overview of the experiment was depicted in Figure 2. For each genotype, muscle samples were collected at 45 min PM from three pigs, the genotype, weight, gender and determined metabolic parameters for each animal were presented in Supplemental table 1. After protein extraction and in-solution digestion, 100 ug peptides from each genotype were subjected to iTRAQ labeling (normal/control, iTRAQ-114; RN mutant, iTRAQ-115; HAL mutant, iTRAQ-116 and RN/HAL double mutant, iTRAQ-117), and then the four differentially labeled samples were equally mixed together. The experiment had three biological replicates. Afterward, the peptide mixtures were subjected to the TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides, and both phosphopeptides and non-modified peptides were analyzed with LC–MS/MS using Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subjected to database searching using both an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and the embedded Sequest HT server with the following criteria: database, SwissProt  Sus Scrofa (pig) protein database (updated to 01-11-2014); enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications included oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N-terminus and lysine(K) ), carbamidomethyl for Cys, deamidation for Asn and Gln, phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, and Tyr), iTRAQ were also included as a variable modification. The MS and MS/MS results were searched with a precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm and a MS/MS mass tolerance at 0.05 Da. The results were filtered in Proteome Discoverer with the integrated Percolator algorithm [31] to ensure the false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.01. Only peptides identified with high confidence, first rank, Mascot score higher than 18 and passed the default score versus charge state for Sequest HT were accepted. Phosphosite localization probability was determined using the PhosphoRS probability algorithm [32]. Peptides with different amino acid sequences or modifications were considered unique. The generated quantitative data was further filtered by removing the data with missing channels, the redundant data, and the un-unique peptides shared by multiple proteins. Then the data was subject to statistical analysis. For the datasets of non-modified peptides, the quantification was performed at protein level. the log2-values of the measured precursor areas were normalized by the median values across an entire labelling experiment to correct for protein abundance variation. Peptides from same proteins were merged with the R Rollup function (http://www.omics.pnl.gov) allowing for one-hit-wonders and using the mean of the normalized areas for each peptide. Then the mean over the experimental conditions for each protein in each replicate was subtracted, and data from the three replicates were merged. Significant up/down regulated proteins were defined as proteins with minimum 4/3 fold change, quantified in at least two of the replicates and with a standard deviation lower than the 2×median of all the standard deviations of proteins as previously described [30].  For the datasets of phosphopeptides, after normalization at peptide level, they were further normalized against the abundance of corresponding protein for each phosphopeptides by minus the normalized value of protein based on the protein quantitative information from non-modified peptides, this step was essential to remove the effects caused by protein expression difference. Detection of differentially regulated phosphopeptides was carried out applying a combination of limma and rank tests [33]. Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple test [34]. Statistical methods were described in more detail in [35]. Perseus was also used to visualize the statistical results [36]. A very stringent criteria was used to define phosphopeptides with significant regulation, which should be observed in at least two replicates, with a p-value ˂ 0.05, and showed no less than 1.5 fold change in one condition compared to the other three conditions. We applied fuzzy c-means clustering analysis [37] of phosphopeptides.  Annotation and classification of the identified proteins were facilitated by using Protein Center (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The detail procedures were performed as described previously [25]. Motif analysis of PTM sites was done using Motif-X online software with possibility threshold of P < 10−6 and relative occurrence rate threshold of 3% (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/motif-x.html). Network analysis was performed using Cytoscape (3.4.0 version) and related Apps, including clusterMarker and StringApp (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/stringapp) with a high confidence setting (0.7), where confident associations were shown with connecting lines. The sub-clusters were generated using Markov CLustering Algorithm (MCL) in clusterMarker app. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was used to reveal the protein interaction and signaling pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Pigs with the Halothane (HAL) or Rendement Napole (RN) gene mutations demonstrate abnormal muscle energy metabolism patterns and produce meat with poor quality, classified as pale, soft, and exudative (PSE) meat, but it is not well understood how HAL and RN mutations regulate glucose and energy metabolism in porcine muscle. To investigate the potential signaling pathways and phosphorylation events related to these mutations, muscle samples were collected from four genotypes of pigs, wild type, RN, HAL, and RN-HAL double mutations, and subjected to quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis using the TiO<sub>2</sub> enrichment strategy. The study led to the identification of 932 proteins from the nonmodified peptide fractions and 1885 phosphoproteins with 9619 phosphorylation sites from the enriched fractions. Among them, 128 proteins at total protein level and 323 phosphosites from 91 phosphoproteins were significantly regulated in mutant genotypes. The quantitative analysis revealed that the RN mutation mainly affected the protein expression abundance in muscle. Specifically, high expression was observed for proteins related to mitochondrial respiratory chain and energy metabolism, thereby enhancing the muscle oxidative capacity. The high content of UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase 2 (UGP2) in RN mutant animals may contribute to high glycogen storage. However, the HAL mutation mainly contributes to the up-regulation of phosphorylation in proteins related to calcium signaling, muscle contraction, glycogen, glucose, and energy metabolism, and cellular stress. The increased phosphorylation of Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2) in HAL mutation may act as a key regulator in these processes of muscle. Our findings indicate the different regulatory mechanisms of RN and HAL mutations in relation to porcine muscle energy metabolism and meat quality.

### Keywords
Porcine muscle; rn and hal mutation; muscle metabolism; glycogen metabolism; camk2; phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Rolighedsvej 30, DK-1958, Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

### Submitter
Honggang Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Rene Lametsch
Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Rolighedsvej 30, DK-1958, Frederiksberg C, Denmark.


