### Accession
PXD012800

### Title
On-chip AP-MS: Interaction proteomics on a microfluidics platform

### Description
Essentially all cellular processes are orchestrated by protein-protein interactions (PPIs). In recent years, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) has been the preferred method to identify cellular PPIs. Here we present a microfluidics-based (AP-MS) workflow to identify PPIs using minute amounts of input material. The use of this automated platform allowed us to identify the human cohesin, CCC and Mediator complex from as little as 4 micrograms of input lysate, representing a 50─100-fold downscaling compared to regular microcentrifuge tube-based protocols. We show that our platform can be used to affinity purify tagged baits as well as native cellular proteins and their interaction partners. As such, our method holds great promise for future biological and clinical AP-MS applications in which sample amounts are limited.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed in PBS and harvested. Cell pellets were washed in PBS and then resuspended in lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol, EDTA-free complete proteins inhibitors (Roche), 1% NP-40, and 1 mM DTT. Lysates were incubated at 4°C for two hours on a rotating wheel and subsequently centrifuged for 30 minutes at 4,000 x g at 4°C. Samples were then used for tube-based or on-chip AP-MS using GFP-nanobody beads GFP-Trap®_A beads (ChromoTek) or in house produced Lag16-2K/R. IP were performed as in Makowski, M. M., Willems, E., Jansen, P. W. T. C., & Vermeulen, M. (2016). Cross-linking immunoprecipitation-MS (xIP-MS): Topological Analysis of Chromatin-associated Protein Complexes Using Single Affinity Purification . Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP, 15(3), 854–865. After the pull-down the samples were on-bead digested. Overnight digestion solutions were acidified by adding 1 µL of 10% formic acid first and diluted with additional 25 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Samples were evaporated on a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf) using the program V-AQ for 60-100 minutes and were reconstituted to a 7─8 µL volume with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were either directly measured with a single injection of 5 µL on the mass spectrometer or stored at ─80 °C until analysis by LC-MS/MS. Chromatography separations and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC™ 1000 coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using an organic gradient obtained by mixing Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in LC grade water) and Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in LC grade water). The linear gradient was formed over 33 minutes starting from 15% Buffer B and ending to 35% Buffer B. The reverse phase column was then washed with 60% and 90% Buffer B for 5 minutes each buffer and re-equilibrated to 5% Buffer B for a total acquisition time of 65 minutes. The flow rate was 200 nL/minutes. Analytical columns for reverse phase separations were packed in house with C18 material [ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ particle size 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany)] in a 300 mm long column spray emitter by means of an air-pressure pump (Next Advance, Inc.). Emitters were 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID with an opening of 8±1 μm (New Objectives, Inc.). Data were acquired in data-dependent top speed mode excluding +1 and peptides with unassigned charge and including charges up to 7+. Peptide full spectra were recorded from 300 to 1600 m/z on the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at 120k resolution in profile mode, using an AGC target of 2E5, a maximum injection time of 50 milliseconds, and an exclusion time of 1 minute. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap mass analyzer using CID for fragmentation with a collision energy at 35%, a stepped collision energy of 5; resolution was set to 30k, AGC target to 1.5E4, scan rate to rapid, and intensity threshold to 5E4.

### Data Protocol
Data searches were run against SwissProt human database (comprising reviewed entries only and downloaded in June 2017) using standard settings on MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.0). Briefly, 1% FDR was applied to the match of PSM and assembly of proteins. Mass tolerance for correct matches was set to 20 ppm for FTMS analyzer and 0.5 Da for ITMS MS/MS matches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was included as fixed modification while acetyl at protein terminus and methionine oxidation were considered variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin enzyme cuts and peptides length was set between 1 and 7 aminoacids. We performed LFQ quantification with option match between runs and iBAQ quantification of proteins. Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) was used to perform filtering, imputation of missing values from a normal distribution, and permutation-based FDR corrected t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Essentially all cellular processes are orchestrated by protein-protein interactions (PPIs). In recent years, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) has been the preferred method to identify cellular PPIs. Here we present a microfluidic-based AP-MS workflow, called on-chip AP-MS, to identify PPIs using minute amounts of input material. By using this automated platform we purify the human Cohesin, CCC and Mediator complexes from as little as 4 micrograms of input lysate, representing a 50&#x2500;100-fold downscaling compared to regular microcentrifuge tube-based protocols. We show that our platform can be used to affinity purify tagged baits as well as native cellular proteins and their interaction partners. As such, our method holds great promise for future biological and clinical AP-MS applications in which sample amounts are limited.

### Keywords
Low input, Ap-ms, Interaction proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Cristina Furlan

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


