### Accession
PXD025275

### Title
A dual RNA regulator balancing carbon uptake and 1 central metabolism in Vibrio cholerae

### Description
Bacterial small RNAs (sRNAs) are well-known to modulate gene expression by base-pairing with trans-coded transcripts and are typically considered to be non-coding. However, several sRNAs have been reported to also contain an open reading frame and thus are considered  dual regulators. In this study, we discovered a dual regulator from Vibrio cholerae, called VcdRP, harboring a 29 amino acid protein (VcdP), as well as a base-pairing sequence. Using a forward genetic screen, we identified VcdRP as a repressor of cholera toxin production and we link this phenotype to inhibition of carbon transport by the base-pairing segment of the regulator. By contrast, we demonstrate that VcdP acts downstream of carbon transport by binding to citrate synthase (GltA), the first enzyme of the citric cycle. Interaction of VcdP with GltA results in increased enzyme activity and together VcdR and VcdP reroute carbon metabolism. We further show that transcription of vcdRP is repressed by CRP allowing us to provide a model in which VcdRP employs two different molecular mechanisms to synchronize sugar uptake and metabolism in V. cholerae.

### Sample Protocol
MS analysis was performed on V. cholerae wild‐type (KPS‐0014) carrying either pCtrl (untagged control) or pEVS143-vcdP-SPA that were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag antibody as described above. The samples were processed using the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (Hughes, 2019). Briefly, the samples were reduced with Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, alkylated with chloroacetamide and subsequently precipitated onto magnetic beads (SpeedBead magnetic carboxylate) using ethanol. Following two wash steps, the bead-associated precipitated proteins were digested in solution with trypsin. The peptides were separated by chromatography on a Dionex U3000 nanoHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm) coupled to a QExactive Plus Orbitrap MS (Thermo, Bremen, Germany)

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (v2.4.0, Thermo, Germany). The files were searched individually using SequestHT algorithm node against a protein database containing genome‐derived proteins of Vibrio cholerae serotype O1 (strain ATCC 39315 / El Tor Inaba N16961- access:2018.06.26), with VcdP-SPA and mouse IgG appended along with the cRAP list of common laboratory contaminants. Searches were performed with semi-trypsin specificity with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages. The results were filtered using the following criteria: protein level FDR <5%, at least two high confidence peptides (FDR <1%) of which at least one is unique and peptide assigned as high confidence with an FDR ≤ 1%

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small protein, Vibrio cholerae, Dual function rna regulator

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin  Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr.Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomics & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin  Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 24105 Kiel, Germany


