### Accession
PXD003451

### Title
Reduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling restores the dynamic properties of key stress granule proteins during aging

### Description
Low complexity “prion-like” domains in key RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) mediate the reversible assembly of RNA granules. Individual RBPs harboring these domains have been linked to specific neurodegenerative diseases. Although their aggregation in neurodegeneration has been extensively characterized, it remains unknown how the process of aging disturbs RBP dynamics. We show that a wide variety of RNA granule components including stress granule proteins become highly insoluble with age in C. elegans and that reduced insulin/IGF-1 daf-2 receptor signaling efficiently prevents their aggregation. Importantly, stress granule-related RBP aggregates are associated with reduced fitness. We show that HSF-1 is a main regulator of stress granule-related RBP aggregation in both young and aged animals. During aging, increasing DAF-16 activity restores dynamic stress granule-related RBPs partly by reducing the build-up of other misfolded proteins that seed RBP aggregation. Longevity-associated mechanisms found to maintain dynamic RBPs during aging could be relevant for neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate highly insoluble proteins, we performed a sequential extraction as previously described (David et al, 2010). Briefly, cytosolic proteins were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g after solubilization in RAB buffer (0.1 M MES, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM MgSO4, 0.75 M NaCl, 0.02 M NaF, 1 mM PMSF, Roche Complete Inhibitors 2x, DNaseI and RNaseI). The pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 0.5% SDO, 1% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF, Roche Complete Inhibitors 1×) and centrifuged at 20,000 g to remove membrane proteins. This final pellet containing highly insoluble proteins was resuspended in 70% formic acid and centrifuged at 50,000 g to remove worm cuticlar debris. Proteins in the highly insoluble fraction were further processed for mass spectrometry analysis as previously described (David et al, 2010). Briefly, after dialysis, proteins were solubilized in final concentration of 8M Urea. After alkylation and reduction, samples were diluted in 150mM ammonium bicarbonate to obtain a final 2M Urea concentration. Proteins were digested by modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 5% w/w overnight at 37°C. Peptides from young and aged animals on control and daf-2 RNAi were labelled by 4-plex iTRAQ following manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems, Pleasanton, CA, USA). We checked that over 95% of the peptides were labelled with iTRAQ by analysing the sample on a 1-h LC-MS/MS run and searching the spectra, allowing iTRAQ as a variable modification. In order to decrease sample complexity and improve identification, peptides were separated by SCX fractionation and desalted. A total of 46 SCX fractions were collected. Individual SCX fractions were separated on a reverse phase C18 (LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) and the LC eluate was coupled to a micro-ionspray source attached to a QSTAR Pulsar Elite mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) (Trinidad et al, 2013). SCX fractions 1-20 contained relatively few peptides and were analysed by a single LC-MS analysis. To increase the coverage of peptides fractions 21-46 were analysed twice by LC-MS/MS. In the first analysis, only those ions with m/z between 375 and 600 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS, while in the second analysis, this range was between 590 and 1200 Da.  MS/MS spectra were analysed as previously described (David et al, 2010). We kept peptides that had at least one iTRAQ peak area over 25 counts. For proteins identified by one single peptide, peptides with an expectation value larger than 1E-3 were eliminated. For proteins identified by two or more peptides, we discarded peptides with an expectation value larger than 1E-2. The false positive rates were estimated by conducting the search using a concatenated database containing the original UniProt database as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. Using this stringent cut-off, we did not identify any decoy database proteins, indicating that the protein false discovery rate was much less than 1%. In the insoluble fractions, we detected a total of 438 proteins comparing extracts from day16/day3 old animals, 470 proteins comparing extracts from day18/day3 old animals and 492 proteins comparing extracts from day14/day3 old animals. To determine the relative level of each protein, we averaged the ratio of (peak area of sample of interest)/ (sum of peak areas from all four conditions) for all peptides identified for each protein. To measure the fold change in levels of aggregation-prone proteins with age, we divided the ratio for aged control or aged daf-2(-) samples by the respective ratio for young control or young daf-2(-) samples. For further data analysis, we kept only proteins present in all three biological replicates and averaged their fold changes.

### Data Protocol
Data were visualized using Analyst QS software (version 1.1), and MS/MS centroid peak lists were generated using the Mascot.dll script (version 1.6b18). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the entire UniprotKB C. elegans database release 15.9 (downloaded 2009.10.13) using Protein Prospector v.5.3.2. Initial peptide tolerances in MS and MS/MS modes were 200 ppm and 0.2 daltons, respectively. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethylation and iTRAQ labeling of lysine residues were searched as fixed modifications. The peptide amino termini were fixed as either iTRAQ-modified or protein N-terminal acetylated. We allowed the following variable modifications: methionineoxidation, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation, N-terminal pyro-glutamate, and N-terminal methionine loss with or without acetylation. Other than N-terminal or methionine oxidation, we did not search specifically for oxidation of other amino acids, glycation, or nitrosylation. Therefore it is possible that we are missing some damaged peptides in our analysis, but the detection of the non-modified peptide as well as other peptides from the same protein should allow us to identify the majority of potentially damaged proteins. All high scoring peptide matches (expectation value,0.01) from individual LC-MS/MS runs were then used to internally recalibrate MS parent ion m/z values within that run. Recalibrated data files were then searched with a peptide tolerance in MS mode of 50 ppm. For each peptide MS/MS spectra, the raw area of the peaks at m/z 114.1, 115.1, 116.1, and 117.1 (60.1 m/z) was determined by Protein Prospector from the raw data files. We kept peptides that had at least one iTRAQ peak area over 25 counts. For proteins identified by one single peptide, peptides with an expectation value larger than 1E-3 were eliminated. For proteins identified by two or more peptides, we discarded peptides with an expectation value larger than 1E-2. The false positive rates were estimated by conducting the search using a concatenated database containing the original UniProt database as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. Using this stringent cut-off, we did not identify any decoy database proteins, indicating that the protein false discovery rate was much less than 1%. In the insoluble fractions, we detected a total of 438 proteins comparing extracts from day16/day3 old animals, 470 proteins comparing extracts from day18/day3 old animals and 492 proteins comparing extracts from day14/day3 old animals. To determine the relative level of each protein, we averaged the ratio of (peak area of sample of interest)/ (sum of peak areas from all four conditions) for all peptides identified for each protein. To measure the fold change in levels of aggregation-prone proteins with age, we divided the ratio for aged control or aged daf-2(-) samples by the respective ratio for young control or young daf-2(-) samples. For further data analysis, we kept only proteins present in all three biological replicates and averaged their fold changes.

### Publication Abstract
Low-complexity "prion-like" domains in key RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) mediate the reversible assembly of RNA granules. Individual RBPs harboring these domains have been linked to specific neurodegenerative diseases. Although their aggregation in neurodegeneration has been extensively characterized, it remains unknown how the process of aging disturbs RBP dynamics. We show that a wide variety of RNA granule components, including stress granule proteins, become highly insoluble with age in C.&#xa0;elegans and that reduced insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) daf-2 receptor signaling efficiently prevents their aggregation. Importantly, stress-granule-related RBP aggregates are associated with reduced fitness. We show that heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF-1) is a main regulator of stress-granule-related RBP aggregation in both young and aged animals. During aging, increasing DAF-16 activity restores dynamic stress-granule-related RBPs, partly by decreasing the buildup of other misfolded proteins that seed RBP aggregation. Longevity-associated mechanisms found to maintain dynamic RBPs during aging could be relevant for neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Caenorhabditis elegans, Quantification, Aging, Itraq, Insulin

### Affiliations
Indiana University
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tuebingen, Germany

### Submitter
Jonathan Trinidad

### Lab Head
Dr Della C. David
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tuebingen, Germany


