### Accession
PXD028618

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of HPV(+) oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma recurrence

### Description
The global rise of HPV(+) oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) has generated considerable interest underlying its etiology and management. Despite an overall decline in head and neck malignancies, the incidence in OPSCC has by contrast sharply risen, with HPV(+) subtypes now comprising 80% of all OPSCC.1,2 Relative to HPV(-) OPSCC, HPV(+) patients are more responsive to chemoradiation and harbor a 52% risk-of-death reduction.3 Despite this distinct outcome, treatment regimens remain the same for all OPSCC subtypes (smoking-driven and virus-driven), rather than an adaptive approach to what most consider distinct diseases. The short-term effects (e.g., mucositis, odynophagia) and long-term toxicities (e.g., xerostomia, dysphagia, ototoxicity) from treatment substantially affect quality of life, and rival the impact of the cancer itself. Recently published as well as ongoing trials are actively examining deintensification approaches2,4-9, with the goal of diminishing treatment sequelae for HPV(+) subtypes.   While deintensification may decrease chemoradiation-related toxicities, it nonetheless may also undertreat a meaningful percentage of HPV(+) patients who may then recur.  In examining national trials, 19% of HPV(+) patients had disease progression after therapy, with a two-year survival rate of 60%.10 Current methods to ascertain HPV status involve p16 staining. However, on comparison with gold standard E6/E7 expression by qPCR, p16 harbored a 15% false positivity rate11, suggesting limited utility as a sole biomarker for deintensification.   Improved molecular stratification would greatly enhance the clinician’s ability to precisely tailor treatment while minimizing the risk of jeopardizing outcomes. One approach encompasses in-depth proteomic profiling of HPV(+) OPSCC to reveal distinct protein expression profiles and delineate clinically relevant upstream pathways. In turn, these proteomic differences may distinguish higher-risk disease (cases predisposed to recurrence that may benefit from treatment intensification) from lower-risk phenotypes (cases whose treatment response is sufficiently robust to warrant deintensification).   Here, two HPV(+) OPSCC cohorts stratified by treatment response are compared via a hybrid data dependent acquisition/data independent acquisition (DDA/DIA) approach via mass spectrometry.  We focused on detection of low-abundance proteins to highlight proteomic signatures that can be potentially exploited for treatment stratification.

### Sample Protocol
Patient selection. Adult patients ≥18 years old treated with HPV(+) OPSCC between 2008-2014 at a single tertiary medical center were assessed for inclusion. Sites included tongue base, lingual tonsil, soft palate, tonsil, and unspecified oropharynx. All specimens were recut and confirmed with HPV(+) OPSCC diagnoses by a dedicated head and neck pathologist. HPV status was determined by either p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) and/or HPV in-situ hybridization (ISH). Those with unavailable or incomplete pathology specimens, staging, treatment, or follow-up data were excluded. Patients with clinical or pathological distant metastasis at initial diagnosis were eliminated. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Version 26 (Chicago, IL). Continuous co-variates were assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA), while categorical co-variates were computed using chi square or Fisher’s exact test as appropriate.  FFPE tissue sample preparation for MS: 10-micron serial sections were cut from Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) blocks. The first section was stained for p16 to confirm HPV+ OPSCC tissue. Between 2-10 serial sections per sample (depending on size of the tumor) were then rehydrated using a standard workflow (xylene-ethanol deparaffinization). Non-tumor sample was then dissected off and the serial tumor containing sections were combined in micro-pestle tubes and lysed in 0.2% Rapigest in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. Pressure assisted protein extraction was then performed using a Barocycler (PBI Biosciences) which combine heat and cycling pressure to homogenate and extract proteins from the tissue.12 After lysis, the protein concentration of soluble supernatant was determined via Bicinchoninic Acid Assay (Thermo). Protein was reduced with DTT (15mM) for 1h at 370C, alkylated with iodoacetamide (30mM) for 30min at room temperature in the dark, and digested for 16 hours on a shaker at 370C with a 1:40 ratio of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega). Rapigest was then removed by acidification of each sample to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA and subsequent centrifugation. Soluble sample was de-salted using HLB plates (Oasis HLB 30µm, 5mg sorbent, Waters).   MS acquisition: MS data was acquired on a 6600 TripleTOF (Sciex) operating in DDA‐MS mode for generating spectral libraries, and in DIA‐MS (discovery) mode for quantitative analysis of FFPE blocks. iRT Standards (Biognosys) were added to each sample before acquisition. The 6600 TripleTOF (Sciex) was connected to Eksigent 415 LC system that was operated in micro-flow mode. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% aqueous formic acid and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were pre-loaded onto the trap column (ChromXP C18CL 10 x 0.3 mm 5 µm 120Å) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min for 3 min and separated on the analytical column (ChromXP C18CL 150 x 0.3mm 3 µm 120Å) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min using a linear A-B gradient composed of 3-35% A for 60 min, 35-85% B for 2 min, then and isocratic hold at 85% for 5 min with re-equilibrating at 3% A for 7 min. Temperature was set to 30oC for the analytical column. Source parameters were set to the following values: Gas 1 = 15, Gas 2 = 20, Curtain Gas = 25, Source temp = 100, and Voltage = 5500V.   DDA MS1 scans were acquired using a dwell time of 250 msec in the mass range of 400-1250 m/z of 100 counts per second were selected for fragmentation. DDA MS2 scans were acquired in high-sensitivity mode with dynamic accumulation with a dwell time of 25 msec for ions ranging from +2 to +5 using rolling collision energy and a collision energy spread of 5. Ions were excluded for fragmentation after one occurrence for a duration of 15 seconds. DIA MS1 scans were acquired using a dwell time of 250 msec in the mass range of 400-1250 m/z. DIA MS2 scans were acquired over the precursor range of 400-1250 m/z with the MS2 range of 100-1800 m/z using 100 variable windows with a dwell time of 30msec.

### Data Protocol
Generation of spectral libraries and database searches: Assay libraries were generated as described by Parker et al.13 Briefly, samples were pooled into two groups, HPV+ Disease-Free and HPV+ Recurrence, and were acquired in DDA to build spectral libraries. DDA files were converted to mzXML and searched through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) using 3 algorithms, (1) Comet14; (2) X!tandem! Native scoring15; and (3) X!tandem! K‐scoring16 against a reviewed, human canonical protein sequence database, downloaded from the Uniprot database, containing an equal amount of target and randomized decoy proteins. Peptide probability modeling was performed using the TPP peptide prophet “xinteract” and the resulting searches were combined using the TPP “interprophet parser”. Further filtering was done using Mayu to select peptide spectral match probability values consistent with a 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) culminating in a spectral library generated using the TPP SpectraST tool. Retention times were then normalized to ‘indexed’ retention time space17 using the custom python script spectrast2spectrast_irt.py, publicly available via the MSPROTEOMICSTOOLS python package (https://github.com/msproteomicstools/msproteomicstools). Biognosys internal retention time reference peptides were added to each sample immediately before acquisition and were used for retention time (RT) alignment. As needed, the expanded Common internal Retention Time standards reference peptides18 was used to align RT in fractionated library samples, removing any outliers as described by Parker et al.13,17 Retention time normalized splib files were consolidated to a single spectrum entry for each peptide sequence using the “consensus spectrum” function in Spectrast. These spectral libraries were then filtered to generate peptide assay libraries by selecting the top six most intense b or y ion fragments. The resulting file was converted to the openSWATH library input TraML format with decoys appended.  Quantitation of individual specimens by DIA-MS. Peak group extraction and FDR analysis was done as outlined by Parker et al.13 Briefly, raw intensity data for peptide fragments was extracted from DIA files using the open source openSWATH workflow19 against the sample specific peptide assay. Retention time prediction was made using the Biognosys iRT standards spiked into each sample. Target and decoy peptides were subsequently extracted, scored, and analyzed using the mProphet algorithm20 to determine scoring cut‐offs consistent with 1% FDR. Peak group extraction data from each DIA file was combined using a ‘feature alignment’ script, which performs data alignment and modeling analysis across an experimental dataset.21 Finally, all duplicate peptides were removed from the dataset to ensure that peptide sequences are proteotypic to a given protein in our FASTA database.   Normalization and quantitation. The total ion current (TIC) associated with the MS2 signal across the chromatogram was calculated for normalization using in-house software. This ‘MS2 Signal’ of each file was used to adjust the transition intensity of each peptide in a corresponding file. To obtain a measure of total protein quantity, normalized transition-level data of all unique peptides corresponding to a protein were subsequently processed using mapDIA to obtain protein level quantitation.22 Pairwise comparison was then performed using mapDIA to obtain fold change and false discovery statistics between groups.  FFPE samples were required to yield a minimum of 600 identifiable proteins by DIA-MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Deintensification therapy for human papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (HPV(+) OPSCC) is under active investigation. An adaptive treatment approach based on molecular stratification could identify high-risk patients predisposed to recurrence and better select for appropriate treatment regimens. Collectively, 40 HPV(+) OPSCC FFPE samples (20 disease-free, 20 recurrent) were surveyed using mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis via data-independent acquisition to obtain fold change and false discovery differences. Ten-year overall survival was 100.0 and 27.7% for HPV(+) disease-free and recurrent cohorts, respectively. Of 1414 quantified proteins, 77 demonstrated significant differential expression. Top enriched functional pathways included those involved in programmed cell death (73 proteins, <i>p</i> = 7.43 &#xd7; 10<sup>-30</sup>), apoptosis (73 proteins, <i>p</i> = 5.56 &#xd7; 10<sup>-9</sup>), &#x3b2;-catenin independent WNT signaling (47 proteins, <i>p</i> = 1.45 &#xd7; 10<sup>-15</sup>), and Rho GTPase signaling (69 proteins, <i>p</i> = 1.09 &#xd7; 10<sup>-5</sup>). PFN1 (<i>p</i> = 1.0 &#xd7; 10<sup>-3</sup>), RAD23B (<i>p</i> = 2.9 &#xd7; 10<sup>-4</sup>), LDHB (<i>p</i> = 1.0 &#xd7; 10<sup>-3</sup>), and HINT1 (<i>p</i> = 3.8 &#xd7; 10<sup>-3</sup>) pathways were significantly downregulated in the recurrent cohort. On functional validation via immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, 46.9% (PFN1), 71.9% (RAD23B), 59.4% (LDHB), and 84.4% (HINT1) of cases were corroborated with mass spectrometry findings. Development of a multilateral molecular signature incorporating these targets may characterize high-risk disease, predict treatment response, and augment current management paradigms in head and neck cancer.

### Keywords
Carcinoma, Ffpe, Ihc, Head and neck cancer, Hpv

### Affiliations
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute


