### Accession
PXD026752

### Title
MS analysis of GAR1 methylation immunopurified from HEK-293 Cells

### Description
The conserved box H/ACA RNPs consist of one box H/ACA RNA and 4 core proteins: Dyskerin, NHP2, NOP10 and GAR1. The assembly of the H/ACA RNPs is a stepwise process which requires several assembly factors: SHQ1, NAF1, the Survival of Motor Neuron complex SMN, and the R2TP complex. It implicates the co-transcriptional assembly of a pre-particle containing the nascent RNAs, Dyskerin, NOP10, NHP2 and NAF1. The latest keeps the H/ACA RNP inactive, and needs to be replaced by GAR1 to produce mature and functional H/ACA RNPs in the Cajal bodies. In this study, we explore in details the molecular mechanism leading to the assembly of mature box H/ACA RNPs. We performed extensive analysis of GAR1, NHP21 and NAF interactomes by quantitative stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture proteomic analyses (SILAC), and revealed new assembly intermediates: 1) an early protein-only pre-H/ACA RNP complex containing the core proteins DKC1, NOP10 and NHP2, and the assembly factors SHQ1 and NAF1, and 2) a late assembly intermediates containing the RNA, the core proteins and NAF1. We showed that the SMN complex is associated with late forming H/ACA pre-RNP complexes containing GAR1. Moreover, our study identifies new proteins highly and specifically associated with GAR1, NHP2 and NAF1, reflecting their importance in box H/ACA assembly or function, such as the PRMT1 and PRMT5 arginine methylases. MS analysis of purified GAR1 revealed new sites of arginine methylations in the two GAR domains of GAR1, and showed that most of these methylated arginines exist both in mono-methylated and di-methylated forms in cells. By different methods, we showed that unmethylated GAR1 is correctly incorporated in H/ACA RNPs. Therefore, GAR1 methylation should be important for its function.

### Sample Protocol
The expression of GFP-GAR1 in Flp-In T-REx 293/GFP-GAR1 cells was induced for 12 h by 1 µg/mL Doxycycline. Total extracts were prepared as previously described (63) in RSB 600 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 600 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2) containing 1% NP-40 and incubated with GFP-Trap (Chromotech) for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed first with the same buffer, then with RSB 150 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2) containing 0,05% NP-40.  The immunoprecipitated material was resuspended in Laemmli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. After colloidal blue staining of the gel, the band corresponding to GFP-GAR1 molecular weight was cut and digested with chymotrypsin (10 ng/mL, overnight). Digested peptides were analysed by LC-MSMS. Peptides were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to Fourier transform tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-FT-MS/MS) using a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap precolumn (0.3 mm 10 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient consisting of 2–40% buffer B (B=99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 3–33 min) and 40–80% B (33–34 min) was used to separate peptides at 300 nL/min from a Pepmap capillary reversed-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired using a top-20 collision-induced dissociation (CID) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The Orbitrap was programmed to perform a FT 400–1,400 Th mass scan (60,000 resolution) with the top 20 ions in intensity selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) datadependent acquisition (DDA) MS/MS in the LTQ. FT spectra were internally calibrated using a single lock mass (445.1200 Th). Target ion numbers were 500,000 for FT full scan on the Orbitrap and 10,000 MSn on the LTQ. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (67). The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.2.2.0. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens complement of the UniProtKB (reviewed and isoforms version, downloaded on 11-19-2020, 96456 (target) sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Chymotrypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Dimethylation of K (+28.0313 Da), Dimethylation of R (+28.0313 Da), Methylation of K (+14.01565 Da), Methylation of R (+14.01565 Da), Trimethylation of K (+42.04695 Da), fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.44 (71). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score [PMID 23307401] and the phosphoRS score (72) with a threshold of 95.0 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package (73). A phosphoRS score above was considered as a confident localization. MSMS spectra of dimethylated arginine were manually inspected for neutral loss of dimethylamine (45.06 Da) and neutral loss of methylamine (31.04 Da) in order to distinguish between asymmetric dimethylarginine (aDMA) and symmetric dimethylarginine (sDMA), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The conserved H/ACA RNPs consist of one H/ACA RNA and 4 core proteins: dyskerin, NHP2, NOP10, and GAR1. Its assembly requires several assembly factors. A pre-particle containing the nascent RNAs, dyskerin, NOP10, NHP2&#xa0;and NAF1 is assembled co-transcriptionally. NAF1 is later replaced by GAR1 to form mature RNPs. In this study, we explore the mechanism leading to the assembly of H/ACA RNPs. We performed the analysis of GAR1, NHP2, SHQ1&#xa0;and NAF1 proteomes by quantitative SILAC proteomic, and analyzed purified complexes containing these proteins by sedimentation on glycerol gradient. We propose the formation of several distinct intermediate complexes during H/ACA RNP assembly, notably the formation of early protein-only complexes containing at least the core proteins dyskerin, NOP10, and NHP2, and the assembly factors SHQ1 and NAF1. We also identified new proteins associated with GAR1, NHP2, SHQ1&#xa0;and NAF1, which can be important for box H/ACA assembly or function. Moreover, even though GAR1 is regulated by methylations, the nature, localization, and functions of these methylations are not well known. Our MS analysis of purified GAR1 revealed new sites of arginine methylations. Additionally, we showed that unmethylated GAR1 is correctly incorporated in H/ACA RNPs, even though with less efficiency than methylated ones.

### Keywords
Apms, Methylation

### Affiliations
IGF, CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France
UMR 7367 CNRS-UL IMoPA Biopôle de l'Université de Lorraine Campus Brabois-Santé 9 avenue de la forêt de Haye 54505 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy FRANCE

### Submitter
Franck Vandermoere

### Lab Head
Dr Severine Massenet
UMR 7367 CNRS-UL IMoPA Biopôle de l'Université de Lorraine Campus Brabois-Santé 9 avenue de la forêt de Haye 54505 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy FRANCE


