### Accession
PXD023920

### Title
Triple SILAC identified progesterone-independent and dependent PRA and PRB interacting partners in human breast cancer cells

### Description
Progesterone receptor (PR) isoforms, PRA and PRB, both progesterone-independent and dependent modulated the biology of breast cancer cells. The different phenotypes in breast cancer mediated by PRA and PRB could due to the differences of their structures, leading to the distinct protein interacting partners and downstream signaling events of each receptor. Here, we constructed Tet-inducible HA-tagged PRA or HA-tagged PRB in T47DC42 breast cancer cells. We performed affinity purification coupled with SILAC mass spectrometry technique to comprehensively study PRA and PRB interacting partners in both liganded and unliganded conditions. To validate our findings, we applied both forward and reverse SILAC to effectively minimize experimental errors. These datasets will be useful in investigating PRA- and PRB-specific molecular mechanisms and can potentially be used as a database for subsequent experiments to identify novel PRA and PRB interacting proteins that differentially mediated different biological functions in breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
In forward SILAC; T47DC42-PRA and T47DC42-PRB were cultured in light and heavy SILAC labeling and used uninduced-PRA and PRB (no Dox treatment) which grow in medium SILAC as control. PRA and PRB labeling were swapped in the reverse SILAC experiment except for the control. To investigated PRA and PRB interacting partners in ligand-independent, cells expressing PRA and PRB were seeded 500,000 cells/well in 100 mm cell culture dish and incubated for 24 h to achieve 70-80% confluency. Cells were treated with 1000 ng/mL of Dox for 24 h. For ligand-dependent, cells were pretreated with 1000 ng/mL of Dox for 24 h and treated with 10 nM of R5020 for an additional 1 h. Ethanol control was treated as control of the experiment. On harvesting, cells were washed one time in cold PBS and then scraped in cold IP lysis buffer [1% (vol/vol) Nonidet P-40, 30 mM KCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)], 1 mM Na3VO4, and with 1X protease inhibitors (Roches) and total cell lysate were rotated end-over-end at 4 °C for 30 min. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 13000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min. Supernatant was collected and protein concentration was measured by Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermoscientific) following the manufacturer's instructions. 1.5 milligram of protein from each light, medium, and heavy were separately immunoprecipitation using HA-tag antibody (dilution 1:100, (Cell Signaling Technology) at 4°C overnight with end-over-end rotation. 50 uL of Dynabeads protein-G (Invitrogen/Life Technologies) were washed three times with PBS and resuspended in IP lysis buffer. To precipitate the HA-tag complex protein, dynabeads were added and rotated at 4 °C for 1.5 h. Bead and protein complex were washed three times with 500 uL of wash buffer [1% (vol/vol) Nonidet P-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4)]. The beads were suspended in 30 uL of 2XSDS loading buffer with 10% DTT and denatured at 95 °C for 10 mins. To elute the Co-IP product, beads were collected by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 10 minutes.  The Co-IP products from light, medium, and heavy were then combined 1:1:1 and short-run on 10% SDS-PAGE gel for 10 min.  Gel was fixed with 50% methanol–7% acetic acid for 1 h with gentle shaking before staining with Coomassie blue for 1 h and destained with milliQ water overnight.  In gel digestion was performed as previously described.  Briefly, gel was cut into 1x1 mm pieces, then 50% acetonitrile (ACN)–50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature to de-stained the color.  Gel pieces were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM tributylphosphine and 20 mM acrylamide (Sigma) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 90 min at room temperature.  Then the gel was dehydrated with 100% ACN before proteins were digested with trypsin (Sigma Proteomics grade) at 37°C overnight.  After trypsin digestion, the supernatant containing the peptides were sonicated in a water-bath for 10 min before collection.  The sonication step was repeated after adding 100 µL of 50% ACN–0.1% formic acid and peptides solution was collected and combined with the previous one.  The peptide volume was reduced to 30 µL by rotary evaporation and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min to remove interfering materials before LC-MS/MS analysis. -Nano LC-MS/MS:  The Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), was used to analysis the peptide sample, preparation as described in section 2.  A 5 µL aliquot of the sample was loaded onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20mm) over a 3 minute period at 15 µL/min.  The sample was then washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 300 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) which was packed with Magic C18AQ resin (3 µm, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA).  The eluted peptides were loaded into the mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer; Thermo Scientific).  The program configuration was: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% Acetonitrile + 0.2% Formic Acid) for a time period of 90 minutes, then 30-80% MS buffer B for 3 minutes, followed by 80% MS buffer B over 2 minutes, and then 80-5% for a further 3 min.  The peptides obtained after elution were ionised at 2400V.  The Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) investigation was executed using a survey scan of 350-1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms, the top 12 peptides were chosen and fragmented in the HCD cell.  The selected fragments were scanned using the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 17,500.  The resulting product ion fragment masses were measured (mass range of 120-2000 Da).  The precursor peptide mass was subsequently excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
A total of 12 raw files corresponding to three forward and three reverse SILAC of both progesterone independent and dependent (table.1) were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite 1.6.0.16 (www.maxquant.org) (28). We process 6 replicates both forward and reverse together and used the Andromeda search engine against an in silico tryptic digest of human proteins from the UniProt sequence database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with only tryptic peptides that were at least seven amino acids in length with up to two missed cleavages were considered. Mass spectra were searched using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and processed with an FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides, and modifications. The search included propionamide (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein amino (N)-termini, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, medium (Arg +6, Lys+4), and heavy (Arg +10.00827, Lys +8.01420) isotope labeling were set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Silac, Breast cancer, Progesterone receptor, Interacting partners

### Affiliations
Age-related Inflammation and Degeneration Research Unit,  Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand

### Submitter
Prangwan Pateetin

### Lab Head
Dr Viroj Boonyaratanakornkit
Age-related Inflammation and Degeneration Research Unit,  Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


