### Accession
PXD041996

### Title
Affinity purified epitope-taggedPol V LC-MSMS

### Description
The full mass spectrometry report of affinity purified epitope-tagged Pol V from A. thiniana T87 cells.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, T87-Pol V cells (~5 kg a batch) were harvested and lysed in liquid nitrogen using SKSI Tissue Lyser (BiHeng) and then homogenized in 5 L lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Biomake)). The homogenized material was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 60 min. The supernatant was further filtered through two layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem) and precipitated by ammonium sulfate (350 g/L) for 5 hours. After centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 60 min, the pellet was dissolved in TGED buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 10 mM (NH4)2SO4, 10% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA) followed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm for 60 min. The supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG affinity resin (Genscript) on a rotator for 2 hours, and the resulting material was loaded on a gravity column. The resin was washed with 20-column volumes of buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT), followed by Pol V elution with 5 column volumes of buffer A containing 500 μg/mL FLAG peptide. The elute was loaded onto a Capto Q HiRes column (Cytiva) and Pol V was eluted using a linear gradient from 0.1 M to 0.8 M NaCl in buffer A.  The samples was mixed with 200 μL of UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), loaded into the filter devices and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. The concentrates were diluted in the device with 200 μL of UA buffer and centrifuged again. Then the concentrates were mixed with 100 μL of 50 mM IAA in UA buffer and incubated in darkness at room temperature for 30 min followed by centrifugation for 15 min. Then, the concentrate was diluted with 100 μL of UA buffer, and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice. The concentrate was diluted with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice. The resulting concentrate was diluted to 40 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 2 µg of Trypsin. After overnight incubation at 37 ℃, peptides were collected by centrifugation of the ﬁlter units for 20 min.

### Data Protocol
Experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with RP-C18 5 μm resin in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 84% acetonitrile ) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 60 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 20 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 27 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) against Arabidopsis sequence database (download at March 2021; 136838 sequences). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation (M), ion score > 20 at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
De novo DNA methylation in plants relies on transcription of RNA polymerase V (Pol V) along with KTF1, which produce long non-coding RNAs for recruitment and assembly of the DNA methylation machinery. Here, we report a cryo-EM structure of the Pol V transcription elongation complex bound to KTF1. The structure reveals the conformation of the structural motifs in the active site of Pol V that accounts for its inferior RNA-extension ability. The structure also reveals structural features of Pol V that prevent it from interacting with the transcription factors of Pol II and Pol IV. The KOW5 domain of KTF1 binds near the RNA exit channel of Pol V providing a scaffold for the proposed recruitment of Argonaute proteins to initiate the assembly of the DNA methylation machinery. The structure provides insight into the Pol V transcription elongation process and the role of KTF1 during Pol V transcription-coupled DNA methylation.

### Keywords
T87, Pol v

### Affiliations
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences / Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology
CAS Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences,China.

### Submitter
Hongwei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Zhang
CAS Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences,China.


