### Accession
PXD034869

### Title
Large-scale activity profiling of the apoplast upon bacterial infection

### Description
Pathogens suppress hydrolases in the plant apoplast to cause disease. Despite the importance of these enzyme-inhibitor interaction to plant diseases, to date only a handful examples have been described. Unravelling new plant targets and their inhibitory mechanisms will identify novel components of the plant immune system and point to molecular coevolution operating in the apoplast. Here, we simultaneously monitor the changes in activity of over 170 extracellular enzymes during bacterial infection.

### Sample Protocol
After large scale labelling of the apoplastic fluid with with the ‘probe cocktail’ (FP-biotin, JJB111, DCG04 and DK00x) labelled enzymes were affinity enriched and subsequently on-bead trypsin digested. The beads were resuspended in 250 µL of 8M urea dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8. To reduce disulphide bridges, 12.5 L of 200 mM DTT was added and beads were incubated at 65C for 15 minutes while shaking. Beads were then cooled down to 35C. For the alkylation step, 12.5 L of 400 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) was added and incubated at 35°C for 30 minutes while shaking and in the dark. Trypsin (Gold Mass spectrometry Grade, Promega) was reconstituted according to manufactures’ instructions and added to the beads. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C while shaking. After digestion, beads were shortly spun down at low speed and the supernatant (containing the peptides) was transferred to a new protein LoBind tube. Beads were washed with 50 L of MS grade water, spun down and the supernatant was combined with the first supernatant. TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) was added to the peptides to a final concentration of 0.5-1%. Before mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were clean up in Sep-pak C18 columns (WAT020515, Thermo) following the instructions provided by the manufacturer.  LC-MS/MS Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo) operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 32 or 36 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition and at 30 °C in all other modes. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a flow rate around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min, which did not exceed 980 bar. Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode and operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1500 or 1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen, de Godoy et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data-dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 or 3.0 × 106 ions or 30 or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) using the default settings Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox, Hein et al. 2014). MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (strain ATCC BAA-871 / DC3000) (UP000002515_223283.fasta; 5426 entries, downloaded 5/25/2020) reference Proteome and the Nicotiana benthamiana database (12864_2019_6058_MOESM10_ESM.fasta; 74802 entries, downloaded 2/21/2020) (Kourelis, Kaschani et al. 2019). To estimate the level of contamination, all searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 sequences) that contains known MS contaminants. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Digestion mode was set to “specific”, Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with 2 missed cleavages allowed, the instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da and the peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach and decoy mode “revert”). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Minimum score for unmodified peptides was set to 0. All peptide relevant evidence data can be found in supplemental Table S1. For protein quantification modified peptides (minimum score 40) and unique and razor peptides were allowed. Further analysis and annotation of identified peptides was done in Perseus v1.5.5.3 (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016). Processed data can be found in supplemental Tables S2 and S3. Only protein groups with at least two identified unique peptides over all runs were considered for further analysis. For quantification we combined related biological replicates to categorical groups and investigated only those proteins that were found in a minimum of one categorical group at least in 3 out of 4 biological replicas. Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm). Briefly, Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Activity-based proteomics, Chitinase, Pr3, Nicotiana benthamiana, Pseudomonas syringae, Apoplast

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


