### Accession
PXD021263

### Title
Derivatized heparin hexaccharides LC-MS/MS

### Description
We have developed a novel chemical derivatization method coupled tandem mass spectrometry to resolve the structural sequences of sulfated glycosaminoglycans. In order to evaluate and demonstrate our method capable for native sulfated oligosaccharides, a complex heparin hexasaccharide was used.

### Sample Protocol
The chemical derivatization process was described in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
A detailed description of the data processing was provided in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The structures of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), especially the patterns of modification, are crucial to modulate interactions with various protein targets. It is very challenging to determine the fine structures using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) due in large part to the gas-phase sulfate losses upon collisional activation. Previously, our group reported a method for fine structure analysis that required permethylation of the GAG oligosaccharide. However, uncontrolled depolymerization during the permethylation process due to esterification of uronic acid lowers the reliability of the method to resolve structures of GAGs, especially for larger oligosaccharides. Here, we describe a simplified derivatization method using propionylation and desulfation. The oligosaccharides have all hydroxyl and amine groups protected with propionyl groups and then have sulfate groups removed to generate unprotected hydroxyl and amine groups at all sites that were previously sulfated. This derivatized oligosaccharide generates informative fragments during collision-induced dissociation that resolve the original sulfation patterns. This method is demonstrated to enable accurate determination of sulfation patterns of even the highly sulfated pentasaccharide fondaparinux by MS<sup>2</sup> and MS<sup>3</sup>. Using a mixture of dp6 from porcine heparin, we demonstrate that this method allows for structural characterization of complex mixtures, including clear chromatographic separation and sequencing of structural isomers, all at high yields without evidence of depolymerization. This represents a marked improvement in the reliability to structurally characterize GAG oligosaccharides over permethylation-based derivatization schemes.

### Keywords
Heparin hexaccharides, Lc-ms/ms, Glycan

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi
Director Glycoscience Center of Research Excellence (GlyCORE)  Associate Professor of Pharmacology Associate Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry  The University of Mississippi School of Pharmacy Department of BioMolecular Sciences  P.O. Box 1848 445 Faser Hall University, MS  38677-1848

### Submitter
Hao Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua S. Sharp
Director Glycoscience Center of Research Excellence (GlyCORE)  Associate Professor of Pharmacology Associate Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry  The University of Mississippi School of Pharmacy Department of BioMolecular Sciences  P.O. Box 1848 445 Faser Hall University, MS  38677-1848


