### Accession
PXD036877

### Title
Xylan utilization by haloarchaea-nanohaloarchaea associations

### Description
In hypersaline brines, biodegradation of recalcitrant plant polymers can be inhibited by salt-induced microbial stress and/or caused by inadequate metabolic capabilities of extremely halophilic microbes. Therefore, woody materials can be well-preserved even in NaCl brines that are less biologically hostile than most other brines. Here, we considered whether the nanohaloarchaea, that live alongside (the related) haloarchaea, ever partake in the degradation of xylan, a major hemicellulose component of wood. Samples were taken from natural evaporitic brines and anthropogenic solar salterns located in various parts of Europe and Asia. We recently demonstrated that nanohaloarchaeon Ca. Nanohalobium constans lives as an ectosymbiont associated with the chitinolytic haloarchaeon Halomicrobium. Here, we describe an extremely halophilic xylan-degrading consortium with three members, where nanohaloarchaea act as ectosymbionts of Haloferax lucertensis, which in turn acts as a scavenger of xylan-degradation products, produced by a primary xylan hydrolytic Halorhabdus species. The two corresponding binary associations of nanohaloarchaea, Candidatus Nanohalococcus occultus SVXNc and Candidatus Nanohalovita haloferacivicina BNXNv and their hosts were obtained, stably cultivated and characterized. In contrast to the previously described association of chitinolytic haloarchaeon Halomicrobium and its amylolytic symbiont Ca. Nanohalobium, the host haloarchaea within the xylan-degrading consortium could metabolize α-glucans (glycogen and starch), and, thus, obtained no obvious trophic benefit from ectosymbionts. The current study has broadened the range of culturable ectosymbiontic nanohaloarchaea and demonstrates that they are an important ecophysiological component of polysaccharide-degrading halophilic microbial communities and can be readily isolated in binary co-cultures by using the appropriate enrichment strategy.

### Sample Protocol
The samples subjected to proteomic analysis derived from binary associations of nanohaloarchaea, dubbed Ca. Nanohalococcus occultus SVXNc (Nanohalococcus or SVXNc for short) and Haloferax lucertense SVX82. Cell lysis, protein extraction and proteolytic digestion was performed as described previously (La Cono, V., Messina, E., Rohde, M., Arcadi, E., Ciordia, S., Crisafi, F., ... & Yakimov, M. M. (2020). Symbiosis between nanohaloarchaeon and haloarchaeon is based on utilization of different polysaccharides. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(33), 20223-20234).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data were carried out using MASCOT v2.4 search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed against the SVX82 and SVXNc genome sequences. The following parameters were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage, up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional methionine oxidation and acetylation protein N terminal, and as fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The false discovery rates (FDR) scores were adjusted by a percolator algorithm. The acceptances criteria for proteins identification were FDR scores < 1% and at least one peptide identified with high confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change, desertification, salinisation of soils and the changing hydrology of the Earth are creating or modifying microbial habitats at all scales including the oceans, saline groundwaters and brine lakes. In environments that are saline or hypersaline, the biodegradation of recalcitrant plant and animal polysaccharides can be inhibited by salt-induced microbial stress and/or by limitation of the metabolic capabilities of halophilic microbes. We recently demonstrated that the chitinolytic haloarchaeon Halomicrobium can serve as the host for an ectosymbiont, nanohaloarchaeon 'Candidatus Nanohalobium constans'. Here, we consider whether nanohaloarchaea can benefit from the haloarchaea-mediated degradation of xylan, a major hemicellulose component of wood. Using samples of natural evaporitic brines and anthropogenic solar salterns, we describe genome-inferred trophic relations in two extremely halophilic xylan-degrading three-member consortia. We succeeded in genome assembly and closure for all members of both xylan-degrading cultures and elucidated the respective food chains within these consortia. We provide evidence that ectosymbiontic nanohaloarchaea is an active ecophysiological component of extremely halophilic xylan-degrading communities (although by proxy) in hypersaline environments. In each consortium, nanohaloarchaea occur as ectosymbionts of Haloferax, which in turn act as scavenger of oligosaccharides produced by xylan-hydrolysing Halorhabdus. We further obtained and characterised the nanohaloarchaea-host associations using microscopy, multi-omics and cultivation approaches. The current study also doubled culturable nanohaloarchaeal symbionts and demonstrated that these enigmatic nano-sized archaea can be readily isolated in binary co-cultures using an appropriate enrichment strategy. We discuss the implications of xylan degradation by halophiles in biotechnology and for the United Nation's Sustainable Development Goals.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Xylan degradation, Nanohaloarchaea, Haloarchaea, Hypersaline habitats

### Affiliations
Institute of Polar Research, ISP-CNR, Messina, Italy
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Michail M. Yakimov
Institute of Polar Research, ISP-CNR, Messina, Italy


