### Accession
PXD033194

### Title
Cardiac tissue remodeling as a new marker to predict cardiac dysfunction induced by radiotherapy.

### Description
The contribution of radiotherapy, per se, in late cardiotoxicity remains controversial. An experimental model was developed, in which rat hearts were exposed to a range of ionizing radiation doses, to clarify its impact on the development of early cardiac dysfunction. Rat’s hearts were exposed to daily doses of 0.04, 0.3 and 1.2 Gy, for 23 days, achieving cumulative doses of 0.92, 6.9 and 27.6 Gy, respectively. Myocardial deformation, assessed by global longitudinal strain, was impaired (a relative percentage reduction of > 15% from baseline) in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, by scanning electron microscopy, the microvascular density in the cardiac apex was significantly decreased exclusively at 27.6 Gy dosage. Prior to GLS impairment detection, several tools (qRT-PCR, mass spectrometry and western blot) were used to assess cardiac tissue remodeling. The number/expression of several genes, proteins and KEGG pathways, related to inflammation, fibrosis and cardiac muscle contraction, were found to be differently expressed in the cardiac tissue, according to the cumulative dose. Subclinical cardiac dysfunction occurred in a dose-dependent manner as detected by cardiac tissue remodeling, a predictor of the severity of global longitudinal strain impairment. Moreover, there is no dose threshold below which no myocardial deformation impairment was detected. These findings may contribute to i) develop new markers and explore non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging to assess cardiac tissue remodeling as an early predictor of cardiac dysfunction; ii) improve radiation-based diagnostic and therapeutic cardiac procedures; iii) highlight the need for personalized clinical approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Heart tissue proteins were extracted and solubilized with 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitors for 10 min, at 95ºC and 1000 rpm. Protein extract was sonicated for 10 cycles, 30 s on/30 s off (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode). After centrifugation at 13200 rpm, for 5 min, 100 μg of protein were processed for proteomics analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC (2 μg), overnight at 37 ºC and 1000 rpm. The resulting peptides were cleaned-up and desalted with C18 micro columns and further quantified. nanoLC-MS/MS Protein identification was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS. This equipment is composed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 500 ng of peptides were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) at 300 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  Global settings: lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15 s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Protein identification and quantitative analysis was performed by Proteome Discoverer™ (Thermo Scientific), MaxQuant and VEMS considering the information from the UniProt protein database for Rattus norvegicus taxonomic selection. Quantitative analysis was compared and merged to create a consensus quantitative report to minimize computational artifacts. Quantitation was performed on the peptide and protein level using both ion and spectral counts-based methodologies. Database dependent search of MS data Mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm on the peptide level and 0.01 Da on the fragment ions. A maximum of four missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, di-glycine tag on lysine, lysine acetylation, tyrosine nitration, tyrosine phosphorylation, threonine phosphorylation, serine phosphorylation, N-terminal water loss, N-terminal NH3 loss, glutamine deamidation and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications. The MSMS data was searched against all reviewed rat proteins from UniProt (24th of June 2019) with concatenation of all the sequences in reverse, maintaining only lysine and arginine in place. The data was searched and quantified with both MaxQuant and VEMS.   For MaxQuant the variable modifications such as methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, glutamine deamidation and asparagine deamidation were included.  Quantitative analysis of MS data Quantitative data from MaxQuant and VEMS were analyzed in R statistical programming language. Protein iBAQ values from the two programs were pre-processed by three methods: 1) removing common MS contaminants followed by Log2 (x + 1) transformation, 2) removing common MS contaminants followed by Log2 (x + 1) transformation and quantile normalization, 3) removing common MS contaminants followed by Log2 (x + 1) transformation, quantile normalization and abundance filtering to optimize overall Gaussian distribution of the quantitative values. The distribution of the quantitative values in each sample, for each processing method was analyzed. PCA analysis was performed by using R statistical programming language. The three different pre-processing methods led to similar results and therefore the quantitative data obtained by pre-processing method 2 were used for further analysis. To define differentially expressed proteins, statistical analysis utilizing R package limma was used and each irradiated experimental group was compared with the sham-irradiated group. Correction for multiple testing was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The contribution of radiotherapy, <i>per se</i>, to late cardiotoxicity remains controversial. To clarify its impact on the development of early cardiac dysfunction, we developed an experimental model in which the hearts of rats were exposed, in a fractionated plan, to clinically relevant doses of ionizing radiation for oncological patients that undergo thoracic radiotherapy. Rat hearts were exposed to daily doses of 0.04, 0.3, and 1.2 Gy for 23 days, achieving cumulative doses of 0.92, 6.9, and 27.6 Gy, respectively. We demonstrate that myocardial deformation, assessed by global longitudinal strain, was impaired (a relative percentage reduction of &gt;15% from baseline) in a dose-dependent manner at 18 months. Moreover, by scanning electron microscopy, the microvascular density in the cardiac apex was significantly decreased exclusively at 27.6 Gy dosage. Before GLS impairment detection, several tools (qRT-PCR, mass spectrometry, and western blot) were used to assess molecular changes in the cardiac tissue. The number/expression of several genes, proteins, and KEGG pathways, related to inflammation, fibrosis, and cardiac muscle contraction, were differently expressed in the cardiac tissue according to the cumulative dose. Subclinical cardiac dysfunction occurs in a dose-dependent manner as detected by molecular changes in cardiac tissue, a predictor of the severity of global longitudinal strain impairment. Moreover, there was no dose threshold below which no myocardial deformation impairment was detected. Our findings i) contribute to developing new markers and exploring non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging to assess cardiac tissue changes as an early predictor of cardiac dysfunction; ii) should raise red flags, since there is no dose threshold below which no myocardial deformation impairment was detected and should be considered in radiation-based imaging and -guided therapeutic cardiac procedures; and iii) highlights the need for personalized clinical approaches.

### Keywords
Cardiac tissue, Cardiac muscle, Cardiooncology, Radiotherapy, Cardiac dysfunction, Gls

### Affiliations
Angiogenesis Laboratory, Centro Cardiovascular da Universidade de Lisboa (CCUL@RISE), Lisbon School of Medicine of the Universidade de Lisboa; Lisbon, 1649-028, Portugal
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto

### Submitter
Hugo Osorio

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Constantino Rosa Santos
Angiogenesis Laboratory, Centro Cardiovascular da Universidade de Lisboa (CCUL@RISE), Lisbon School of Medicine of the Universidade de Lisboa; Lisbon, 1649-028, Portugal


