### Accession
PXD039502

### Title
piRNA processing by a trimeric Schlafen-domain-containing nuclease

### Description
Transposable elements are genomic parasites that expand within and spread between genomes. Piwi proteins control transposon activity, notably in the germline. These proteins recognize their targets through small RNA co-factors named piRNAs, making piRNA biogenesis a key specificity-determining step in this important genome immunity system. While the processing of piRNA precursors is an essential step in this process, many molecular details of this process remain unknown. We identify a novel endoribonuclease, PUCH, that initiates piRNA processing in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetic and biochemical studies show that PUCH, a trimer of Schlafen-like-domain (SLFNL) proteins, executes 5-end piRNA precursor cleavage. PUCH-mediated processing strictly requires an m7G-Cap and a Uracil at position three. We also demonstrate how PUCH interacts with PETISCO, a complex that binds piRNA precursors, and that this interaction enhances piRNA production in vivo. The identification of PUCH completes the C. elegans piRNA biogenesis repertoire and uncovers a novel type of RNA endonuclease formed by three SLFL proteins. Mammalian Slfn genes have been associated with immunity responses, exposing a novel molecular link between immune responses in mammals and deeply conserved RNA-based mechanisms that control transposable elements.

### Sample Protocol
To identify of TOFU-2::HA and TOFU-2::HA(E216A), samples were separated on a 4%–12% NOVEX NuPAGE gradient SDS gel (Thermo) for 10 min at 180 V in 1× MES buffer (Thermo). Proteins were fixated and stained with Coomassie G250 Brilliant Blue (Carl Roth). The gel lanes were cut, minced into pieces, and transferred to an Eppendorf tube. Gel pieces were destained with a 50% ethanol/ 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) solution. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 56°C and then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Sigma) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel by two incubations with 30% ABC/acetonitrile and three subsequent incubations with pure acetonitrile. The acetonitrile was subsequently evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and loaded on StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) for desalting and storage.  For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 20-cm self-packed column with 75 µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr.Maisch GmbH) mounted to an EASY HPLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) and sprayed online into an Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). We used a 94-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated with a top 10 MS/MS data-dependent acquisition scheme per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011) integrated into MaxQuant suite 1.6.5.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008) using the UniProt C. elegans database (August 2014; 27,814 entries). In both analyses, carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Match-between-run option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
Transposable elements are genomic parasites that expand within and spread between genomes<sup>1</sup>. PIWI proteins control transposon activity, notably in the germline<sup>2,3</sup>. These proteins recognize their targets through small RNA co-factors named PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), making piRNA biogenesis a key specificity-determining step in this crucial genome immunity system. Although the processing of piRNA precursors is an essential step in this process, many of the molecular details remain unclear. Here, we identify an endoribonuclease, precursor of 21U RNA 5'-end cleavage holoenzyme (PUCH), that initiates piRNA processing in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetic and biochemical studies show that PUCH, a trimer of Schlafen-like-domain proteins (SLFL proteins), executes 5'-end piRNA precursor cleavage. PUCH-mediated processing strictly requires a 7-methyl-G cap (m<sup>7</sup>G-cap) and a uracil at position three. We also demonstrate how PUCH interacts with PETISCO, a complex that binds to piRNA precursors<sup>4</sup>, and that this interaction enhances piRNA production in vivo. The identification of PUCH concludes the search for the 5'-end piRNA biogenesis factor in C. elegans and uncovers a type of RNA endonuclease formed by three SLFL proteins. Mammalian Schlafen (SLFN) genes have been associated with immunity<sup>5</sup>, exposing a molecular link between immune responses in mammals and deeply conserved RNA-based mechanisms that control transposable elements.

### Keywords
Interactomics; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


