### Accession
PXD007974

### Title
Deep Multilayer Tissue Proteomics Identifies Molecular Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression

### Description
The molecular networks underlying Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are not well-defined. We present temporal profiling of >14,000 proteins and >34,000 phosphosites at the asymptomatic and symptomatic stages of AD, deep proteomics analysis of transgenic mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
The mouse brain samples from two mouse models (5xFAD and Tau P301S) and corresponding controls with replicates were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each and fractionated into 105 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Five percent of each fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (75 µm x ~40 cm, 50 µm x ~30 cm for phosphoproteome, 1.9 μm C18 resin). Peptides were eluted by in ~3 h gradient (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile). MS settings included MS1 scans (60,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC and 100 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (410-1600 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 x 105 AGC, ~125 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 38% normalized collision energy, 1.0 m/z isolation window with 0.3 m/z offset, and ~15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 8 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethyl modification of 57.02146 on Cysteine were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease; mass spectrometry; proteomics; proteome; phosphoproteome; transcriptome; rna-seq; genomics; genome; systems biology; disease network; aβ; tau; netrin

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


