### Accession
PXD001204

### Title
Multiple Proteases to Localize Oxidation Sites

### Description
Proteins present in cellular environments with high levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and/or low levels of antioxidants are highly susceptible to oxidative post-translational modification (PTM).  Irreversible oxidative PTMs can generate a complex distribution of modified protein molecules, recently termed as proteoforms.  Using ubiquitin as a model system, we mapped oxidative modification sites using trypsin, Lys-C, and Glu-C peptides. Several M+16 Da proteoforms were detected as well as proteoforms that include other previously unidentified oxidative modifications. This work highlights the use of multiple protease digestions to give insights to the complexity of oxidative modifications possible in bottom-up analyses.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro Oxidation of Ubiquitin.  Bovine ubiquitin was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).  Protein (10 mg•mL-1) was dissolved in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.4) and 10 mM H2O2 and 1 mM FeCl2 were added and allowed to react at 37 C for 2 hours. The reaction was quenched by flash freezing with liquid nitrogen.  Protein sample was desalted on an HLB cartridge (Waters; Milford, MA) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Solvent was removed by centrifugal evaporation and dried protein stored at -80 °C until further analysis.   Top-down ESI-MS and MSn Analysis. Intact oxidized ubiquitin (~30 M) was solubilized in 49:49:2 water:methanol:acetic acid.  ESI-MS analysis was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with direct infusion by a syringe pump. The following electrospray ionization parameters were used: spray voltage 4.25 kV; capillary temperature 200.00 C and flow rate 3 μL•min-1.  Orbitrap detector settings included resolving power of 100 k, parent m/z scan range 600-2000, 3 scans, and 30 and 100 scans for parent and fragmentation spectra, respectively. MS/MS data were recorded in the FT.  MS/MS and MS3 settings used an isolation width of 1 m/z and normalized collision energy of 35%.  Protein digestion. Purified oxidized ubiquitin (1 g•L-1) was solubilized in a denaturing buffer (0.2 M Tris, 8 M urea, 10 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0).  Tris buffer (0.2M Tris, 10mM CaCl2, pH=8.0) was added to dilute urea to 2M. The solution was separated into three equal volume aliquots and each incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma), glutamic acid-C [(Glu-C); Princeton Separation, Inc, Adelphia, NJ] or lysine-C [(Lys-C); Princeton Separation, Inc] proteases at a 1:50 protein:enzyme mass ratio for 24 h at 37 C.  Liquid nitrogen was used to quench digestions and samples were desalted with HLB cartridges and the eluent dried by centrifugal evaporation.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS.  Online desalting and reversed-phase chromatography was performed with a nanoLC system equipped with an autosampler (Eksigent; Dublin, CA). Mobile phases A and B for these analyses were 96.95:2.95:0.1 water:acetonitrile:formic acid and 99.9:0.1 acetonitrile:formic acid, respectively.  Five μL of each peptide sample (1 g•L-1 in 0.1% formic acid) was loaded on to a trapping column [100 μm i.d. × 2 cm; 3 m C18 200 Å stationary phase material (Michrom Bioresource Inc.;Auburn, CA)] at 3 μLmin-1 in 3% mobile phase B for 3 min. After desalting, the sample was loaded onto a pulled-tip (using a CO2 laser) analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 13.2 cm), packed in-house with 3 m C18 100 Å stationary phase material (Michrom Bioresource Inc.). The following gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 300 nL•min-1: 0-5 min, 10% mobile phase B; 5-15 min, 10-30% B; 15-45 min, 30-45% B; 45-50 min, 45-60% B; 50-55 min, 60-80% B; 55-65 min, 80% B; 65-75 min, 10% B. The LC eluent was introduced into the ESI source with ~1.5-2.0 kV.  Data-dependent acquisition parameters were: parent Orbitrap MS resolving power 60 k; m/z scan range 300-1800; the top eight most intense ions were selected and activated using CID; normalized collision energy 35%; dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of two for a duration of 60 sec; and, a minimum of 5000 ion counts for MS/MS.  Samples were analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis. Top-down spectra were viewed and analyzed by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo). Spectra were manually inspected and the m/z values matched to theoretical b- and y-type ions generated by ProteinProspector v5.9.4 [38].  For peptide data, .RAW files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software (Thermo) and MS/MS spectra searched against a .fasta file containing the ubiquitin sequence (truncated from the N-terminal region of Uniprot ID P0CH28).  Sequest search parameters included two maximum enzyme miscleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da; dynamic modifications (see Supplemental Table S1) of mono oxidation to Lys, Arg, Pro, Thr, Met, His, Tyr, Ala, Asn, Asp, Glu, Gln, Ile, Leu, Phe, Ser and Val (Ox, +15.995 Da), dioxidation to Lys, Arg, Pro, His, Tyr, Asn, Asp, Phe and Met (DiOx, + 31.990 Da), carbonylation to Lys, Arg, Pro, Glu, Gln, Leu, Ser, Val and Ile (+13.979 Da), deamidation to Gln, Arg and Asn (0.984 Da), decarboxylation to Asp and Glu (-30.010 Da), oxidation of His to Asn (-23.0159 Da) or Asp (-22.032 Da) or aspartylurea (-10.032 Da) or ring open (4.979 Da), carbonylation of Arg to glutamic semialdehyde (GluSA, -43.053 Da), Lys to aminoadipic semialdehyde (AminoAdSA, -1.032 Da) or aminoadipic acid (14.963 Da), Pro to pyrrolidinone (-30.010 Da), and Thr to 2-amino-3-oxo-butanoic acid (Oxd’n, -2.016 Da). Only peptides with medium (p<0.05) and high confidence (p<0.01) as determined from a reverse decoy database search were used for further analysis.  MS/MS spectra were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins present in cellular environments with high levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and/or low levels of antioxidants are highly susceptible to oxidative post-translational modification (PTM). Irreversible oxidative PTMs can generate a complex distribution of modified protein molecules, recently termed as proteoforms. Using ubiquitin as a model system, we mapped oxidative modification sites using trypsin, Lys-C, and Glu-C peptides. Several M+16 Da proteoforms were detected as well as proteoforms that include other previously unidentified oxidative modifications. This work highlights the use of multiple protease digestions to give insights to the complexity of oxidative modifications possible in bottom-up analyses.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Orbitrap mass spectrometry, Top-down, Oxidation, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Liqing Gu

### Lab Head
Dr Rena A. S. Robinson
University of Pittsburgh


