### Accession
PXD011524

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human alveolar bone

### Description
We optimised a sample preparation and analysis workflow for proteomic analysis of human alveolar bone. We compared the peptides and proteins extracted from bone by different buffers, then used a multi-enzyme, multi-search engine approach to increase proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Bone tissue was homogenised into G1 buffer (4 M GuHCl , 50 mM HEPES pH7.4) using a cryogenic tissue crusher. Insoluble material from G1 extractions was sequentially extracted in the same way with E buffer (0.5 M EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH7.4), followed by G2 buffer (4 M GuHCl, 50 mM HEPES pH7.4). Insoluble material from G2 extractions were digested overnight with trypsin.  Insoluble material from T1 digestions was digested with lysC in U1 buffer (6 M urea, 25 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.5). All extraction buffers except T1 and U1 contained protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Bimake).  G1, E and G2 extractants were reduced and alkylated (using DTT / N-ethylmaleimide respectively), then reductive dimethylation of primary amines was performed at the protein level, using formaldehyde and cyanoborohydride. Reactions were quenched using ethanolamine then proteins purified by chloroform / methanol protein precipitation. For shotgun analysis, aliquots of resuspended protein were digested with one of: trypsin, gluC, aspN or lysarginase. Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates (TAILS) enrichment of the N-terminome was performed on undigested G1, E and G2 extracts.  T1 and U1 samples were reduced and alkylated (using DTT / N-ethylmaleimide respectively). Samples were C18 purified and digested again with trypsin.  All peptide samples were C18 purified, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 1ug peptide was loaded onto column for MS

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to mzML and mgf files using msconvert within the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) GUI (v5.1.0 Petunia). Acquired spectra were then matched to peptide sequences in the NextProt protein database (2018-01-17 release, with reverse decoy database appended to allow downstream false discovery rate (FDR) estimation) using 3 search engines: X!Tandem (Jackhammer TPP v.2013.06.15.1), Comet (v2017.01 rev.1) and Mascot (v2.5.1). Search results from replicate injections were combined using xinteract, then peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were statistically evaluated using PeptideProphet within TPP. PSMs (PeptideProphet probability ≥ 0.05) from multiple samples and search engines were refined and combined using iProphet, with peptide IDs defined as those with probability equivalent to less than ≤1% FDR. Peptides were assigned to proteins using ProteinProphet, and protein IDs were defined as those ≤1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
With 2129 proteins still classified by the Human Proteome Organisation Human Proteome Project (HPP) as "missing" without compelling evidence of protein existence (PE) in humans, we hypothesized that in-depth proteomic characterization of tissues that are technically challenging to access and extract would yield evidence for tissue-specific missing proteins. Paradoxically, although the skeleton is the most massive tissue system in humans, as one of the poorest characterized by proteomics, bone falls under the HPP umbrella term as a "rare tissue". Therefore, we aimed to optimize mineralized tissue protein extraction methodology and workflows for proteomic and data analyses of small quantities of healthy young adult human alveolar bone. Osteoid was solubilized by GuHCl extraction, with hydroxyapatite-bound proteins then released by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid demineralization. A subsequent GuHCl solubilization extraction was followed by solid-phase digestion of the remaining insoluble cross-linked protein using trypsin and then 6 M urea dissolution incorporating LysC digestion. Bone extracts were digested in parallel using trypsin, LysargiNase, AspN, or GluC prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates was used to purify semitryptic peptides, identifying natural and proteolytic-cleaved neo N-termini of bone proteins. Our strategy enabled complete solubilization of the organic bone matrix leading to extensive categorization of bone proteins in different bone matrix extracts, and hence matrix compartments, for the first time. Moreover, this led to the high confidence identification of pannexin-3, a "missing protein", found only in the insoluble collagenous matrix and revealed for the first time by trypsin solid-phase digestion. We also found a singleton proteotypic peptide of another missing protein, meiosis inhibitor protein 1. We also identified 17 proteins classified in neXtprot as PE1 based on evidence other than from MS, termed non-MS PE1 proteins, including &#x2265;9-mer proteotypic peptides of four proteins.

### Keywords
Human, Missing protein, Shotgun, Bone, Tails

### Affiliations
Centre for Blood Research ; Oral & Biomedical Sciences University of British Columbia Canada
UBC

### Submitter
Peter Bell

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M Overall
Centre for Blood Research ; Oral & Biomedical Sciences University of British Columbia Canada


