### Accession
PXD033831

### Title
Employing Sterculic Acid–a naturally occurring 1, 2-cyclopropene fatty acid–for live-cell imaging of lipids by inverse electron-demand Diels-Alder reaction

### Description
To allow the study of unsaturated free fatty acids in live cells, we here report the use of sterculic acid, a 1,2-cyclopropene containing oleic acid analogue, as a bioorthogonal probe. We here show that this lipid can be readily taken up by dendritic cells without toxic side-effects, and that it can subsequently be visualised in live cells using an inverse electron-demand Diels-Alder (IEDDA) reaction with quenched tetrazine fluorophores. Furthermore, this reaction can be integrated into a multiplexed bioorthogonal reaction workflow by combining it with two sequential copper-catalysed Huisgen ligation reactions. This allows for the study of multiple biomolecules in the cell simultaneously by multimodal confocal imaging. Aside from lipid imaging, the uptake and protein modification of sterculic acid can be studied in live cells via chemical proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical proteomics sample preparation For the preparation of proteomics samples, 7.5E5 DC2.4 cells were seeded in 6 cm dishes in triplicate and allowed to attach for 20 h at 37 C, 5% CO2. Cells were then either treated with LPS (100 ng/mL) or vehicle (PBS) in fresh medium for 24 h. Cells were then washed with medium twice and Sterculic acid (10 µM) or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) was added. After 20 h of incubation, medium was aspirated, cells were washed with DBPS twice and harvested by scraping in ice-cold DPBS. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation (4 °C, 1000 g, 5 min), supernatant was aspirated and cell pellets were lysed by resuspension in cold lysis buffer. Protein concentration was measured by Qubit assay and all samples were adjusted to the lowest protein concentration. To assist membrane solubility, 0.1% Triton X-100 was added to all samples followed by click reaction with biotin-PEG4-tetrazine (200 µM) at 37 °C for 4 h. Proteins were precipitated using Bligh&Dyer and redissolved in 500 µL PBS containing 0.5% SDS and 5 mM DTT by heating to 65 °C for 15 minutes, allowed to cool to rt and alkylated by addition of IAA (15 µL, 0.5M) for 30 min. Excess IAA was quenched with DTT (5 µL, 1M) and samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes containing 500 µL PBS and 25 µL prewashed high capacity streptavidin agarose slurry. Samples were agitated (1000 rpm) for 2 h to ensure binding to the beads, which were then spun down (3.000 g, 2 min). Supernatant was discarded and beads were washed with PBS containing 0.5% SDS (3X) and PBS (3X). Beads were resuspended in MilliQ, transferred to low-binding tubes, spun down (3.000 g, 2 min) and supernatant was discarded. The beads were resuspended in digestion buffer (200 µL, 100 mM Tris pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, 0.25 µg)) and incubated while shaking overnight (16 h, 37 °C, 1000 rpm). Beads were spun down (3.000 g, 2 min) and supernatant containing tryptic peptides were transferred to new low-bind tubes. The beads were washed with a 10% formic acid solution (100 µL), which was transferred to the previously isolated peptides. Peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips and concentrated using an Eppendorf speedvac (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus 5301).  Nano-LC-MS settings for pulldown samples Desalted peptide samples were reconstituted in 35 µL LC-MS solution (97:3:0.1 H2O, ACN, FA) containing 10 fmol/µL yeast enolase digest (cat. 186002325, Waters) as injection control. Injection amount was titrated using a pooled quality control sample to prevent overloading the nanoLC system and the automatic gain control (AGC) of the QExactive mass spectrometer. The desalted peptides were separated on a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system set in a trap-elute configuration with a nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm (Waters) trap column for peptide loading/retention and nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (Waters) analytical column for peptide separation. The column was kept at 40 °C in a column oven. Samples were injected on the trap column at a flow rate of 15 µL/min for 2 min with 99% mobile phase A (0.1% FA in ULC-MS grade water (Biosolve)), 1% mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ULC-MS grade acetonitrile (Biosolve)) eluent. The 85 min LC method, using mobile phase A and mobile phase B controlled by a flow sensor at 0.3 µL/min with average pressure of 400-500 bar (5500-7000 psi), was programmed as gradient with linear increment to 1% B from 0 to 2 min, 5% B at 5 min, 22% B at 55 min, 40% B at 64 min, 90% B at 65 to 74 min and 1% B at 75 to 85 min. The eluent was introduced by electro-spray ionization (ESI) via the nanoESI source (Thermo) using stainless steel Nano-bore emitters (40 mm, OD 1/32”, ES542, Thermo Scientific).  The QExactive HF was operated in positive mode with data dependent acquisition without the use of lock mass, default charge of 2+ and external calibration with LTQ Velos ESI positive ion calibration solution (88323, Pierce, Thermo) every 5 days to less than 2 ppm. The tune file for the survey scan was set to scan range of 350 – 1400 m/z, 120,000 resolution (m/z 200), 1 microscan, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, max injection time of 100 ms, no sheath, aux or sweep gas, spray voltage ranging from 1.7 to 3.0 kV, capillary temp of 250 °C and an S-lens value of 80. For the 10 data dependent MS/MS events the loop count was set to 10 and the general settings were resolution to 15,000, AGC target 1e5, max IT time 50 ms, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, fixed first mass of 120 m/z and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28 eV. For individual peaks the data dependent settings were 1.00e3 for the minimum AGC target yielding an intensity threshold of 2.0e4 that needs to be reached prior of triggering an MS/MS event. No apex trigger was used, unassigned, +1 and charges >+8 were excluded with peptide match mode preferred, isotope exclusion on and dynamic exclusion of 10 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 2.0.1.0). The following changes were made to the standard settings of MaxQuant: Label-free quantification was chosen with an LFQ minimal ratio count of 1. Match between runs and iBAQ quantification was enabled. Searches were performed against a Uniprot database of the Mus Musculus proteome (UPID: UP000000589, downloaded April 13th, 2022) including the internal standard (yeast enolase P00924). The “proteingroups.txt” file was used for further analysis in Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism 8.1.1. for Windows (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). Sterculic acid-enriched proteins were selected by filtering the proteins for detection by 2+ unique peptides, not found in the reverse decoy FASTA file, and a 2.5-fold difference between average LFQ values between Sterculic acid- or vehicle-treated samples with a p-value of <0.05 using a Student’s t-test. At most 1 missing LFQ value in the positive controls was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
In the field of lipid research, bioorthogonal chemistry has made the study of lipid uptake and processing in living systems possible, whilst minimising biological properties arising from detectable pendant groups. To allow the study of unsaturated free fatty acids in live cells, we here report the use of sterculic acid, a 1,2-cyclopropene-containing oleic acid analogue, as a bioorthogonal probe. We show that this lipid can be readily taken up by dendritic cells without toxic side effects, and that it can subsequently be visualised using an inverse electron-demand Diels-Alder reaction with quenched tetrazine-fluorophore conjugates. In addition, the lipid can be used to identify changes in protein oleoylation after immune cell activation. Finally, this reaction can be integrated into a multiplexed bioorthogonal reaction workflow by combining it with two sequential copper-catalysed Huisgen ligation reactions. This allows for the study of multiple biomolecules in the cell simultaneously by multimodal confocal imaging.

### Keywords
Lipidation, Sterculic, Ptm, Bioorthogonal, Cyclopropene

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Professor of Molecular physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Berend Gagestein

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Professor of Molecular physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


