### Accession
PXD021799

### Title
The mitochondrial single-stranded DNA binding protein directs RNA primer formation for mtDNA replication

### Description
Single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) binding proteins protect regions of ssDNA formed during processes such as DNA replication and repair. We here devise a genetic screen and identify the mitochondrial ssDNA-binding protein (mtSSB) as a key regulator of mtDNA levels. In mitochondria, RNA synthesis from the light-strand promoter (LSP) is required for transcription as well as for generating the primers for initiation of mtDNA synthesis. We find that mtSSB is essential for mtDNA replication initiation, as transcription is strongly upregulated from the LSP in an mtSSB knockout mouse model, but cannot support the switch to replication. Using deep sequencing as well as biochemical reconstitution experiments, we find that mtSSB is also necessary to restrict transcription initiation and primer formation to specific promoters and origins of replication both in vitro and in vivo. Pathological mutations in human mtSSB cannot efficiently support primer maturation and origin specific initiation of mtDNA replication in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation of ultrapure mitochondria was performed as previously described with the following modifications: desalted peptides were eluted in 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid from the STAGEtips. TMT Labeling 4µg of peptides from each individual sample was re-suspended with 9µl of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). For mice of three different ages, 5 cre- and 5 cre+ samples were distributed in one TMT 10-plex set. 80µg of each TMT 10-plex labeling reagent dissolved in 7µl of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) was added to each sample and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. To stop the reaction, 2µl of 5% Hydroxylamine was added to each sample. After 15 min of incubation, 10 samples of each TMT 10-plex set were combined. After the mixtures were dried in a Speed-Vac, 100µl of 0.1% formic acid was added. The 10-plex mixtures were cleaned with C18 StageTips. Fractionation of TMT-labeled peptide mixture Each of the 10-plex mixtures was fractionated by basic pH RP-HPLC. We used an Ultimate 3000 Micro-LC from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Peptides were subjected to a Waters ACQUITY UPLC Peptide CSH C18 Column (1.7 µm particles, 1 mm ID and 150 mm in length). Buffer A and B were 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 5% ACN pH 8, and 10mM ammonium bicarbonate in 80% ACN pH 8 respectively. The peptide separation was performed with an 85 min linear gradient from 1% to 45% of B at a flow rate of 30 µl/min.  The peptide mixtures were fractionated into 66 fractions and consolidated into 11 fractions. The fractions were dried in a Speed-Vac and re-suspended with 0.1% of formic acid before analysis by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75 μm ID Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water, and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile respectively. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 120 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 10 min at 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at a resolution of 60000 in the range of 350 to 1500 m/z. The AGC was set to 1e6 and the maximum injection time to 100 ms.  Peptide fragmentation was performed in the ion trap using 35% normalized collision energy for CID. The isolation window was 0.7 Da.  MS2 spectra were acquired using AGC target of 1e4 and 50 ms maximum injection time. The top ten most intense MS2 fragments were isolated with and isolation window of 1.3 Da using synchronous precursor selection and fragmented using 65% normalized collision energy. The corresponding MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at resolution of 50000. For the MS3 scans, the m/z range was set from 100 to 500 and the AGC was set to 5e4 with a maximum injection time of 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine was used for analyzing the LC-MS/MS raw data. The raw data were searched against the reviewed and unreviewed sequences of the mouse proteome, UP000000589, from UniProt (downloaded in September 2019). The following parameters were used for data analysis: for ‘’fixed modification’’: cysteine carbamidomethylation; for ‘’variable modification’’: methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; for ‘’digestion’’ specific with Trypsin/P, Max. missed cleavages 2; for quantification “Type”: Reporter ion MS3 and 10plex TMT; the remaining parameters were set as default. TMT reporter correction factors were changed to the values provided by the manufacturer. TMT reporter intensity data was processed separately for each of the three ages. Proteins with less than ten valid values were excluded from the analysis. TMT reporter intensities were subjected to variance stabilization normalization using vsn version 3.46.0. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma version 3.34.5. The differential expression results from the three ages were combined and MitoCarta2 annotations were added using the primary gene name and the first of the gene name synonyms of the oldest Uniprot ID with the highest number of peptides. Exploratory data analysis was done in R version 3.4.3, using the following packages: dplyr version 0.7.6, ggplot2 version 3.0.0, GGally version 1.4.0, FactoMineR version 1.39, and factoextra version 1.0.5

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mtdna, Mtssb, Replication, Tmt

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden


