### Accession
PXD027890

### Title
Mouse brain LC-MS data in DWI-T2 mismatch area after cerebral ischemia

### Description
In ischemic stroke, DWI-T2 mismatch (positive signals on DWI but negative signals on T2) indicates ischemia within 4.5 h. However, the molecular expression pattern of this region remains elusive. This project aimed to reveal the proteomics profiling of the brain tissues at DWI-T2 mismatch, T2(+), and contralateral regions of brain within 4.5 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion compared with naïve brains of mice.

### Sample Protocol
These collected brain tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8M urea in 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 8), then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected as the protein sample, and protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific, USA). Each protein sample (100 g) was transferred for Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric labeling (Thermo Scientific) to perform quantitative proteomics analysis according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
uantitative proteomics analysis of the MS RAW data was performed using MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.14.0) with the rat protein database obtained from UniProt reviewed Rattus norvegicus proteomes.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic stroke with a mismatch between diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) or T2-weighted images indicates onset within 4.5 h, but the pathological substrates in the DWI-T2 mismatch and T2(+) areas remain elusive. In this study, proteomics was used to explore (1) the protein expression profiles in the T2(+), mismatch, and contralateral areas, and (2) the protein with the highest expression in the T2(+) area in the brains of male Sprague-Dawley rats within 4.5 h after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). The expression of the candidate protein was further validated in (1) rat brain subjected to MCAO, (2) rat primary cortical neuronal culture with oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD), and (3) infarcted human brain tissues. This study showed that apoptosis was observed in the T2(+) and mismatch regions and necroptosis in the T2(+) region of rat brains after MCAO. We identified capping protein regulator and myosin 1 linker 3 (CARMIL3) as the candidate molecule in the T2(+) and mismatch areas, exclusively in neurons, predominantly in the cytoplasm, and most abundant in the mismatch area. The CARMIL3(+) neurons and neurites in the mismatch and T2(+) areas were larger than those in the control area, and associated with (1) increased expression of sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1), indicating edema, (2) accumulation of p62, indicating impaired autophagy, and (3) increase in 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), indicating oxidative stress. The increased expression of CARMIL3 was validated in a cell model of cortical neurons after OGD and in infarcted human brain tissues. In conclusion, this study shows that the mismatch and T2(+) areas within 4.5 h after ischemia are characterized by upregulated expression of CARMIL3 in neurons, particularly the mismatch area, which is associated with neuronal edema, impaired autophagy, and oxidative stress, indicating that CARMIL3 serves as a molecular signature of brain ischemia.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Mouse, Dwi-t2 mismatch area, Ischemic stroke

### Affiliations
National Taiwan Ocean University

### Submitter
Pang-Hung Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Pang-Hung Hsu
National Taiwan Ocean University


