### Accession
PXD017997

### Title
Multi-omics reveals the lipid inventory of synaptic junctions and altered lipid signaling in environmental enrichment

### Description
Membrane lipids are essential components of synaptic junctions that have key functions in neurotransmission. In the first part of the study, we provide a quantitative lipid inventory of mouse and rat synaptic junctions. We next used a simultaneous multi-omics extraction and analysis workflow termed SIMPLEX to probe the interplay of proteins and lipids in synaptic signal transduction. We found that SIMPLEX is suitable to generate hypotheses about novel mechanisms underlying complex changes in synaptic connectivity elicited by environmental stimuli. As a proof of principle, this approach revealed that in mice exposed to an enriched environment reduced endocannabinoid signaling is linked to increased surface expression of AMPAR in a subset of Cannabinoid-receptor 1 positive synapses, a mechanism which likely regulates synaptic strength in an input-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
TMT based proteomics protocol The protein pellet obtained after lipid extraction was first homogenized in a lysis buffer containing 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris, pH = 8.5. After a centrifugation step of 30 min at 4 °C and 18 000 g, the supernatant was immediately transferred to a new tube and the protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  For the TMT-based proteomics analysis of the rat P2, So and Sj samples, acetone was added in a ratio of 1:4 (sample:acetone, v/v) and the samples were incubated at 4°C overnight. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea, 0.1% rapigest (in house-synthesized) and 50 mM TEAB buffer. The proteins were reduced and alkylated using TCEP (final concentration 10 mM) for 1 hour at 22 °C and IAA (final concentration 40 mM) in the dark for 30 min, respectively. Next, 50 mM TEAB was added to ensure urea concentrations less than 1 M. The proteins were digested using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:40 (w/w) at 37 °C in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 650 rpm, overnight. Protein digestion was stopped by adding formic acid and the samples were centrifuged at 15 000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was desalted using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak, 50 mg, Waters). Digestion efficiency was controlled by measuring 0.5 µg of each sample on a monolithic column. Afterwards, the samples were dried again and resuspend in 100 mM TEAB buffer. The same amount of each digested sample (100 µg protein of total digestion) were reacted with the TMT reagent (TMT 10plex, ThermoFisher) in 100 mM TEAB buffer for 1 hour at 25 °C in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 550 rpm. To quench the reaction, 5% hydroxylamine was added and the samples were incubated for 15 min at 25 °C. Finally, the samples were combined to generate a pooled sample after checking the TMT labeling efficiency on a Q Exactive HF.  The remaining samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (Wisniewski, Zougman et al., 2009) with minor modification. Briefly, the samples were diluted to 10 mM SDS using freshly prepared 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5 and loaded onto a spin filter by centrifugation for 15 min at 13 500 g. Afterwards, samples were washed three times with 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5 and three times with 50 mM TEAB by centrifugation at 13 500 g for 15 min. Protein digestion was performed in 50 mM TEAB, 0.2 M GuHCl and 2 mM CaCl2 using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for 12 h at 37 oC. Finally, peptides were eluted with 50 mM TEAB by centrifugation and acidified to 1% TFA. Digestion efficiency was controlled by monolithic reverse phase separation and samples were stored at -80 oC until further analysis. Label-free proteomics protocol The analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Lumos Fusion (Thermo Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) for the inventory and environmental enrichment, respectively. Briefly, peptides were preconcentrated on an Acclaim C18 PepMap trap column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on an Acclaim C18 PepMap main column (15 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using a binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA in 84% ACN). The gradient increased linearly from 3% to 35% B at flow rate 250 nL/min over 120 min. For Q Exactive HF data acquisition, survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60 000, an AGC target of 3*106 and a maximum IT of 50 ms, and were followed by data-dependent MS/MS of the 15 most intense signals. For the MS/MS scans, resolution was set to 60 000, AGC value to 2*105, maximum IT to 100 ms, dynamic exclusion was 30 s, isolation window was 0.4 m/z and NCE was set to 33%. The Orbitrap Lumos data was acquired with a resolution of 60 000, an AGC target of 4*105 and a maximum IT of 50 ms for the survey scans, and a resolution of 30 000, an AGC target of 3*104, a maximum IT of 150 ms and an isolation window of 1 m/z for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis QI software version 4.1. Raw data were aligned in automatic mode. The exported peak lists were further searched using searchGui 1.14.4, X!Tandem (version 2015.12.15.2) and Mascot (version 2.4) against a concatenated target-decoy mouse database (downloaded from Uniprot June 2015 time, 16716 entries). Protein inference at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) was performed by using PeptideShaker (version 1.04+). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ion. Trypsin was set as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Post-translational modifications were set as following: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. PeptideShaker output was reimported into Progenesis. Peptide-ion measurements were exported from Progenesis and processed by an in-house pipeline developed based on MSStats (Version 3.10.4) (DOI: 10.18129/B9.bioc.MSstats ) R package. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantification. Peptide abundances were log2 transformed, missing values were censored and imputed. Preprocessed data were normalized based on quantile. Relative abundance of each protein per run was estimated by Tukey’s median polish. Fold- change between standard and enriched environment conditions and p-value were calculated per protein. Significantly changing proteins were determined based on p-value <0.05 threshold. TMT based proteomics data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). For both, the reviewed and unreviewed rat proteome data were retrieved from Uniprot database (downloaded on 28 November 2018, 36076 entries). The MS and MS/MS data were searched against this database by using Mascot and Sequest search engines. A 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance was used, with 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance on the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Trypsin was set as the enzyme allowing maximum two missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT tags on peptides Lysine and any N-terminus residues were searched as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine was searched as variable modification. The target-decoy approach was used to evaluate false-positive peptide-spectrum matches based on 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). Multiple test correction was performed by adjusting the calculated p values according to Benjamini-Hochberg. Proteins with an adjusted p value < 0.05 were classified as significant. All data analysis and plots were performed using R (Version 0.99.903).

### Publication Abstract
Membrane lipids and their metabolism have key functions in neurotransmission. Here we provide a quantitative lipid inventory of mouse and rat synaptic junctions. To this end, we developed a multiomics extraction and analysis workflow to probe the interplay of proteins and lipids in synaptic signal transduction from the same sample. Based on this workflow, we generate hypotheses about novel mechanisms underlying complex changes in synaptic connectivity elicited by environmental stimuli. As a proof of principle, this approach reveals that in mice exposed to an enriched environment, reduced endocannabinoid synthesis and signaling is linked to increased surface expression of &#x3b1;-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) in a subset of Cannabinoid-receptor 1 positive synapses. This mechanism regulates synaptic strength in an input-specific manner. Thus, we establish a compartment-specific multiomics workflow that is suitable to extract information from complex lipid and protein networks involved in synaptic function and plasticity.

### Keywords
Lipidomics, Synaptic junctions, Multi-omics, Enriched environment, Endocannabinoid signaling

### Affiliations
University of Vienna Department of Analytical Chemistry
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften (ISAS) 

### Submitter
Canan Has

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Ahrends
University of Vienna Department of Analytical Chemistry


