### Accession
PXD007983

### Title
pitaya proteomics LC-MS/MS

### Description
The pathogenic fungus Neoscytalidium dimidiatum (Nd) is the causal agent of pitaya canker and causes significant yield losses. The mechanism by which Nd invades pitaya stems remains largely unknown. Here, quantitative proteomic analysis was employed to investigate pitaya immune responses against Nd infection. A total of 2766 proteins including 244 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified during the infection cycle. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that the DEPs were associated with photosynthesis, phytohormone activity, reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis and pathogenic defense responses. This study demonstrates that comparative proteomics is an effective strategy for providing new perspective on biotic stress from fungal pathogens in pitaya.

### Sample Protocol
5 g of ground power was suspended in 5 mL of chilled solution I (90% acetone, 10% trichloroacetic acid ) and incubated at −20 °C overnight. The solution was then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min. The pellet was washed twice with chilled acetone and redissolved in 1 mL solution II (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 50 mM dithiothreitol and protease inhibitor). After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a 2D-quant kit. Protein (100 μg) from the 0, 12 and 36 h samples was alkylated and digested using the previously described FASP (filter-assisted sample preparation) method with a Microcon-30 centrifugal filter (Millipore, Cat. No. MRCF0R030 ). The digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA, Cat. No.90064). The peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse phase LC (hp-RPLC) using an XBridge C18 column (4.6 mm inner diameter, 25 cm, 5 m, 130 Å; Waters, Milford, MA, USA) on a Waters e2695 high-performance LC instrument (Waters) as described previously. Eight fractionated peptide samples were used for tandem LC–MS/MS analysis on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The peptides were eluted with a 60 min gradient of solvent B (98% ACN, 0.1% formic acid); 5–35% solvent B for 45 min, 35–100% solvent B for 10 min. The peptides were acquired with an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For protein identification, the spectral data were submitted to the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.3, Thermo Fisher) and searched against a custom database. Carbamidomethylation and TMT-6plex were set as fixed modifications. The mass tolerance of precursor ions was ±20 ppm and that of fragment ions was ±0.02 Da. Only peptides that were filtered with a confidence level of 95% were accepted.

### Data Protocol
the protein sequences were firstly BLAST to the sequence of arabidopsis thaliana. the protein Uniprot ID were further analyzed using the KOBAS3.0 software (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/). The GO classification and KEGG pathway enrichment were obtained from KOBAS results. p<0.05 were the threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pitaya;tmt;proteomics;lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Guangxi university, state key lab for subtropical Agro-bioresource conservation and utilization, SKLCUSA
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, China

### Submitter
qiang Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Li Mei Pan
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, China


