### Accession
PXD013318

### Title
Combinatorial proteomics and transcriptomics identify AMPK in the control of the axonal regeneration programme of DRG sensory neurons after spinal injury

### Description
Axoplasmic proteomics from sciatic or centrally projecting branches of sciatic DRG identifies unique protein enrichment and signalling pathways, including prior and subsequent to a spinal regeneration-incompetent versus sciatic regeneration-competent axonal injury.

### Sample Protocol
Bilateral sciatic nerve axotomy or sham injuries were performed in 8 weeks old mice. 6h later, sciatic DRG neurons were harvested and lysed in IP lysis buffer (25mM Tris•HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) containing a cocktail of protease and phosphatase inhibitors on ice for 30min. After centrifuging at 12,000g for 10min at 4 °C, protein concentration was measured by BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher, 23227). 1.2mg protein per group was used for the AMPKα immunoprecipitation experiment. 5ug AMPKα antibody (Abcam, ab80039) was added into each sample for overnight incubation at 4 °C on a rotary device. Normal rabbit IgG immunoprecipitation was used as negative control. On the second day, 50ul protein A Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher, 10001D) was washed 2 times with 500ul IP lysis buffer and incubated with the protein and AMPKα antibody mixed solution for 1h at 4 °C. Thereafter, the nonspecific proteins were separated by the Magna GrIP Rack (Millipore, 20-400). The Dynabeads complex was washed 3 times with 1ml IP lysis buffer. Next, Dynabeads were resuspended in 30ul 1XLDS loading buffer (Thermo Fisher, NP0007) containing reducing agent and mixed gently. Next the samples were boiled 10min at 70°C, the LDS loading buffer was separated from the beads mixture and collected for mass spectrometry analyses. All samples were prepared in biological duplicates. Samples were loaded on a 10% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Life technologies) for 10min at 180V in MES running buffer (Life technologies). After fixation in 7% acetic acid containing 40% methanol and subsequent staining for 30min using Colloidal Blue staining kit (Life technologies), protein lane was excised from the gel, chopped and destained (50% ethanol in 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 15min rotating at room temperature and dehydrated for 10min rotating in 100% acetonitrile. Vacuum dried samples were rehydrated and reduced for 60min in reduction buffer (10mM DTT in 50mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0) at 56°C and subsequently alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 for 45min at room temperature in the dark. Dehydrated and vacuum dried samples were trypsin digested (1µg trypsin/sample in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0) at 37°C over night. Stepwise peptide extraction was done as follows: twice extraction solution (30% acetonitrile) and 100% acetonitrile for 15min at 25°C shaking at 1400 rpm. Reductive methylation for quantification was performed as previously described (Hsu et al., 2003). Chemically labelled peptides were mixed 1:1 as follows:  EXT_CF_0097 = (AMPK-IP, SNA-lysate), Heavy label + (IgG-IP, SNA-lysate), Light label; EXT_CF_0098 = (IgG-IP, SNA-lysate), Heavy label + (AMPK-IP, SNA-lysate), Light label; EXT_CF_0099 = (AMPK-IP, sham-lysate), Heavy label + (IgG-IP, sham-lysate), Light label; EXT_CF_0100 = (IgG-IP, sham-lysate), Heavy label + (AMPK-IP, sham-lysate), Light label; Light label = DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 and Heavy label = DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4

### Data Protocol
Spectra were recorded with a Q Exactive Plus operating in positive mode and recording TOP10 MSMS. Spectra were searched against Mus Musculus Uniprot database (downloaded 8th of January 2018; 91,278 entries) in MaxQuant Version 1.5.2.8

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Immunoprecipitation, Ampk, Spinal injury

### Affiliations
Charite
Imperial College, Medicine, Level 3 Sherfield Building, Exhibition Road, SW7 2AZ London

### Submitter
Anja Freiwald

### Lab Head
Dr Ilaria Palmisano
Imperial College, Medicine, Level 3 Sherfield Building, Exhibition Road, SW7 2AZ London


