### Accession
PXD000794

### Title
Regulatory T-cell LC-MSMS -  Transcription Factor 7 Limits Regulatory T Cell Generation in the Thymus

### Description
In this study, the proteomes of regulatory T cells (Treg) and conventional T cells (Tconv) were compared in a quantitative proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion – Cell pellets corresponding to 6x105 FACS-sorted Treg (Foxp3+) and Tconv (Foxp3-) cells were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then heated at 90 ºC for 5 minutes, followed by sonication for 20 minutes and removal of cell debris by centrifugation. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 ºC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark, followed by protein digestion overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 ºC. The reaction was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.2% (v/v), and RapiGest was precipitated by further incubation at 37 ºC for 45 minutes. Following centrifugation supernatants were collected and protein digests were stored at -20 ºC until further use. Peptide stable isotope labeling and fractionation – Protein digests were dimethyl labeled on column as previously described with slight modifications (Boersema 2009). Briefly, SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) were washed with ACN and conditioned with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Acidified samples were loaded and washed with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were labeled by flushing the columns with labeling reagent (light or intermediate using CH2O (Fisher) + NaBH3CN (Fluka) or CD2O (Isotec) + NaBH3CN, respectively). After washing with 0.1% formic acid, labeled peptides were eluted with 80% (v/v) ACN/0.05% (v/v) formic acid. The ‘light’ and ‘intermediate’ labeled samples were mixed in 1:1 ratio based on cell number. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in IPG rehydration buffer and fractionated according to manufacturer’s instructions using pH 3-10 IPG strips and 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent). The 12 fractions resolved were acidified and desalted with C18 Stagetips (Empore 3M) (Rappsilber 2007). Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 ºC until further use.  LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis - Peptides were separated using the nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm particle size, 180 µm inner diameter x 20 mm length) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm particle size, 75µm inner diameter x 200 mm length).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Proxeon nanospray source. The mobile phases for LC separation were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ACN (solvent B). Peptides were first loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 15 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 2 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 7% in 10 minutes, then increased to 25% in 100 minutes and finally to 40% in a further 10 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 230 °C. Full scan spectra from m/z 300 to 1700 at resolution 30,000 FWHM (profile mode) were acquired in the Orbitrap MS. The filling time was set at maximum of 500 ms with limitation of 106 ions. From each full-scan spectra, the 15 ions with the highest relative intensity were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. Normalized collision energy of 40% was used, and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3 x 104 ions or after filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data was acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ and 3+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries with maximum retention period of 30 s and relative mass window of 7 ppm. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification - MS raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.2.0.18) (Cox 2008). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The derived peak list was searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine (version 1.2.0.18) in MaxQuant against the Uniprot mouse database (2011.06.21) containing 53,623 proteins to which 248 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries had been added. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search, and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ion masses. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acid residues and three labeled amino acid residues were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required at both the protein level and the peptide level. In addition to the FDR threshold, proteins were considered identified if they had at least one unique peptide. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. Bioinformatic analysis – Statistical analysis was performed for the proteins quantified in at least two replicates using the Limma package in R/Bioconductor (Gentleman 2004, Smyth 2004). After fitting a linear model to the data, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used for the protein ratios, which were weighted on the summed peptide intensities reported by MaxQuant in order to capture the effect that the statistical spread of unregulated proteins is much more focused for highly abundant proteins than for low abundance ones (Cox 2008). P-values were then adjusted for multiple testing with Benjamini and Hochberg's method. Proteins with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed between Treg and Tconv. Protein classification was performed using PANTHER classification system (Mi 2007). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed using the functional annotation tool of MetaCore (GeneGo Inc., (Nikolsky 2005)). Direct interactions between differentially expressed proteins were investigated using the STRING database (Jensen 2009), and visualized in Cytoscape (Shannon 2003). Heatmaps were generated using the ggplot2 package in R (Wickham 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) differentiate in the thymus, but the mechanisms that control this process are not fully understood. We generated a comprehensive quantitative and differential proteome of murine Tregs and conventional T cells. We identified 5225 proteins, 164 of which were differentially expressed in Tregs. Together with the comparative analysis of proteome and gene expression data, we identified TCF7 as a promising candidate. Genetic elimination of transcription factor 7 (TCF7) led to increased fractions of Tregs in the thymus. Reduced levels of TCF7, found in the heterozygote, resulted in a greater potential for Treg precursors to differentiate into the Treg lineage. In contrast, activation of TCF7 through &#x3b2;-catenin had the opposite effect. TCF7 levels influenced the required TCR signaling strength of Treg precursors, and TCF7 deficiency broadened the repertoire and allowed lower TCR affinities to be recruited into the Treg lineage. FOXP3 was able to repress TCF7 protein expression. In summary, we propose a regulatory role for TCF7 in limiting access to the Treg lineage.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Treg

### Affiliations
EMBL
Functional Proteomics Genome Biology Unit European Molecular Biology Laboratory Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Functional Proteomics Genome Biology Unit European Molecular Biology Laboratory Heidelberg, Germany


