### Accession
PXD030844

### Title
Pytheas S. cerevisiae tRNA sample analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry remains an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. This dataset contains the analysis of a mixture of S. cerevisiae tRNAs, decorated with a variety of complex RNA modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Mixture of baker’s yeast (S. cerevisiae) tRNA were purchased from Roche and used without further purification. 75 µg were digested with ~100 units of RNase T1 for 1 h at 55°C. LC-MS/MS data were collected using Agilent Q-TOF 6520. Following nuclease digestion (when applicable), RNA MS data were acquired on an Agilent Q-TOF 6520-ESI instrument coupled to the Agilent 1200 LC system. Mixtures of nucleolytic RNA fragments were resolved on XBridge C18 column (3.5 µM, 1x150 mm, Waters) via a 40 min 1-15% of mobile phase B linear gradient elution with 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) as mobile phase A and 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) in 50% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Data were collected in the data-dependent acquisition mode using negative ionization. A typical duty cycle consisted of a single 0.33 s MS1 scan (400-1700 m/z) followed by 4-6 successive 1 s MS2 scans (100-1700 m/z and 4 m/z isolation window). Most intense precursor ions were used for isolation (4 m/z isolation window) and CID fragmentation. Fragmentation collision energies were optimized by direct infusion of 23 RNA oligonucleotide standards. For the MS2 data acquisition, precursor ion selection rules were as follows: absolute intensity threshold was 2000 counts; ions with assigned charge = 1 were excluded; and 0.35 min dynamic exclusion window was applied. Modified sequences from T1 digested tRNAs were analyzed using targeted acquisition and MS2 scans were averaged across chromatographic peak. MS2 data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Agilent Qualitative Analysis software, limiting number of peaks to 250-350 most intense, and using 20 counts as an absolute intensity threshold, unless scan averaging was used.

### Data Protocol
The yeast target-decoy library was prepared from the 275 tRNA sequences of S. cerevisiae S288c that have been retrieved from the GtRNAdb, identical entries were filtered out and the remaining 55 sequences aligned. T1 digestion, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages was used. Except for pseudouridine, 19 different types of tRNA modifications were included using the MODOMICS database as reference for sequence location. Since tRNAGln is missing from MODOMICS entries, tRNAGln sequences was left unmodified. Matching and scoring have been performed using the default parameters, except for β = 0.025 and α = 2.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. The main features of Pytheas are flexible handling of isotope labeling and RNA modifications, with false discovery rate statistical validation based on sequence decoys. We demonstrate bottom-up mass spectrometry characterization of diverse RNA sequences, with broad applications in the biology of stable RNAs, and quality control of RNA therapeutics and mRNA vaccines.

### Keywords
Yeast, Rna modifications, Pytheas

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States

### Submitter
Luigi D'Ascenzo

### Lab Head
Dr Jamer R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States


