### Accession
PXD041716

### Title
Verticillium dahliae Frq and Frh form a Frq-Frh complex in dependence on arginine 806 (R806) of Frh

### Description
The plant pathogenic fungus Verticillium dahliae has homologs of the clock genes [Cascant-Lopez et al., 2020], which are well described in Neurospora crassa [Diernfellner et al., 2020]. In N. crassa, frequency (Frq) and the Frq-interacting RNA helicase (Frh) interact and form the Frq-Frh complex [Cheng et al., 2005]. Formation of this complex was described to be still possible but weakened by a single amino acid exchange of arginine 806 of Frh to histidine (Frh^R806H) [Shi et al., 2010; Conrad et al., 2016]. We found that both FRQ and wild-type FRH were required for enhanced conidiation and the light-dependent repression of microsclerotia formation in V. dahliae, but were dispensable for disease induction in tomato plants. Strikingly, the FRH^R806H mutant strain grew similar to the FRQ deletion strain, although transcript and protein levels of Frq were not significantly affected by the FRH^R806H mutation when compared with the wild-type. Therefore, we hypothesized that V. dahliae Frq and Frh form the Frq-Frh complex to regulate V. dahliae development, and that this complex formation is abolished upon the amino acid exchange in the Frh. By the use of protein pull-downs, potential interactions of Frh-GFP or Frh^R806H-GFP with Frq were investigated. While we found evidence for a direct interaction of Frh-GFP and Frq, no proteins were significantly co-enriched with Frh^R806H-GFP.  References:  Cascant-Lopez, E.; Crosthwaite, S.K.; Johnson, L.J.; Harrison, R.J. No evidence that homologs of key circadian clock genes direct circadian programs of development or mRNA abundance in Verticillium dahliae. Front Microbiol 2020, 11, 1977, doi:10.3389/fmicb.2020.01977. Diernfellner, A.C.R.; Brunner, M. Phosphorylation timers in the Neurospora crassa circadian clock. J Mol Biol 2020, 432, 3449–3465, doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2020.04.004. Cheng, P.; He, Q.; He, Q.; Wang, L.; Liu, Y. Regulation of the Neurospora circadian clock by an RNA helicase. Genes Dev 2005, 19, 234–241, doi:10.1101/gad.1266805. Shi, M.; Collett, M.; Loros, J.J.; Dunlap, J.C. FRQ-interacting RNA helicase mediates negative and positive feedback in the Neurospora circadian clock. Genetics 2010, 184, 351–361, doi:10.1534/genetics.109.111393. Conrad, K.S.; Hurley, J.M.; Widom, J.; Ringelberg, C.S.; Loros, J.J.; Dunlap, J.C.; Crane, B.R. Structure of the frequency‐interacting RNA helicase: a protein interaction hub for the circadian clock. EMBO J 2016, 35, 1707–1719, doi:10.15252/embj.201694327.

### Sample Protocol
5 × 10^9 freshly harvested conidiospores of the V. dahliae JR2 wild-type strain, an ectopically GFP overexpressing strain, an FRH-GFP expressing strain, and an FRH^R806H-GFP expressing strain were used to inoculate 500 ml simulated xylem medium [Harting et al., 2020]. After two days of incubation in light with shaking at 25°C, mycelia from one to three cultures each were combined (N = 1) and ground in liquid nitrogen. Ground mycelia of V. dahliae wild-type and the GFP overexpressing strain VGB45 were mixed to obtain approximately the same level of free GFP in the wild-type control compared with Frh-GFP fusion protein (59/60 wild-type, 1/60 VGB45). Protein extraction with B*-buffer, the in vitro protein pull-down, subsequent chloroform-methanol extraction, protein digestion with trypsin in presence of RapiGest SF (Waters), and subsequent TFA treatment were conducted for three biological replicates (N = 3) as previously described [Höfer et al., 2021] with the following modification: The three eluates of the protein pull-down were mixed. Peptides were purified with StageTips [Rappsilber et al., 2003, 2007] according to the described protocol [Maurus et al., 2023]. Purified peptides were solved and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) analysis conducted as previously described [Höfer et al., 2021].  References: Harting, R.; Höfer, A.; Tran, V.-T.; Weinhold, L.-M.; Barghahn, S.; Schlüter, R.; Braus, G.H. The Vta1 transcriptional regulator is required for microsclerotia melanization in Verticillium dahliae. Fungal Biol 2020, 124, 490–500, doi:10.1016/j.funbio.2020.01.007. Höfer, A.M.; Harting, R.; Aßmann, N.F.; Gerke, J.; Schmitt, K.; Starke, J.; Bayram, Ö.; Tran, V.-T.; Valerius, O.; Braus-Stromeyer, S.A.; et al. The velvet protein Vel1 controls initial plant root colonization and conidia formation for xylem distribution in Verticillium wilt. PLoS Genet 2021, 17, e1009434, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1009434. Rappsilber, J.; Ishihama, Y.; Mann, M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 2003, 75, 663–670, doi:10.1021/ac026117i. Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Ishihama, Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2007, 2, 1896–1906, doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261. Maurus, I.; Harting, R.; Herrfurth, C.; Starke, J.; Nagel, A.; Mohnike, L.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Schmitt, K.; Bastakis, E.; Süß, M.T.; et al. Verticillium dahliae Vta3 promotes ELV1 virulence factor gene expression in xylem sap, but tames Mtf1-mediated late stages of fungus-plant interactions and microsclerotia formation. PLoS Pathog 2023, 19, e1011100, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1011100.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analyzed and processed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 [Cox and Mann, 2008] and Perseus 1.6.0.7 [Tyanova et al., 2016] according to the described protocol [Höfer et al., 2021]. Rows were filtered for a minimum of three valid values in samples of either the FRH-GFP or the FRH^R806H-GFP expressing strain. The replacement of missing values from normal distribution was independently conducted four times. The fusion protein expressing strain (FRH-GFP or FRH^R806H-GFP) was used as the first group in the volcano plot, and the control as the second group.  References: Cox, J.; Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367–1372, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511. Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M.Y.; Geiger, T.; Mann, M.; Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics Data. Nat Methods 2016, 13, 731–740, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901. Höfer, A.M.; Harting, R.; Aßmann, N.F.; Gerke, J.; Schmitt, K.; Starke, J.; Bayram, Ö.; Tran, V.-T.; Valerius, O.; Braus-Stromeyer, S.A.; et al. The velvet protein Vel1 controls initial plant root colonization and conidia formation for xylem distribution in Verticillium wilt.

### Publication Abstract
The vascular plant pathogenic fungus <i>Verticillium dahliae</i> has to adapt to environmental changes outside and inside its host. <i>V. dahliae</i> harbors homologs of <i>Neurospora crassa</i> clock genes. The molecular functions and interactions of Frequency (Frq) and Frq-interacting RNA helicase (Frh) in controlling conidia or microsclerotia development were investigated in <i>V. dahliae</i> JR2. Fungal mutant strains carrying clock gene deletions, an <i>FRH</i> point mutation, or <i>GFP</i> gene fusions were analyzed on transcript, protein, and phenotypic levels as well as in pathogenicity assays on tomato plants. Our results support that the Frq-Frh complex is formed and that it promotes conidiation, but also that it suppresses and therefore delays <i>V. dahliae</i> microsclerotia formation in response to light. We investigated a possible link between the negative element Frq and positive regulator Suppressor of flocculation 1 (Sfl1) in microsclerotia formation to elucidate the regulatory molecular mechanism. Both Frq and Sfl1 are mainly present during the onset of microsclerotia formation with decreasing protein levels during further development. Induction of microsclerotia formation requires Sfl1 and can be delayed at early time points in the light through the Frq-Frh complex. Gaining further molecular knowledge on <i>V. dahliae</i> development will improve control of fungal growth and Verticillium wilt disease.

### Keywords
Frq-interacting rna helicase, Clock proteins, Frq, Frequency, Verticillium dahliae jr2, Frh

### Affiliations
University of Göttingen, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard H. Braus
University of Göttingen, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics


