### Accession
PXD017229

### Title
Revisiting high resolution crystal structure of Phormidium rubidum phycocyanin using X-ray and mass spectrometry

### Description
X-ray crystolography structure deconvolution in combination with mass spectrometry sequencing

### Sample Protocol
Pure PC was precipitated by adding 4X volume of acetone, the resulting protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea (30 µL), and the disulfide bonds were reduced using TCEP, tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (C4706, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 5 mM total concentration for 30 min. The free thiols were then alkylated with freshly prepared iodoacetamide (I1149, Sigma), added to give 10 mM final concentration, for 30 min with shaking in the dark. Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (V5071, Promega, Madison, WI) was added to give a final concentration of 0.02 µg/µL, and enzymatic digestion took place at 37 ºC with shaking overnight. Finally, the digestion was quenched by adding 5 uL of 1% aqueous formic acid to afford a total concentration of 0.1%. Aliquots (5 µL, ~100 pmoles) of the peptide samples were separated on line by using a Dionex Ulimate 3000 RSLCnano pump and autosampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and a custom-packed column containing ProntoSIL C18AQ, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size (Bischoff, Stuttgart, Germany), in a 75 µm × 15 cm capillary. The mobile phase consisted of A: 0.1% formic acid in water, and B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile/20% water (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). At a flow rate of 500 nL/min, the gradient was held for 5 min at 2% B and slowly ramped to 17% B over the next 30 min, increasing to 47% B over the next 30 min and then finally increasing to 90% B over 30 min and held at 90% for 10 min.  The column was then allowed to re-equilibrate for 60 min with a flow of 2% B in preparation for the next injection.   The separated peptides were analyzed on-line by using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) operated in standard data-dependent acquisition mode controlled by Xcalibur version 4.0.27.19. Precursor-ion activation was set with an isolation width of m/z 1.0 and with two collision energies toggled between 25 and 30%. The mass resolving power was 70 K for precursor ions and 17.5 K for the product ions (MS2).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X (version 10.0, Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, www.bioinfor.com) and Protein Metrics Byonic and Byologic (Protein Metrics Inc., Cupertino, CA, www.proteinmetrics.com). The data were searched against a custom database that included decoys, and positive IDs were manually verified. PEAKS was used in the de novo mode followed by DB, PTM, and SPIDER modes. Search parameters included a precursor-ion mass tolerance of 10.0 ppm and a fragment-ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Variable modifications included all built-in modifications as well as phycobiliprotein specific PTMs, and the pigments selected were phycocyanobilin and phycoerythrin.  The maximum allowed modifications per peptide were 3; and the maximum missed cleavages were 2; false discovery rate, 0.1%. SPIDER (function) was used to identify unknown spectra by considering homology searches, sequence errors, and residue substitutions to yield a more confident identification.  Byonic searches employed the same database but used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 60 ppm with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Wildcard searches of ± 200 Da were employed to look for modifications in addition to regular PTM analysis.   Protein false discovery rate threshold was determined by the score of the highest ranked decoy protein identified. All the search results were combined in Byologic for validation. Some predicted peptide fragments derived from the originally proposed sequence or the raw X-ray crystallography data were not identified with this strategy. For these, a peptide sequence library was constructed by using Python, and this new database containing variable amino acids at conflicting sites was used for a new search. This strategy allowed all the remaining residues to be identified.

### Publication Abstract
The crystal structure of phycocyanin (pr-PC) isolated from Phormidium rubidum A09DM (P. rubidum) is described at a resolution of 1.17&#xa0;&#xc5;. Electron density maps derived from crystallographic data showed many clear differences in amino acid sequences when compared with the previously obtained gene-derived sequences. The differences were found in 57 positions (30 in &#x3b1;-subunit and 27 in &#x3b2;-subunit of pr-PC), in which all residues except one (&#x3b2;145Arg) are not interacting with the three phycocyanobilin chromophores. Highly purified pr-PC was then sequenced by mass spectrometry (MS) using LC-MS/MS. The MS data were analyzed using two independent proteomic search engines. As a result of this analysis, complete agreement between the polypeptide sequences and the electron density maps was obtained. We attribute the difference to multiple genes in the bacterium encoding the phycocyanin apoproteins and that the gene sequencing sequenced the wrong ones. We are not implying that protein sequencing by mass spectrometry is more accurate than that of gene sequencing. The final 1.17&#xa0;&#xc5; structure of pr-PC allows the chromophore interactions with the protein to be described with high accuracy.

### Keywords
Phormidium_pc sequence

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Haijun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Haijun Liu
Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis


