### Accession
PXD044415

### Title
A strategy to disentangle direct and indirect effects on (de)phosphorylation by chemical modulators of the phosphatase PP1 in complex cellular contexts

### Description
Chemical activators and inhibitors are useful probes to identify substrates and downstream effects of
enzymes; however, due to the complex signaling environment within cells, it is challenging to distinguish
between direct and indirect effects. This is particularly the case for phosphorylation, where a single
(de)phosphorylation event can trigger rapid changes in many other phosphorylation sites. An additional
complication arises when a single catalytic entity, which acts in form of many different holoenzymes with
different substrates, is activated or inhibited, as it is unclear which holoenzymes are affected, and in turn
which of their substrates are (de)phosphorylated. Direct target engaging MS-based technologies to study
targets of drugs do not address these challenges. Here, we tackle this by studying the modulation of protein
phosphatase-1 (PP1) activity by PP1-disrupting peptides (PDPs), as well as their selectivity toward PP1, by
using a combination of mass spectrometry-based experiments. By combining cellular treatment with the PDP
with in vitro dephosphorylation by the enzyme, we identify high confidence substrate candidates and begin
to separate direct and indirect effects. Together with experiments analyzing which holoenzymes are
particularly susceptible to this treatment, we obtain insights into the effect of the modulator on the complex
network of protein (de)phosphorylation. This strategy holds promise for enhancing our understanding of PP1
in particular and, due to the broad applicability of the workflow and the MS-based read-out, of chemical
modulators with complex mode of action in general.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth and Co-immunoprecipitation experiments for mVenus-PDP1(m): Eight 10 cm cell culture dishes with HeLa Kyoto cells (BIOSS cell line repository) were grown to 60% confluency and transfected with 10 µg pTriEx-mVenus-PDP1 or pTriEx-mVenus-PDP1m per plate using FuGene HD (4 plates per plasmid). 24 h post transfection cells were placed on ice and washed twice with 10 mL ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed in 500 µL lysis buffer per plate (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1% IGEPAL, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1x PhosStop (Roche), 1x Protease Inhibitor) and cells scratched from the plate and pressed through a needle (21 G, BD) 8 times, before being transferred to an Eppendorf tube. Next, all tubes were centrifuged at 4 °C and 104 rcf for 10 min. 20 µL of the resulting supernatant served as input sample. 25 µL CnBr-GFP nanobody agarose bead slurry (EMBL PEPcore) per tube (8 tubes total) were washed two times with 1 mL lysis buffer (centrifugation at 4 °C and 300 rcf for 1 min). Beads were then incubated with the resulting supernatant from lysate centrifugation on a rotation wheel at 4 °C for 2 h. Beads were washed three times with 1 mL lysis buffer (centrifugation at 4 °C and 300 rcf for 1 min) and eluted in 40 µL 1x LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE; Thermo Fisher) with 100 mM DTT by heating to 70 °C for 10 min. Samples were immediately stored at -80 °C for subsequent MS analysis.   mVenus-PP1α after PDP(m)-Nal treatment:  Eight 10 cm dishes for the cell line HeLa Kyoto FlpInTrex mVenus-PP1α and four 10 cm dishes of HeLa Kyoto FlpInTrex mVenus-Ctrl were induced with 1 µg/mL doxycycline for 24 h. Lyophilized stocks of PDP-Nal and PDPm-Nal (jpt, Heidelberg) were dissolved in 10% DMSO to a stock concentration of 10 mM and stored at –20 °C. On the day of the experiment, peptides were diluted to final concentration of 50 µM in growth medium (DMEM, 1 g/L glucose, GlutaMAX™ Supplement, 1 mM pyruvate, Gibco). Five minutes before lysis, medium was removed from the cell culture dishes and 50 µM PDP-Nal or PDPm-Nal in 5 mL growth medium was added onto the dishes for HeLa Kyoto FlpInTrex mVenus-PPP1CA (4 plates per peptide variant). For incubation, cells were placed back at 37 °C. After 5 min, cells were immediately placed on ice and washed three times with 10 mL ice-cold PBS. After final removal of PBS, plates were placed at a 45° angle for 1 min to collect and remove excess PBS. Cell lysis was then carried out by adding 500 µL lysis buffer per dish (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% IGEPAL, 1x cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). Cells were then scraped on ice, transferred to an Eppendorf tube and additional lysis was carried out by pushing cells through an injection needle (21 G, BD) eight times. Subsequently, cells were centrifuged at 4 °C and 104 rcf for 10 min. From the resulting supernatant, 50 µL were removed as input sample. The remainder was used for immunoprecipitation. The lysate from each plate was incubated with 25 µL agarose GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek, prewashed in lysis buffer) on a rotation wheel at 4 °C for 2h. After three washes (spin down at 4 °C and 400 rcf for 1 min) with 1 mL lysis buffer, samples were eluted by incubation of bead slurry with 30 µL 1x LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE; Thermo Fisher) at 70 °C for 10 min.   PDP(m)-Nal phosphoproteome analysis:  Lyophilized stocks of PDP-Nal and PDPm-Nal (jpt, Heidelberg) were dissolved in 10% DMSO to a stock concentration of 10 mM and stored at –20 °C. On the day of the experiment, peptides were diluted to final concentration of 50 µM in growth medium (DMEM, 1 g/L glucose, GlutaMAX™ Supplement, 1 mM pyruvate, Gibco). As control, a 10% DMSO solution without peptides was diluted in growth medium in the same manner. HeLa Kyoto cells (obtained from the BIOSS cell line repository) were grown to 90% confluency in 10 cm cell culture dishes before being washed twice with 10 mL PBS. Next, three dishes per condition were treated with 3 mL of 50 µM PDP-Nal, PDPm-Nal, or control solution described above. All dishes were placed back at 37 °C in the cell culture incubator for 5 min. Dishes were lysed in 500 µL 8 M urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 20 nM Calyculin A, 1x PhosStop (Roche) and cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (#04693132001, Roche)). The lysate was collected by using a cell scraper and pressed through an injection needle (21 G, BD) using a syringe 8 times. 5 µL of sample were used for Bradford determination of total protein and the remaining sample was immediately frozen at -80°C for later MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS sample preparation and data acquisition for co-immunoprecipitations In‐gel trypsin digestion of co-immunoprecipitated samples was performed according to standard procedures. Briefly, the samples were run on a Nu-PAGE™ 4%–12% Bis‐Tris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for about 1 cm. Subsequently, the still not size‐separated single protein band per sample was cut, reduced (50 mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55 mM chloroacetamide) and digested overnight with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega). The peptides obtained were dried to completeness and resuspended in 25 μL of buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water), and 5 μL of sample were injected per MS measurement. LC‐MS/MS measurements were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermofisher Scientific, Bremen) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific, Bremen). Injected peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The mass spectrometers were operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60k using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 (HF-X) or 4e5 (Lumos) and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 ms (HF-X) or 50 ms (Lumos). Up to 18 (HF-X) or 20 (Lumos) peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 25 s (HF-X) or 20 s (Lumos) was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26% (HF-X) or 30% (Lumos). The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 (HF-X) or 5e4 (Lumos) and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 ms (HF-X) or 22 ms (Lumos).   MS sample preparation and data acquisition for phosphoproteomics.  200 µg of protein lysates per sample were reduced, alkylated and diluted to 1.3 M Urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Digestion was performed by adding trypsin and incubating overnight at 37 °C. TMT labeling was carried out by reconstituting peptide solutions (200 μg peptide amount per sample) in 20 μL of 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5), and 5 μL of a specific 11.6 mM TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100% anhydrous ACN. In total nine different peptide samples (biological triplicates of “control”, “PDP-Nal” and “PDPm-Nal”), each labeled with a specific TMT reagent, were pooled into a TMT-9-plex pool and acidified using 20 μL of 10% FA. Phosphopeptides were enriched from 1.8 mg of TMT-labeled peptide pool using Fe-IMAC as described previously. High-pH RP tip fractionation into 6 fractions was performed in Stage Tips.  LC-MS/MS measurements of TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were carried out using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific, Bremen). Peptides were separated using a 90 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water). The Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA), positive ionization and multi-notch MS3 mode. Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded over a range of 360-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60k using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to charge state (2-6), dynamic exclusion (90 s with a ±10 ppm window), and monoisotopic precursor selection. MS2 spectra for peptide identification were recorded in the Orbitrap (Quadrupole isolation window 0.7 m/z). Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30% (AGC target value 5e4, maximum injection time 54 ms, resolution 30k). For TMT reporter ion quantification an additional MS3 spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap over an m/z range of 100-1000 m/z at 50k resolution (AGC target value 1.2e5, maximum injection time 120 ms). For this, fragment ions were selected by multi-notch isolation, allowing a maximum of 10 notches. MS1 precursor isolation was performed with an MS1 isolation window of 1.2 m/z and an MS2 isolation window of 2 m/z. Fragmentation in the Orbitrap was performed by HCD at 55% NCE. The overall cycle time of the method was 3 s.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein phosphatase-1; enzyme activators; enzyme inhibitors; phosphoproteomics; mode of action

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Strasse 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


