### Accession
PXD024106

### Title
Acid sphingomyelinase deactivation post-ischemia/ reperfusion promotes cerebral angiogenesis and brain remodeling via small extracellular vesiclesAcid sphingomyelinase deactivation post-ischemia/ reperfusion promotes cerebral angiogenesis and brain remodeling via small extracellular vesicles

### Description
Acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) inhibitors, which are clinically used as anti-depressants for ~60 years, have recently been shown to enhance stroke recovery in rodents. Using mice and cerebral microvascular endothelial cells exposed to ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) we show that the antidepressants amitriptyline, fluoxetine and desipramine induce angiogenesis in an ASM-dependent way by releasing small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from endothelial cells, which have bona fide characteristics of exosomes and which, similar to sEVs released during I/R, promote angiogenesis. Post-I/R, ASM inhibition elicits a profound brain remodeling response with increased blood-brain barrier integrity, reduced brain leukocyte infiltrates and increased neuronal survival. The ASM inhibitor-mediated release of sEVs has disclosed an elegant target, via which stroke recovery can be amplified. Key words: Antidepressant, ceramide, exosome, focal cerebral ischemia, middle cerebral artery occlusion, sphingomyelin, stroke recovery

### Sample Protocol
Purified exosomes released from hCMEC/D3 cultured under normoxic conditions were exposed to vehicle or amitriptyline (50 µM) and lysed in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) at pH 7.8 supplemented with 1 tablet cOmplete Mini and 1 tablet PhosSTOP (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) per 10 ml. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay. Afterwards, cysteines were reduced by 30 min incubation at 56°C in 10 mM dithiothreitol and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were processed using S-trap Micro Column Digestion Protocol with slight modifications. In brief, carbamidomethylated samples were diluted with 10% SDS to a final concentration of 5% SDS. Afterwards, 4.43 µl of 12% phosphoric acid were added, followed by the addition of 292.38 µl of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.1). 165 µl of the acidified lysate/S-trap buffer mix was placed into the spin column and spun down in a bench-top centrifuge in a 1.5 ml tube at 4,000 g until all the solution had passed through. The flow through was discarded and the rest of the acidified lysate/S-trap buffer mix was loaded into the spin column and the procedure explained before was repeated. Afterwards, 3 washing steps with 150 µl of S-trap binding buffer each were performed by centrifugation at 4,000 g. Then, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, U.S.A.) was added in an enzyme to a sample ratio of 1:10 (w/w) in 25 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing 2 mM CaCl2. Spin columns were incubated for 1 h at 47°C. After incubation, peptides were recovered by centrifugation prior addition of 40 µl of 50 mM ABC to the spin columns. Further peptide recovery was done by adding 40 µl 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 35 µl of 50% acetonitrile (for recovering hydrophobic peptides) to the spin columns followed by centrifugation. Finally, samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Raw data and label free quantification analysis were done with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In the consensus workflow, the Feature Mapper, the Precursor Ion Quantifier and the Protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) Validator nodes were used. With the Feature Mapper node chromatographic runs were aligned based on the retention time. For the Precursor Ion Quantifier node (1) parameters for peptides were set to Unique and Razor, (2) precursor abundances were based on intensity, (3) sample normalization was based on total peptide amount and (4) target FDR was set to 0.01. For the processing workflow the Minora Feature Detector was used. Raw data were entered in the Uniprot human database (November 2019; 20,609 protein sequences). Mascot and Sequest were applied as search algorithms with the following settings: (1) trypsin as enzyme allowing two missed cleavages, (2) carbamidomethylation of cysteins (+57.0214 Da) as fixed modification, (3) oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) as variable modification, and (4) mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Antidepressants have been reported to enhance stroke recovery independent of the presence of depressive symptoms. They have recently been proposed to exert their mood-stabilizing actions by inhibition of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), which catalyzes the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin to ceramide. Their restorative action post-ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) still had to be defined. Mice subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion or cerebral microvascular endothelial cells exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation were treated with vehicle or with the chemically and pharmacologically distinct antidepressants amitriptyline, fluoxetine or desipramine. Brain ASM activity significantly increased post-I/R, in line with elevated ceramide levels in microvessels. ASM inhibition by amitriptyline reduced ceramide levels, and increased microvascular length and branching point density in wildtype, but not sphingomyelinase phosphodiesterase-1 ([Smpd1]<sup>-/-</sup>) (i.e., ASM-deficient) mice, as assessed by 3D light sheet microscopy. In cell culture, amitriptyline, fluoxetine, and desipramine increased endothelial tube formation, migration, VEGFR2 abundance and VEGF release. This effect was abolished by Smpd1 knockdown. Mechanistically, the promotion of angiogenesis by ASM inhibitors was mediated by small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) released from endothelial cells, which exhibited enhanced uptake in target cells. Proteomic analysis of sEVs revealed that ASM deactivation differentially regulated proteins implicated in protein export, focal adhesion, and extracellular matrix interaction. In vivo, the increased angiogenesis was accompanied by a profound brain remodeling response with increased blood-brain barrier integrity, reduced leukocyte infiltrates and increased neuronal survival. Antidepressive drugs potently boost angiogenesis in an ASM-dependent way. The release of sEVs by ASM inhibitors disclosed an elegant target, via which brain remodeling post-I/R can be amplified.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Antidepressants, Lc-ms/ms, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr Albert Sickmann sickmann@isas.de>
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


