### Accession
PXD024844

### Title
Age-related alterations in the testicular proteome of a non-human primate

### Description
Aging of the human testis and associated cellular changes are difficult to assess, thus we used a translational non-human primate model to get insights into underlying biochemical processes. Using proteomics we analyzed testicular tissue of six young (age 2 to 3) and four old (age 10 to 12) C. jacchus individuals. Mass spectrometry identified 63124 peptides, which could be assigned to 5924 proteins. Among them we found proteins, which are specific for germ cells, Leydig cells, and somatic cells, indicating the relevance of the dataset. The quantitative analysis showed 31 differentially abundant proteins, of which 29 proteins were more abundant in old animals. An increased abundance of several anti-proliferative proteins, among them CDKN2A, indicate slowed cell proliferation in older testes. Immunohistochemistry localized CDKN2A in spermatogonia and spermatocytes, suggesting altered spermatogenesis. Additionally, an increased abundance of several extracellular proteins and small leucine rich repeat proteoglycans was observed, which may be related to impaired cell migration and fibrotic events. An increased abundance of proteins with inhibitory roles in smooth muscle cell contraction like CNN1, indicate functional alterations, specifically in peritubular cells and may mirror a reduced capacity of these cells, to contract in aged testes. In summary, these results document several age-associated changes in the testicular proteome of a non-human primate model and provides new insight into testicular aging.

### Sample Protocol
To approximately 1 mg tissue 100 µL of 8 M of urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. For lysis and homogenization, samples were sonicated using a cup resonator (Bandelin) and further processed with QIAshredder (QIAGEN) centrifugation devices (4 °C, 2500 g, 1 min). Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce 660 nm assay (Thermo Scientific). 20 µg of protein were reduced in 4 mM dithiothreitol/2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and subsequently alkylated in 8 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested in two steps: (i) Lys-C (1/100, enzyme/protein, Wako) for 4 h and (ii) trypsin (1/50 enzyme/protein, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled with a Q Exactive HF-X (both Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of 1.5 µg peptides were injected onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μM particles, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min (mobile phase: 0.1% formic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water). Peptide separation was performed with an EASY-Spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Scientific) and a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A two-step gradient was used: first from 3% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% B in 160 min and second a 10 min ramp to 40% B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water). Peptides were analyzed in the data-dependent acquisition mode with up to 15 MS/MS scans per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were searched using MaxQuant (1.6.5.0) with the match between runs feature activated and quantified using the label free quantification approach (Tyanova et al., 2016). Amino acid sequences were retrieved from UniProt using all available entries for C. jacchus from both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL (retrieval: 09/2020).

### Publication Abstract
Aging of human testis and associated cellular changes is difficult to assess. Therefore, we used a translational, non-human primate model to get insights into underlying cellular and biochemical processes. Using proteomics and immunohistochemistry, we analyzed testicular tissue of young (age 2 to 3) and old (age 10 to 12) common marmosets (<i>Callithrix jacchus</i>). Using a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach, we identified 63,124 peptides, which could be assigned to 5924 proteins. Among them, we found proteins specific for germ cells and somatic cells, such as Leydig and Sertoli cells. Quantitative analysis showed 31 differentially abundant proteins, of which 29 proteins were more abundant in older animals. An increased abundance of anti-proliferative proteins, among them CDKN2A, indicate reduced cell proliferation in old testes. Additionally, an increased abundance of several small leucine rich repeat proteoglycans and other extracellular matrix proteins was observed, which may be related to impaired cell migration and fibrotic events. Furthermore, an increased abundance of proteins with inhibitory roles in smooth muscle cell contraction like CNN1 indicates functional alterations in testicular peritubular cells and may mirror a reduced capacity of these cells to contract in old testes.

### Keywords
Testis, Senescence, Testicular peritubular cells, Testicular aging, Aging, Tpcs

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, München, Germany
Genzentrum der LMU München

### Submitter
Jan Bernd Stöckl

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center, LMU München, München, Germany


