### Accession
PXD014380

### Title
Novel mechanisms for phosphate acquisition in abundant rhizosphere-dwelling Bacteroidetes

### Description
Global food production is reliant on the application of finite phosphorus (P) fertilisers. Numerous negative consequences associated with intensive P fertilisation have resulted in a high demand to find alternative sustainable methods that will enhance crop P uptake. Bacteroidetes, primarily from the genus Flavobacterium, have recently been shown to be abundant members of the plant microbiome, but their general ecological role and potential to mobilise P in the rhizosphere remains very poorly characterised. Here, we sought to determine the P mobilisation potential of Flavobacterium strains isolated from the rhizosphere of oilseed rape (Brassica napus L.). In contrast to other abundant rhizosphere bacteria, such as Pseudomonas, all Flavobacterium strains exhibited constitutive phosphatase activity independent of external phosphate (Pi) concentrations. Interestingly, a combination of exoproteomic analysis and molecular microbiology techniques revealed that Flavobacterium have a complex and largely unique repertoire of proteins to mobilise and acquire Pi. This includes the expression of novel, as yet unidentified, phosphatases, and numerous proteins of unknown function. We also discovered that Flavobacterium expresses certain SusCD-like transporters, whose role is typically associated with specialised carbon acquisition, in response to Pi-starvation. Furthermore, the genes encoding these unusual Pi-responsive proteins were enriched in plant-associated Flavobacterium strains suggesting that this machinery represents niche-adaptive strategies for overcoming P scarcity in this genus. We propose that abundant rhizosphere-dwelling Flavobacterium spp. have evolved unique mechanisms for coping with Pi-stress which may provide novel solutions for future sustainable agricultural practices.

### Sample Protocol
Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 25 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 8 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 300 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4% B to 35% over 72 min then to 80% B over 3 min, followed by a 15 min re-equilibration at 4% B.  Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 3 x 103 and the max injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant engine (https://www.maxquant.org/) against the fasta databases provided with the download, and the common contaminant database from MaxQuant. Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y)  as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances.  Scaffold (TM, version 4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Protein groups with significant total spectra intensity were determined according to the T-Test, using Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test correction and p<0.1. Additional analysis was performed with Perseus (https://www.maxquant.org/) version 1.5.5.3

### Publication Abstract
Bacteroidetes are abundant pathogen-suppressing members of the plant microbiome that contribute prominently to rhizosphere phosphorus mobilisation, a frequent growth-limiting nutrient in this niche. However, the genetic traits underpinning their success in this niche remain largely unknown, particularly regarding their phosphorus acquisition strategies. By combining cultivation, multi-layered omics and biochemical analyses we first discovered that all plant-associated Bacteroidetes express constitutive phosphatase activity, linked to the ubiquitous possession of a unique phosphatase, PafA. For the first time, we also reveal a subset of Bacteroidetes outer membrane SusCD-like complexes, typically associated with carbon acquisition, and several TonB-dependent transporters, are induced during Pi-depletion. Furthermore, in response to phosphate depletion, the plant-associated Flavobacterium used in this study expressed many previously characterised and novel proteins targeting organic phosphorus. Collectively, these enzymes exhibited superior phosphatase activity compared to plant-associated Pseudomonas&#xa0;spp. Importantly, several of the novel low-Pi-inducible phosphatases and transporters, belong to the Bacteroidetes auxiliary genome and are an adaptive genomic signature of plant-associated strains. In conclusion, niche adaptation to the plant microbiome thus appears to have resulted in the acquisition of unique phosphorus scavenging loci in Bacteroidetes, enhancing their phosphorus acquisition capabilities. These traits may enable their success in the rhizosphere and also present exciting avenues to develop sustainable agriculture.

### Keywords
Oilseed rape, Exoproteomics, Rhizosphere, Bacteroidetes

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, UK
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Elizabeth M. H. Wellington
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, UK


