### Accession
PXD019962

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Liver in Diet-induced Hyperlipidemic Mice under Fructus Rosa roxburghii action

### Description
Fructus Rosae Roxburghii (FRR) has been considered as edible and medicinal fruit possessing antiatherosclerotic effect, but the mechanism is still unclear. Hyperlipidemia (HLP) is material basis for atherosclerosis (AS) formation. Under FRR action, TC, TG, LDL, HDL and ASI in serum were regulated to control level. Differentially expressed proteins in liver were analyzed by using TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS for better understanding the effect and molecular mechanism of FRR on diet-induced hyperlipidemic mice. In total, 4460 proteins were quantified, of which 469 proteins showed dramatic changes between each group. According to molecular functions, 25 differentially co-expressed proteins were divided into five categories: substance metabolism, energy transformation and signal transduction, transcription and translation, immune defense. 15 key proteins involved lipids metabolism, which were identified as Cyp7a1, Cyp3a11, Tm7sf2, COAT2, CSAD, RBP3, Lpin1, Dhrs4, Aldh1b1, GK, Acot 4, TSC22D1, PGFS, EHs, GSTM1. Their altered expression suggested that FRR could maintain the metabolism homeostasis by regulating the metabolism of fatty acids, biosynthesis of BAs and steroids, and production of lipid peroxides (LPOs) in mice. It’s first time potential antiatherosclerotic mechanism of FRR regulating blood lipids was explored from protein level, which is of great significance to explore new drug targets for AS.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling quantitative proteomic analysis  Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and TMT labeling. The hepatic tissue was grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen and transferred to 5 ml centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by the centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Finally, the supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined by BCA kit. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was diluted to urea concentration less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 for the second digestion of 4 h. Approximately 100 μg of protein for each sample was digested with trypsin. After digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed by 10plex TMT kit. One unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis. The hepatic samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 10) over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific) at constant flow rate on EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA, 98% ACN, 1.9% H2O) over 40 min, 25% to 36% in 12 min, climbing to 80% in 4 min and then holding at 80% for last 4 min. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus coupled to the UPLC online. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 32. The ion fragments were detected at a resolution of 35,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in MS survey scan with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissport Mus musculus database (sequences: 16964, release time: 2018.3). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification, TMT 10plex was selected in Maxquant. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20. The distribution of mass error for identified peptides was mostly less than 0.02 Da. The length of most peptides distributed between 8 and 16 were agreed with the property of tryptic peptides.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics methods, functional enrichment and enrichment-based clustering. The identified proteins were classified into three categories by Gene Ontology (GO) annotation: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate enriched protein pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. The pathway with a corrected P<0.05 was significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to KEGG website. Functional enrichment-based clustering was used to explore potential relationships between different protein groups at a special function. The obtained protein groups were collated and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P<0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by x=−log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z scores were clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by heat map.

### Publication Abstract
Fructus Rosae Roxburghii (FRR) has been considered as edible and medicinal fruit possessing antiatherosclerotic effect, but the mechanism is still unclear. HLP is material basis for AS formation. Under FRR action, TC, TG, LDL, HDL and ASI in serum were regulated to control level. Differentially expressed proteins in liver were analyzed by using TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS for better understanding the effect and molecular mechanism of FRR on diet-induced hyperlipidemic mice. In total, 4460 proteins were quantified, of which 469 proteins showed dramatic changes between each group. According to molecular functions, 25 differentially co-expressed proteins were divided into five categories: substance metabolism, energy transformation and signal transduction, transcription and translation, immune defense. 15 key proteins involved lipids metabolism, which were identified as Cyp7a1, Cyp3a11, Tm7sf2, COAT2, CSAD, RBP3, Lpin1, Dhrs4, Aldh1b1, GK, Acot 4, TSC22D1, PGFS, EHs, GSTM1. This suggested that FRR could maintain metabolic homeostasis by regulating the metabolism of fatty acids, biosynthesis of BAs and steroids, and production of LPOs. 20 oxidative lipids further confirmed their importance regulating lipids metabolism. It's first time potential antiatherosclerotic mechanism of FRR regulating blood lipids was explored from protein level, which is of great significance to explore new drug targets for AS. SIGNIFICANCE: Under the action of FRR juice, the blood lipids in mice were regulated to control level. By TMT proteomic analysis, the effect and molecular mechanism of FRR on diet-induced hyperlipidemic mice were further explored. 25 differentially co-expressed proteins obtained in three diet groups might cooperatively regulate the lipids metabolism and hepatic function of mice, thus maintaining the metabolism homeostasis. By lipidomics analysis, 20 oxidative lipids further confirmed the importance of &#x3c9;-3 and &#x3c9;-6 PUFAs in regulating the lipids metabolism. These findings provide an improved understanding for the regulation of FRR on the blood lipids and explores potential metabolic targets for AS prevention.

### Keywords
Fructus rosae roxburghii; hyperlipidemia; atherosclerosis; tmt proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Guizhou Medical University

### Submitter
Pingping Song

### Lab Head
Dr Pingping Song
Guizhou Medical University


