### Accession
PXD005119

### Title
Extraordinary Diversity of Amyloid-beta Proteoforms in Human Alzheimer's Disease Brain

### Description
Amyloid-beta (Aβ) plays a key role in the neuropathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, but little is known about the proteoforms (i.e., all protein variants of a single gene including post-translational modifications and sequence variants) present in human AD brain. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to analyze intact, whole Aβ from soluble and insoluble aggregates in brains of 6 cases with severe dementia and pathologically confirmed Alzheimer’s disease. We found an extraordinary diversity of Aβ peptides totaling 91 unique proteoforms including various N- and C-terminal truncations, 17 different types of post-translational modifications (PTMs), and remarkably 5 amino acid variants in the peptide sequence never before described. Ratios of Aβ proteoforms did not distinguish between soluble and insoluble aggregates, but four individual Aβ proteoforms, three in the insoluble and one in the soluble fraction, were markedly increased when compared across aggregates. Such heterogeneity of the Aβ peptide both deepens our understanding of AD, but perhaps also warrants pause and consideration in our investigation into pathological mechanisms of the disease and therapeutic development.

### Sample Protocol
. Total protein and Aβ concentrations were determined by NanoOrange (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and ELISA, respectively. 5 ng of total Aβ from each patient sample was dried to completeness in vacuo. The 2D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) was used to desalt and delipidate the samples. Precipitated samples were subjected to C8 TopTips (Glygen, Columbia, MD) to separate full-length proteins from Aβ peptides. The flowthrough was collected and dried to completeness in vacuo and stored at -80°C until analysis by nLC-MS/MS. nLC-MS/MS. Samples were resuspended in 1%/10%/5% FA/ACN/MeOH (v/v). Each sample was analyzed in a block-randomized fashion (https://www.random.org) (2) by nanoLC-MS/MS on a hybrid mass spectrometer consisting of a linear quadrupole ion trap and an Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in positive ion mode. Separations were performed using an online NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters). The chromatographic separation was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 (360 μm OD × 75 μm ID) column packed with 10 cm C18 (1.8 μm, 100 Å, Waters) at 300 nL/min and heated to 60 °C. Mobile phases were 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (B). Samples were eluted from the column with the gradient was ramped to 35% B over 65 min and further increased to 95% B over 8 min and held for an additional 6 min. Total run time, including column equilibration, sample loading, and analysis was 89 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 400–2000) (MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at high resolution (60,000 at m/z 400) in profile mode, and the MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (15,000 at m/z 400), in centroid mode using XCalibur, version 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ion injection times for the MS and MS/MS scans were 500 ms each. The automatic gain control targets were set 2 × 105 for MS and MS/MS in the Orbitrap. The most abundant precursor ions from each MS scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the Orbitrap using HCD (isolation width 2.0 Da, normalized collision energy 30%, activation Q 0.250, and activation time 10 ms) within a 3 sec duty cycle (TopSpeed method). Dynamic exclusion (±10 ppm relative to precursor ion m/z) was enabled with a repeat count of one, maximal exclusion list size of 500, and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled and unassigned ions were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Processing and Analysis. MS files (.raw) were imported into PEAKS (version 8, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON) and searched against a UniprotKB/SwissProt Human database of reviewed, canonical sequences (October 2015; 20,204 entries) appended with the cRAP contaminant database (January 2015 version, The Global Proteome Machine, www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html). Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da with no enzyme specificity. All modifications in the UniMod database (http://www.unimod.org) were considered in the PEAKS search. The Spider search was exported to Excel from PEAKS 8 with raw abundances for differential (label-free) quantification. Spider is an algorithm tool within PEAKS, which we utilized to search peptide spectrum matches not identified by the database search by altering the amino acids systematically at each residue until a new, better peptide sequence is constructed from the MS/MS data (3). Search results were exported to Excel and all non-Aβ peptides and those Aβ proteoforms containing formylation were removed. Immunoprecipitation elution was in neat formic acid; thus, formylation occurring endogenously or natively is indistinguishable.    Next, for reproducible identification of Aβ proteoforms on an independent platform, the filtered list of Aβ proteoforms were i) assigned identification numbers by an 3rd party who had no part in the analysis and ii) transformed into chemical formulas. This chemical formula list was queried against each .raw file with NRTDP pipeline at 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance and a 4 min retention time window alignment. MS intensity was calculated across all peaks within an isotopic cluster, and across all clusters for each charge state between the minimum and maximum charge (Supplementary Table 2); this was used to calculate average MS intensity for each proteoform identified in Fig 2. To detect differential abundance from the intensities data, each proteoform was subjected to the following. First, if a given proteoform was not identified by both platforms, it was removed from analysis. Second, the data was filtered to include only proteoforms with an observed intensity from two of the three technical replicates and three of the six patients in each fraction. A total of 61 proteoforms passed these criteria. The intensity measures for each proteoform were standardized across all measures of that proteoform. Standardization is a calculation in which the average intensity for all measures of a given peptide is subtracted from each measure, and the resulting difference is then divided by the standard deviation of all measures of the peptide. A hierarchical linear model ANOVA was used with replicates nested within patients, and patients treated as random effects to test the fixed effect difference between HMW soluble and insoluble fractions. The p-values from the 61 resulting F-tests were then corrected for multiple testing as per Benjamini and Hochberg (4). The mass spectrometric data have been deposited in ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (5). All significantly differentially expressed Aβ proteoforms were manually validated by comparing observed b and y ion assignments with a theoretical list generated by MS-Product on Protein Prospector (http://prospector.ucsf.edu) and UniMod (http://unimod.org) for alternatives for the observed Δ mass shift (6).

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) plays a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known about the proteoforms present in AD brain. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to analyze intact A&#x3b2; from soluble aggregates and insoluble material in brains of six cases with severe dementia and pathologically confirmed AD. The soluble aggregates are especially relevant because they are believed to be the most toxic form of A&#x3b2;. We found a diversity of A&#x3b2; peptides, with 26 unique proteoforms including various N- and C-terminal truncations. N- and C-terminal truncations comprised 73% and 30%, respectively, of the total A&#x3b2; proteoforms detected. The A&#x3b2; proteoforms segregated between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates with N-terminal truncations predominating in the insoluble material and C- terminal truncations segregating into the soluble aggregates. In contrast, canonical A&#x3b2; comprised the minority of the identified proteoforms (15.3%) and did not distinguish between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates. The relative abundance of many truncated A&#x3b2; proteoforms did not correlate with post-mortem interval, suggesting they are not artefacts. This heterogeneity of A&#x3b2; proteoforms deepens our understanding of AD and offers many new avenues for investigation into pathological mechanisms of the disease, with implications for therapeutic development.

### Keywords
Human ad brain; nlc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Professor of Neuology Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 61130
Washington University 

### Submitter
Norelle Wildburger

### Lab Head
Dr David Brody
Professor of Neuology Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 61130


