### Accession
PXD019799

### Title
Aggregated protein of heat-treated GmDnj1 mutant Orbitrap LC-MSMS

### Description
Gmdnj1-knockout mutants had diminished growth in normal conditions, and when under heat stress, exhibited more severe browning, reduced chlorophyll contents, higher reactive oxygen species (ROS) contents, and higher induction of heat stress-responsive transcription factors and ROS-scavenging enzyme-encoding genes. Knocking out a major HSP40 may lead to the impairment of the protein refolding system, and in turn lead to a change in the aggregated protein profile. Therefore, the aggregated protein profiles of the Gmdnj1 mutant lines were compared against that of the wild type Williams 82 under both untreated and heat-treated conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Primary leaves and roots were collected at 6h and 24h after heat treatment, respectively, from theGmdnj1 mutant and Williams 82 for aggregated protein extraction (Planas-Marquès et al., 2016). In brief, 200 mg of ground tissue was resuspended in 4 mL fractionation buffer (20 mM tris-HCl [pH 8], 1 mM EDTA [pH 8], and 0.33 M sucrose) by vortex in a 15-mL centrifuge tube. The homogenized solution was filtered through Miracloth(475855, Merck Millipore, Burlington), followed by centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was further centrifuged at 6,000 xg for 10 min, and the subsequent supernatant at 100,000 x g for 90 min at 4 oC. The final pellet was resuspended in 3 mL fractionation buffer with 0.3 % Triton X-100 and incubated at 4 oC for 1hwith gentle shaking. The solubilized protein was centrifuged at 50,000 xgfor 60 min at 4 oC. The pellet containing the aggregated proteins was thoroughly resuspended in 8 M urea by sonication. The protein concentration was quantified with a 2-D quant kit (GE80-6483-56, GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). Fifteen milligrammes of protein were treated with 5 mM DTT at 37 oC for 30 min followed by 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. The sample was diluted with three volumes of 50 mM sodium bicarbonate. Trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) equivalent to one tenth (w/w) of the protein amount was added for digestion at 37 oC overnight. Digested peptides were cleaned up with a Pierce™ C18 Spin Column (89873, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) followed by a Pierce™ Detergent Removal Spin Column (87777, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with the LC Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a C-18µ-precolumn (300-µm i.d. x 5 mm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC nanoViper C-18 column (75 µm x 25 cm). Mobile phase A (1.9 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and mobile phase B (98 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) were used in the liquid chromatography (LC). The LC mobile phase gradient profile was set as follows: 50oC chamber with 0.3 µLmin-1 flow rate, 100 % mobile phase A for 5 min, increase mobile phase B to 6 % from 0 % from the 5min mark to the 8 min mark, increase mobile phase B to 18 % in the following 40 min, then increase mobile phase B to 30 % in the following 10 min, then increase mobile phase B to 80 % in the following7 min, and finally re-equilibrate with 100% mobile phase A for10 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files generated by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were analysed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The MS/MS spectra were searched against a protein database of Williams 82 (Wm82.a2) with 74733 entries using the SEQUEST HT engine. Searches were configured with dynamic modifications for carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine, oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.011 Da), precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). False discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator, and only peptides with q-value ≤ 0.05 were accepted. Samples were compared using the label-free quantification (LFQ) method. Three biological replicates were performed independently from sample collection to protein identification using LC-MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Global warming poses severe threats to agricultural production, including soybean. One of the major mechanisms for organisms to combat heat stress is through heat shock proteins (HSPs) that stabilize protein structures at above-optimum temperatures, by assisting in the folding of nascent, misfolded, or unfolded proteins. The HSP40 subgroups, or the J-domain proteins, functions as co-chaperones. They capture proteins that require folding or refolding and pass them on to HSP70 for processing. In this study, we have identified a type-I HSP40 gene in soybean, <i>GmDNJ1</i>, with high basal expression under normal growth conditions and also highly inducible under abiotic stresses, especially heat. <i>Gmdnj1</i>-knockout mutants had diminished growth in normal conditions, and when under heat stress, exhibited more severe browning, reduced chlorophyll contents, higher reactive oxygen species (ROS) contents, and higher induction of heat stress-responsive transcription factors and ROS-scavenging enzyme-encoding genes. Under both normal and heat-stress conditions, the mutant lines accumulated more aggregated proteins involved in protein catabolism, sugar metabolism, and membrane transportation, in both roots and leaves. In summary, GmDNJ1 plays crucial roles in the overall plant growth and heat tolerance in soybean, probably through the surveillance of misfolded proteins for refolding to maintain the full capacity of cellular functions.

### Keywords
Gmdnj1, Aggregated protein, Heat stress, Soybean

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
School of Life Sciences and Center for Soybean Research of the State Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR

### Submitter
Kwan Pok Li

### Lab Head
Dr Hon-Ming Lam
School of Life Sciences and Center for Soybean Research of the State Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR


