### Accession
PXD039865

### Title
EPLIN-Beta is a novel substrate of ornithine decarboxylase antizyme 1, mediating cellular migration

### Description
Polyamines promote cellular proliferation, and their levels are controlled by ornithine decarboxylase antizyme 1 (Az1), through the proteasome-mediated, ubiquitin-independent degradation of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the rate-limiting enzyme of polyamine biosynthesis. Az1-mediated degradation of other substrates such as cyclin D1, DNp73 and Mps1 also regulate cell growth and centrosome amplification. Collectively, the currently known six Az1-substrates are all linked with tumorigenesis. To understand if Az1-mediated protein degradation might play a key role in regulating cellular process associated with tumorigenesis, we employed quantitative proteomics to identify novel Az1 substrates. Here, we describe the identification of LIM domain and Actin-binding protein 1 (LIMA1), also known as epithelial protein lost in neoplasm (EPLIN), as a new target of Az1. Interestingly, between the two isoforms of EPLIN-Alpha and -Beta, only EPLIN-Beta is the substrate of Az1, degraded in an ubiquitination-independent manner. Absence of Az1 led to elevated EPLIN-Beta levels, which caused enhanced cellular migration of Az1-/- cells. Consistently, higher levels of LIMA1 correlated with poorer overall survival of colorectal cancer patients. Taken together, this study identifies EPLIN-Beta as a novel Az1 substrate regulating cellular migration.

### Sample Protocol
The SILAC labelled proteins samples were separated on 4–12% Bis–Tris gel, stained with colloidal blue staining kit and digested withtrypsin using in-gel digestion procedures.Tryptic peptides were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were resolved and separated on a 50 cm analytical EASY-Spray column equipped with pre-column over a 120 min gradient ranging from 8 to 38% of 0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile/water at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–2000) were acquired with a resolution of 70 k, an AGC target of 3 × e6 and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. Top twenty most intense peptide ions in each survey scan were sequentially isolated to an ACG target value of 5 x e4 with resolution of 17,500 and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 25. A dynamic exclusion of 10 s and isolation width of 2 m/z were applied.

### Data Protocol
SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30 using default settings. Database searches of MS data were performed using Uniprot human fasta (2017) with tryptic specificity allowing maximum two missed cleavages, two labeled amino acids, and an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. Labeled arginine and lysine were specified as fixed modifications. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide. Proteins were considered identified when supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eplin/lima1, Ubiquitin-independent degradation, Antizyme, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (ASTAR)
TBP Lab, Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore

### Submitter
Suat Peng Neo

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
TBP Lab, Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore


