### Accession
PXD008552

### Title
Andrographolide sulfonate attenuates acute lung injury by reducing expression of myeloperoxidase and neutrophil-derived proteases in mice

### Description
Andrographolide sulfonate (Andro-S), a sulfonation derivative of andrographolide, is known to be effective in treating inflammation-related diseases, while the underlying mechanisms and global protein alterations in response to Andro-S remain unknown. This study aimed to investigate the pharmacological effects and potential targets of Andro-S in a murine model of acute lung injury (ALI).  ALI was induced by aerosolized lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure before treatment with Andro-S. Inflammatory state of each treatment group was determined by histological analysis and quantification of inflammatory markers. Differentially expressed proteins in lung tissues were identified by an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach and further confirmed by immunohistochemistry analysis. Administration of Andro-S alleviated LPS-induced histological changes in the lung and reduced the expression of inflammatory markers in serum, bronchoalveolar fluid and lung tissues. Proteomic analysis identified 34 differentially expressed proteins from a total of 2,234 quantified proteins in the lung. According to bioinformatics analysis, neutrophil elastase (ELANE), Cathepsin G (CTSG) and myeloperoxidase (MPO), three neutrophil-derived proteases related to immune system process and defense responses to fungi were chosen as potential targets of Andro-S. Further immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed the inhibitory effects of Andro-S on LPS-induced ELANE, CTSG and MPO up-regulation. These results indicate that Andro-S suppressed the severity of LPS-induced ALI, possibly by attenuating the expression of and neutrophil-derived proteases.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissues were washed several times with ice-cold PBS to completely remove residual blood, then homogenized and lysed in SDT buffer (100 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 4% sodium SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). Protein concentration was determined using a tryptophan-fluorescence assay, and confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on a 12% gel. An equal amount of protein (50 μg) from each sample was digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, and the digested samples were evaporated to dryness in a Speed-Vac sample concentrator. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM trithylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and processed with 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed at room temperature and reconstituted in 50 μL isopropanol. Peptides were labeled with the isobaric tags and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Samples were combined and the labeling reaction was stopped by adding 100 μL of ddH2O. The samples were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The labeled peptide mixture was fractionated by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 3.5 μm partical size ) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Agilent, USA) operating at 1 mL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate containing 90% acetonitrile; both buffers were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide, as described previously. The fractionation gradient was as follows: 1% B to 25% B in 50 min, 60% B in 4 min, and ramped to 70% B over 2 min. At this point, fraction-collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 70% B for 5min before being ramped back to 1% B, at which point the column was washed and equilibrated. All fractions were collected manually; 14 fractions were collected for each sample in all experiments. The fractioned samples were evaporated to dryness in a Speed-Vac sample concentrator and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed as previous described, with some modifications. The resulting peptides were re-suspended in 10 μL of water containing 0.1% formic acid. A 4-μL volume of the peptide solution was injected onto a 75 μm ×150 mm fused silica pre-column packed in-house with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (120 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using an Easy nano-UPLC1000 system (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The peptides were eluted using a gradient (5–80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 200-min period. Data were acquired using a nano-ESI quadrupole Exactive (Q Exactive) mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with each full MS scan, followed by MS/MS for the 15 most intense ions, using the following parameters: precursor ion charge, ≥ +2; precursor ion isolation window, 2 Da; normalized HCD collision energy, 33%; dynamic exclusion, 30 s. A full MS scan was collected for peptides from 100 to 1700 m/z on the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z=200), and subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z=200).

### Data Protocol
Maxquant  (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.3.0.5) was used to generate peak lists from raw files, and Andromeda was used to search the protein sequence database. Report ion type was chosen, and 8-plex iTRAQ was set as the isobaric labels. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against a decoyed proteome sequence of mouse (Mus musculus C57BL/6J; UP000000589; UniProt proteome database). The precursor mass tolerances for the first and main searches were set at 20 and 6 ppm, respectively, and the fragment mass tolerance for HCD MS/MS spectra was set at 20 ppm. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with allowance for two potential missed cleavages. The false-discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and protein groups was rigorously controlled to below 1%. FDR was calculated as the number of hits from the reverse database divided by the number of forward hits. Each confident protein assignment was based on at least one unique peptide. The R software package was used for normalizing report ion intensities and for calculating p-value between each group using two-tailed Student’s t-test. Identified differentially expressed proteins were functionally annotated using DAVID software 6.8 (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/). The protein-protein interaction network was created using String Consortium software  (version 10.5; http://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Andrographolide sulfonate (Andro-S), a sulfonation derivative of andrographolide, is known to be effective in treating inflammation-related diseases, while the underlying mechanisms and global protein alterations in response to Andro-S remain unknown. This study aimed to investigate the pharmacological effects and potential targets of Andro-S in a murine model of acute lung injury (ALI). ALI was induced by aerosolized lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure before treatment with Andro-S. Inflammatory state of each treatment group was determined by histological analysis and quantification of inflammatory markers. Differentially expressed proteins in lung tissues were identified by an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach and further confirmed by immunohistochemistry analysis. Administration of Andro-S alleviated LPS-induced histological changes in the lung and reduced the expression of inflammatory markers in serum, bronchoalveolar fluid and lung tissues. Proteomic analysis identified 31 differentially expressed proteins from a total of 2,234 quantified proteins in the lung. According to bioinformatics analysis, neutrophil elastase (ELANE), cathepsin G (CTSG) and myeloperoxidase (MPO), three neutrophil-derived proteases related to immune system process and defense responses to fungi were chosen as potential targets of Andro-S. Further immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed the inhibitory effects of Andro-S on LPS-induced ELANE, CTSG and MPO up-regulation. These results indicate that Andro-S suppressed the severity of LPS-induced ALI, possibly by attenuating the expression of and neutrophil-derived proteases.

### Keywords
Andrographolide sulfonate, Acute lung injury, Target identification., Proteomics, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
None

### Submitter
Xing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China


