### Accession
PXD010685

### Title
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors Block proliferation of coronavirus mainly through p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways

### Description
Emerging coronaviruses (CoVs) primarily cause severe gastroenteric or respiratory diseases in humans and animals, for which no approved therapeutics are available so far. Here A9, a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (RTKIs) of the tyrphostin class was identified as a robust inhibitor of TGEV (Transmissible gastroenteritis virus) infection in cell-based assays. Time-of-addition studies suggested that A9 mainly acts at post-adsorption stage of the TGEV life cycle. Moreover, it also exhibited potent antiviral activity against various coronavirus replication, including MHV, PEDV and FIPV. We further investigated the mechanism of action of A9 against TGEV infection in vitro with comparative phosphoproteomics analysis. We specifically identified the A9 target, p38 and JNK1, the downstream molecules of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) as required for efficient TGEV replication in vitro through plaque assay, qRT-PCR and western blotting assays. Additionally, tests of p38 and JNK1 inhibitors also indicated that interventions targeting p38 was more effective in suppressing TGEV propagation than the JNK. In conclusion, these findings indicate that the receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor A9 can directly inhibits TGEV replication and its inhibitory activity on TGEV replication mainly regulated by targeting p38, which provide vital clues to design novel drugs against coronavirus.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines, Virus and reagents. PK-15, ST, Vero-CCL81 (African green monkey kidney epithelial) and CCL94 cells were maintained at 37°C with a 5% CO2 incubator in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin-streptomycin (50 units/ml). FIPV 79-1146 were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC®; Manassas, VA, USA). The PEDV YN144 strain (GenBank accession numbers: KT021232.1) and TGEV WH-1 strain (GenBank accession numbers: HQ462571.1) were isolated from suckling piglet. PEDV and FIPV were propagated in Vero-CCL81 and CCL94 cells respectively. TGEV was grown in PK-15 or ST cells. The viral titers were determined by plaque assay on PK-15 (TGEV), Vero-CCL81 (PEDV) or CCL94 (FIPV) cells. Infection of cultured cells with PEDV was conducted in the presence of trypsin at a concentration of 5 μg/ml with serum-free medium.  Cell viability assay. Tyrphostin A9, BIRB796 and DB07268 were stored as 50 mM stock solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The cytotoxic effect of reagents on cell viability was measured using CellTiter-Glo (Promega) in 96-well plates according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, PK-15 cells were incubated with indicated concentration of compound or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), in triplicates, in a total of 100 μl growth medium at 37°C for 48 h. Cell viability was determined by a Veritas microplate luminometer (Promega) with values normalized to those of untreated cells. Accordingly, throughout this work, no cytotoxicity was observed for A9 at 6 μM, BIRB796 at 80 μM, DB07268 at 60 mM.  Antiviral assays. The effects of A9 on the infection of TGEV in PK-15 or ST cells, PEDV in Vero cells, FIPV in CCL-94 cells, and MHV in L929 cells were conducted by comparing the levels of viral replication in target cells in the absence or presence of A9. Target cells in triplicate were pretreated with DMSO or A9 (4 μM) for 1 h followed by virus infection at an MOI of 0.1. Cell supernatants at 16 to 24 hpi. were harvested and quantified by plaque formation assay.  Time-of-addition assay. The antiviral mechanism of A9 was determined by time-of-addition assay as previously described (25)  Virus Inoculation and Sample Preparation. The samples used for quantitative proteomic analysis consist of four groups: PK-15 cells infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) 0.1 with TGEV, Uninfected cells that treated with A9, Uninfected cells that treated with DMSO, and PK-15 cells infected with TGEV and treated with A9. After 24 h post-infection (hpi), the cells were collected for protein extraction, digestion, and labeling.  Protein Isolation and Labeling with Tandem Mass Tags.  LC–MS/MS Analysis.  Quantitative real-time RT-PCR.  Western blot analyses.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis. All experiments were performed in triplicate. Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). The differences in means were analyzed by Student's t test. P values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant (*p<0.05, **p<0.01, and *** p<0.001).

### Publication Abstract
Emerging coronaviruses (CoVs) primarily cause severe gastroenteric or respiratory diseases in humans and animals, and no approved therapeutics are currently available. Here, A9, a receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (RTKI) of the tyrphostin class, is identified as a robust inhibitor of transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) infection in cell-based assays. Moreover, A9 exhibited potent antiviral activity against the replication of various CoVs, including murine hepatitis virus (MHV), porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) and feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV). We further performed a comparative phosphoproteomic analysis to investigate the mechanism of action of A9 against TGEV infection in vitro. We specifically identified p38 and JNK1, which are the downstream molecules of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) required for efficient TGEV replication, as A9 targets through plaque assays, qRT-PCR and Western blotting assays. p38 and JNK1 inhibitors and RNA interference further showed that the inhibitory activity of A9 against TGEV infection was mainly mediated by the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. All these findings indicated that the RTKI A9 directly inhibits TGEV replication and that its inhibitory activity against TGEV replication mainly occurs by targeting p38, which provides vital clues to the design of novel drugs against CoVs.

### Keywords
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus, Emerging coronaviruses, Lc–ms/ms analysis., Rtkis

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
The State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr guiqing peng
The State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China


