### Accession
PXD011397

### Title
Pux7-interacting proteins in Arabidopsis

### Description
A GFP-mediated pulldown to identify autophagy targets of an autophagy receptor.

### Sample Protocol
Immunprecipitation of GFP-PUX7 Arabidopsis seedlings of the indicated genotype (Ws, 35S::GFP or 35S::GFP-PUX7) were grown in 50 ml liquid GM medium as above, with ~100 mg of dry seeds used per culture, resulting in ~5 g of fresh weight tissue. Frozen tissue was ground to a fine powder, and proteins were extracted on ice for 20 minutes with 1.5 volumes of extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) polyvinylpyrrolidone, 5 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF, 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1X plant protease inhibitor cocktail). Extracts were filtered through two layers of Miracloth, clarified at 30,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C, and the resulting supernatants were immediately applied three times at 4°C over a 12 ml PolyPrep® chromatography column containing 100 µl (equal to a 50 µl bead volume) of GFP-Trap®_A beads (ChromoTek) pre-equilibrated in extraction buffer. The column was washed five times with wash buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM DTT), and remaining bound proteins were eluted with 100 μl of 200 mM glycine-HCl (pH 2.5) and immediately neutralized with 20 μl of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Samples of the crude extract, flow through (both diluted 1/10), third wash step and elution were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by silver staining or immunoblotting with appropriate antibodies (as above). Alternatively, elution fractions were subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (see below).  Tandem Mass Spectrometry Protein samples from the GFP immunoprecipitation experiments (80 μl of the 120 μl elution volume, from three independent biological replicates) were vacuum dried in a SpeedVac™ centrifugal evaporator (Savant Instruments, model number SUC100H) to a final volume of approximately 20 μl and denatured in 8 M urea, 25 mM (NH4)HCO3, in a total volume of 300 µl. Proteins were then reduced in the presence of 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 hour, and alkylated in the dark in the presence of 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for a further 1 hour. Excess alkylating agent was quenched with 50 mM DTT for 5 minutes at room temperature, and the samples were diluted with 1.2 ml of 25 mM (NH4)HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to below 1.5 M. Proteolytic digestion was then initiated by adding 1 µg of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega), and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were vacuum dried as above to a final volume of approximately 300 µl, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) until the pH was less than 3.0, and desalted and concentrated on a 100 µl Bond Elut™ OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies). The peptides were eluted in 50 µl of 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, then lyophilized and re-suspended in 50 µl 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Nano-scale liquid chromatography (LC) separation of tryptic peptides was performed on a Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein digests were loaded onto a 1 μl nanoViper™ sample loop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm x 15 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) by the application of a linear 2 hour gradient from 3.2% to 44.0% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, with a column flow rate set to 300 nl/min. Analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed online using a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) possessing a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with a stainless steel nano-bore emitter operated in positive electro-spray ionization (ESI) mode at a capillary voltage of 1.6 kV. Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 300-1500 m/z was performed at a resolution of 70,000, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1.0 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 100 msec. High energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 10 most intense peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 1.0 x 105 counts, and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, excluding precursors that had an unassigned, +1, +7 or +8 charge state. MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2.0 x 104 and a maximum fill time of 80 msec. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 10 seconds, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 8.0 x 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer™ software (version 2.0.0.802, Thermo Scientific), which was set up to search the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database, as downloaded from www.tair.com (TAIR10_pep_20101214). Peptides were assigned using SEQUEST HT (Eng et al., 1994), with search parameters set to assume the digestion enzyme trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications. The target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict) was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and which could not be differentiated based on the MS/MS analysis alone were grouped, to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Label-free quantification as previously described (Silva et al., 2006) was performed in Proteome Discoverer™ with a minimum Quan value threshold of 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autophagy receptor, Arabidopsis, Cdc48

### Affiliations
Washington University in Saint Louis
Biology department, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Vierstra
Biology department, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA


