### Accession
PXD038905

### Title
The Triticale Mature Pollen and Stigma Proteomes – Assembling the Proteins for a Productive Encounter

### Description
Triticeae crops are major contributors to global food production and ensuring their capacity to reproduce and generate seeds is critical.  However, despite their importance our knowledge of the proteins underlying Triticeae reproduction is severely lacking and this is not only true of pollen and stigma development, but also of their pivotal interaction.  When the pollen grain and stigma are brought together they have each accumulated the proteins required for their intended meeting and accordingly studying their mature proteomes is bound to reveal proteins involved in their diverse and complex interactions.  Using triticale as a Triticeae representative, gel-free shotgun proteomics was used to identify 11533 and 2977 mature stigma and pollen proteins respectively.  These datasets, by far the largest to date, provide unprecedented insights into the proteins participating in Triticeae pollen and stigma development and interactions.  The study of the Triticeae stigma has been particularly neglected and to begin filling this knowledge gap, a developmental iTRAQ analysis was performed revealing 647 proteins displaying differential abundance as the stigma matures in preparation for pollination.  An in-depth comparison to an equivalent Brassicaceae analysis divulged both conservation and diversification in the makeup and function of proteins involved in the pollen and stigma encounter.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ Analysis- The iTRAQ analysis coincides with RAW Files 118, 119, and 120. iTRAQ analysis was performed on proteins extracted from Triticale stigmas at the BCP (early) and TCP (late) stages. Proteins (200 µg) from each stage within each of three biological replicates (A, B and C) were aliquoted, split into two equal technical replicates of 100 µg, air-dried and resuspended in a solution of 4.5 M urea and 1% sodium deoxycholate. Equal amounts of protein, 20 µg for each replicate, were digested with trypsin according to manufactures instructions (Sequence Grade Modified, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA), and the resulting peptides were labelled according to manufactures instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). iTRAQ was split into 3 separate experiments (118, 119, 120). Experiment 118 consisted of biological replicate A, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate C, technical replicate 2 (early and late). Experiment 119 consisted of biological replicate B, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate A, technical replicate 2 (early and late). Experiment 120 consisted of biological replicate C, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate B, technical replicate 2 (early and late). See the supplemental material of the manuscript for an illustration of the experimental design. iTRAQ samples were fractionated into 24 fractions by high pH (pH10) reversed- phase (RP) HPLC using the Agilent Technologies Inc. 1200 HPLC system and pooled offline according to Yang, F.; Shen, Y.; Camp II, D. G., Smith, R. D. High pH reversed- phase chromatography with fraction concatenation as an alternative to strong- cation exchange chromatography for two-dimensional proteomic analysis. Expert Rev. Proteomics. 2012, 9, 129-134. Fractions were then injected and separated by online RP nanoscale capillary LC and analysed by ESI-MS/MS. The experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.  Global analysis- The global analysis coincides with the following RAW files. For Triticale stigma, 20700-20719 and 22331, and for Triticale pollen, 19695-19697, and 19870-19888. Global analyses were performed on proteins extracted from mature Triticale stigmas and pollen grain. Approximately 1 mg of the mature pollen and stigma proteins were digested with trypsin according to manufacturer’s instructions (Promega Corporation). The tryptic digests were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium formate and 1 ml for each sample was injected individually and separated offline into 60 fractions via high pH (pH 10) RP-HPLC using a C18 Hypersil gold column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The experiments were performed with the ÄKTA purifier (Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, UK) and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 4-40% solvent B (A: water, 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10; B: acetonitrile (ACN), 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10), at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The fractions were then concatenated into 20 fractions and separated via inline low pH RP-HPLC MS/MS. Peptide samples (1 µg) were injected and separated by online RP nanoLC and analyzed by ESI MS/MS. The experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. A second global MS analysis was performed on mature stigma proteins only. Aliquots (10 µg) from each of the 6 mature Triticale stigma protein samples not used for the iTRAQ analysis, were washed 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer using an Amicon 3 kDa column. After elution, the samples were vacuum-dried and re-solubilized in 25 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Two micrograms of each sample were digested with trypsin according to manufactures instructions (Sequence Grade Modified, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide samples were combined, purified on a stage tip (C18) and vacuum-dried before MS injection. Peptides were resuspended into 0.1% formic acid for analysis by MS. Peptide samples (1 µg) were injected and separated by online RP nanoLC and analyzed by ESI MS/MS using the same instruments mentioned above. The first global analysis for stigma coincides with the RAW files 20700-20719, and the second global analysis coincides with the RAW file 22331.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ Analysis- MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MGF samples were analyzed using Mascot version 2.5.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search the TAX_Triticeae_147389 database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=triticeae&sort=score) assuming trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages being allowed, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 25 PPM, and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 4-plex of lysine, tyrosine and the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local false discovery rate (FDR) algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 exclusive peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the protein prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Scaffold Q+ version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to quantitate iTRAQ protein identifications. Only proteins identified (at the thresholds described above) across all replicates were used for quantification. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Oberg, A., Mahoney, D.W., Eckel-Passow, J.E., Malone, C.J., Wolfinger, R.D., Hill, E.G., Cooper, L. T., Onuma, O.K., Spiro, C., Therneau, T.M. and Bergen III, H.R. (2008) Statistical analysis of relative labeled mass spectrometry data from complex samples using ANOVA. J. Proteome Res. 7, 225-233. Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm. Statistically significant differentially abundant proteins were determined by applying the Mann-Whitney test with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg to p < 0.02988. Proteins showing a > 1.5 fold difference in abundance were considered differentially abundant.  Global Analysis- All MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated as above and all global experiments were analyzed using Mascot version 2.5.1 and X! Tandem (The GPM, https://thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) to search the TAX_Triticeae_147389 database and the TAX_Viridiplantae_33090 database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=viridiplantae&sort=score) assuming trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages being allowed. They were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, dehydration of the N-terminus- glutamic acid to pyro-glutamate of the N-terminus, and ammonia-loss of the N-terminus- glutamine to pyro-glutamate of the N terminus were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications as described above. Proteins with a single peptide match were validated as previously described (Nazemof, N., Couroux, P., Rampitsch, C., Xing, T. and Robert, L.S. (2014) Proteomic profiling reveals insights into Triticeae stigma development and function. J. Exp. Bot. 65, 6069-6080.). Proteins identified from the various searches were combined as follows. The proteins identified from searches using the Triticeae database were combined to non-Triticeae proteins identified exclusively from searches using the Viridiplantae database. For the stigma, proteins identified in at least one sample from the iTRAQ analysis were also combined with proteins identified from the global Triticeae and Viridiplantae searches provided that their matching Brachypodium orthologs were absent from the list of Brachypodium orthologs of proteins from the initial Triticeae and Viridiplantae searches.

### Publication Abstract
Triticeae crops are major contributors to global food production and ensuring their capacity to reproduce and generate seeds is critical. However, despite their importance our knowledge of the proteins underlying Triticeae reproduction is severely lacking and this is not only true of pollen and stigma development, but also of their pivotal interaction. When the pollen grain and stigma are brought together they have each accumulated the proteins required for their intended meeting and accordingly studying their mature proteomes is bound to reveal proteins involved in their diverse and complex interactions. Using triticale as a Triticeae representative, gel-free shotgun proteomics was used to identify 11,533 and 2977 mature stigma and pollen proteins respectively. These datasets, by far the largest to date, provide unprecedented insights into the proteins participating in Triticeae pollen and stigma development and interactions. The study of the Triticeae stigma has been particularly neglected. To begin filling this knowledge gap, a developmental iTRAQ analysis was performed revealing 647 proteins displaying differential abundance as the stigma matures in preparation for pollination. An in-depth comparison to an equivalent Brassicaceae analysis divulged both conservation and diversification in the makeup and function of proteins involved in the pollen and stigma encounter. SIGNIFICANCE: Successful pollination brings together the mature pollen and stigma thus initiating an intricate series of molecular processes vital to crop reproduction. In the Triticeae crops (e.g. wheat, barley, rye, triticale) there persists a vast deficit in our knowledge of the proteins involved which needs to be addressed if we are to face the many upcoming challenges to crop production such as those associated with climate change. At maturity, both the pollen and stigma have acquired the protein complement necessary for their forthcoming encounter and investigating their proteomes will inevitably provide unprecedented insights into the proteins enabling their interactions. By combining the analysis of the most comprehensive Triticeae pollen and stigma global proteome datasets to date with developmental iTRAQ investigations, proteins implicated in the different phases of pollen-stigma interaction enabling pollen adhesion, recognition, hydration, germination and tube growth, as well as those underlying stigma development were revealed. Extensive comparisons between equivalent Triticeae and Brassiceae datasets highlighted both the conservation of biological processes in line with the shared goal of activating the pollen grain and promoting pollen tube invasion of the pistil to effect fertilization, as well as the significant distinctions in their proteomes consistent with the considerable differences in their biochemistry, physiology and morphology.

### Keywords
Brassica, Stigma, Proteomics, Triticale, Triticeae, Pollen, Itraq, Mass spectrometry, Pollination

### Affiliations
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa Research and Development Centre.
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Carleton University

### Submitter
Renee Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Laurian Robert
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa Research and Development Centre.


