### Accession
PXD011611

### Title
Lipopolysaccharide-regulated secretion of soluble and vesicle-based colorectal cancer cell proteins

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC), among the major cancer types in western world is responsible for 10% of cancer related deaths, often due to late detection when the tumor has already spread out of the colon. Surgery is the mainstay curative treatment for CRC. Nevertheless, between 15-30% of stage II and III patients develop hepatic metastasis within 5 years. Paradoxically, tumor surgery can contribute to the metastatic process, due to inflammatory mediator release in response to surgery, which promotes the metastatic ability of cancer cells. During surgery, bacterial products, such as LPS, from commensal bacteria translocate across the bowel wall, reach systemic circulation and induce an inflammatory response through to the activation of the Nuclear Factor-ĸB (NF-ĸB) pathway. Inflammation promotes malignant transformation by inducing chromosomal and microsatellite instability or CpG island methylation [14], but its direct effect on cancer cells and contribution to metastasis development remains to be elucidated. In this experiment we mimic the perioperative microenvironment where bacterial products get in contact with CRC cancer cells.  We assessed the identity of the secreted proteins, including those released through extracellular vesicles (EV), of six CRC cell lines once exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS).

### Sample Protocol
CRC cell lines: CaCo-2, COLO-205, HCT116, HT-29, LoVo and SW480 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection and maintained in DMEM, 10% FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, and 1% Pen/Strep (Lonza Biowhittaker, Verviers, Belgium). Whole secretome was collected after 18 hours +/- LPS, centrifuged twice, and concentrated using a 4Kd MWCO centrifugal concentrator. Next, the concentrated whole secretome was centrifuged twice at 20,000 g for 30 minutes, using SW40Ti Rotor (Beckman Coulter) and at 100,000 g for 1 hour. The pellet from this centrifugation contained EVs and is further referred to as the EV fraction and the supernatant was the SS fraction.  SS and EV samples were separated by electrophoresis using 4–12% SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen). The gels were fixed in 50% ethanol 3% phosphoric acid and stained with Coomassie R-250. Each lane was cut in three gel pieces and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA file (January 2014), no fragments; 42104 entries using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Crc, Nf-kb, Colorectal cancer, Extracellular vesicles, Label-free, Lps

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


