### Accession
PXD004181

### Title
HSP90 promotes Burkitt lymphoma cell survival by maintaining tonic B cell receptor signaling

### Description
Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive B-cell neoplasm that is currently treated by intensive chemotherapy in combination with anti-CD20 antibodies. Because of their toxicity, current treatment regimens are often not suitable for elderly patients or for patients in developing countries where BL is endemic. Hence, there is a need for targeted therapies. In this study, we performed a compound screen in 17 BL cell lines to identify small molecule inhibitors affecting cell survival. We observed that, among other compounds, inhibitors of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) induce apoptosis in BL cells in vitro at concentrations that did not affect normal B cells. By global proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling, we found that in BL, HSP90 inhibition compromises activity of the pivotal B cell antigen receptor (BCR)-proximal effector spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), which we identified as an HSP90 client protein. Consistently, expression of constitutively active TEL-SYK counteracted the apoptotic effect of HSP90 inhibition. Hence, our study provides a molecular rationale for the use of HSP90 inhibitors in the treatment of BL by demonstrating that HSP90 inhibition interferes with tonic BCR signaling and thus impairs BL cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
For enrichment of tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides, SILAC-labelled DG75 cells were lysed in 8 M urea buffer, mixed 1:1 according to counted cell number and then followed by immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine containing peptides using pY1000 antibody based on manufacture’s instruction. All eluted peptides were desalted by using a self-made C18 stage-tip and then dried in a SpeedVac. For each sample, two technical replicates were analysed by mass spectrometry. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex).The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent acquisition manner where one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 120,000 FWHM (full width, half maximum) to select up to 20 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 6 above a 3x104 intensity threshold, at an isolation width of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by Higher Collision Energy Dissociation (HCD) with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 28%, and their product ion spectra were recorded with a start mass of 110 m/z at resolution of 30,000 FWHM. Automatic gain control target value and maximum ion injection times for MS and MS/MS were 1 x 106 in 40 ms, and 1 x 105 in 64 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant3 (version 1.5.5.) and MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt human database (both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL, downloaded on May, 2016; 153,652 entries) via the Andromeda search engine. Mass tolerance after recalibration of precursor mass and fragment ion mass were set as 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. Allowed variable modifications included protein deamidation (N), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids with the maximum of two enzymatic mis-cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. Intensities of all identified peptides were determined by the MaxQuant with the options of both “match between runs” and “re-quantify” on.

### Publication Abstract
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive B-cell neoplasm that is currently treated by intensive chemotherapy in combination with anti-CD20 antibodies. Because of their toxicity, current treatment regimens are often not suitable for elderly patients or for patients in developing countries where BL is endemic. Targeted therapies for BL are therefore needed. In this study, we performed a compound screen in 17 BL cell lines to identify small molecule inhibitors affecting cell survival. We found that inhibitors of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) induced apoptosis in BL cells in vitro at concentrations that did not affect normal B cells. By global proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling, we show that, in BL, HSP90 inhibition compromises the activity of the pivotal B-cell antigen receptor (BCR)-proximal effector spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), which we identified as an HSP90 client protein. Consistently, expression of constitutively active TEL-SYK counteracted the apoptotic effect of HSP90 inhibition. Together, our results demonstrate that HSP90 inhibition impairs BL cell survival by interfering with tonic BCR signaling, thus providing a molecular rationale for the use of HSP90 inhibitors in the treatment of BL.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Burkitt’s lymphoma, Bcr signaling, Syk, Phosphoproteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany  2. Bioanalytics, University Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany  2. Bioanalytics, University Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany


