### Accession
PXD020824

### Title
Analysis of Amyloid Plaque Composition in two mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) enables label-free, spatially resolved analysis of a wide range of analytes in tissue sections. Quantitative analysis of MSI datasets is typically performed on single pixels or manually assigned regions of interest (ROI). However, many sparse, small objects such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain deposits of amyloid peptides called plaques are neither single pixels nor ROI. Here, we propose a new approach to facilitate comparative computational evaluation of amyloid plaque-like objects by MSI: a fast PLAQUE PICKER tool that enables statistical evaluation of heterogeneous amyloid peptide composition. Comparing two AD mouse models, APP NL-G-F and APP PS1, we identified distinct heterogeneous plaque populations in the NL-G-F model, but only one class of plaques in the PS1 model. We propose quantitative metrics for the comparison of technical and biological MSI replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh-frozen mouse brains were cut (10 µm; CM 1950 cryostat, Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany) and thaw-mounted on indium-tin-oxide (ITO)-coated glass slides (Bruker Daltonics). All slides were dried in a desiccator overnight at RT. Prior to protein MSI, tissue sections were delipidated using the washing procedure by Yang et. Al.: 70 % ethanol (30 s), 100 % ethanol (30 s), Carnoy’s fluid (60/30/10 ethanol/chloroform/acetic acid v/v/v) (120 s), 100 % ethanol (30 s), ddH2O (30 s) and 100 % ethanol (30 s). After drying, the slides were coated with eight layers of 60 mg/mL sDHB matrix in ACN/ddH2O/TFA (40/60/0.5 v/v/v) using an M5 Sprayer (HTX Technologies, Chapel Hill, USA) in a crisscross pattern at a flowrate of 0.02 mL/min and a velocity of 750 mm/min. 2 mm track spacing, 40 mm nozzle height and 30 °C gas temperature were applied.

### Data Protocol
MSI raw data was converted to the imzML file format  using a converter programmed in-house. Subsequently, the datasets were imported into R 3.4.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) using MALDIquant and MALDIquantForeign packages, TIC-normalized, Savitzky-Golay-smoothed, and the baseline was removed using the “TopHat”-method. As this method selects features on the image level, it does not need peak picking, which is usually one of the most time-consuming steps, since it is based on single spectra and does not respect spatial relationships. To assess individual plaque features specific for a given mouse model, area under the curves for defined m/z intervals in linear MS mode corresponding to Aβ peptide species were extracted. To each of the individual binarized images, a connected component labelling process as implemented in the raster package (vers. 3.0-7; https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=raster was applied (“queens-case”)[35, 36]. By combining pixel sets thus extracted for each individual ion image (= Aβ species), a unified collection of pixel sets was generated by joining pixel sets with common pixel coordinates. This process results in a unique ID assigned to each plaque giving access to summary statistics and the individual spectra themselves. By multiplying the laser spot area (20 x 20 µm = 400 µm²) with the number of pixels per plaque, the size of the plaques can be estimated.

### Publication Abstract
MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) enables label-free, spatially resolved analysis of a wide range of analytes in tissue sections. Quantitative analysis of MSI datasets is typically performed on single pixels or manually assigned regions of interest (ROIs). However, many sparse, small objects such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain deposits of amyloid peptides called plaques are neither single pixels nor ROIs. Here, we propose a new approach to facilitate the comparative computational evaluation of amyloid plaque-like objects by MSI: a fast PLAQUE PICKER tool that enables a statistical evaluation of heterogeneous amyloid peptide composition. Comparing two AD mouse models, APP NL-G-F and APP PS1, we identified distinct heterogeneous plaque populations in the NL-G-F model but only one class of plaques in the PS1 model. We propose quantitative metrics for the comparison of technical and biological MSI replicates. Furthermore, we reconstructed a high-accuracy 3D-model of amyloid plaques in a fully automated fashion, employing rigid and elastic MSI image registration using structured and plaque-unrelated reference ion images. Statistical single-plaque analysis in reconstructed 3D-MSI objects revealed the A&#x3b2;<sub>1-42Arc</sub> peptide to be located either in the core of larger plaques or in small plaques without colocalization of other A&#x3b2; isoforms. In 3D, a substantially larger number of small plaques were observed than that indicated by the 2D-MSI data, suggesting that quantitative analysis of molecularly diverse sparsely-distributed features may benefit from 3D-reconstruction. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020824.

### Keywords
Abeta, Maldi, Linear positive mode, Alzheimer, Amyloid plaques, Ms imaging

### Affiliations
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS), Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, Paul-Wittsack Str. 10, 68163, Mannheim, Germany.

### Submitter
Thomas Enzlein

### Lab Head
Dr Carsten Hopf
Center for Mass Spectrometry and Optical Spectroscopy (CeMOS), Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, Paul-Wittsack Str. 10, 68163, Mannheim, Germany.


