### Accession
PXD000599

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of breast epithelial cells with isogenic knockin of PIK3CA mutations

### Description
The PIK3CA gene is frequently mutated in human cancers. To study the signaling mechanisms responsible for cell growth and invasion phenotypes induced by mutant PIK3CA molecules, we carried out a SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of MCF10A, a spontaneously immortalized normal mammary epithelial cell line, and two MCF10A knockin cell lines containing different activating mutations of the PIK3CA gene.   MCF10A and PIK3CA mutation knock in cells were propagated in DMEM/F12 SILAC media deficient in both L-lysine and L-arginine and supplemented with light lysine (K) and arginine (R) for light, 2H4-K and 13C6-R for medium state and 13C615N2-K and 13C615N4-R for heavy state labeling.  Cell lysates were prepared in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate and 5mM sodium fluoride. The lysates were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin.  Tryptic peptides were desalted by C18 reverse phase column and followed by strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. Fractionated peptides were subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched phosphopeptides was carried out using a reverse-phase liquid chromatography system interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Proteome Discoverer (v 1.3) suite was used for quantitation and database searches. The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using Mascot (2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a Human RefSeq database supplemented with frequently observed contaminants.

### Sample Protocol
Please see details in associated paper, PMID: 25247763.

### Data Protocol
Please see details in associated paper, PMID: 25247763.

### Publication Abstract
The PIK3CA gene is frequently mutated in human cancers. Here we carry out a SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using isogenic knockin cell lines containing 'driver' oncogenic mutations of PIK3CA to dissect the signalling mechanisms responsible for oncogenic phenotypes induced by mutant PIK3CA. From 8,075 unique phosphopeptides identified, we observe that aberrant activation of PI3K pathway leads to increased phosphorylation of a surprisingly wide variety of kinases and downstream signalling networks. Here, by integrating phosphoproteomic data with human protein microarray-based AKT1 kinase assays, we discover and validate six novel AKT1 substrates, including cortactin. Through mutagenesis studies, we demonstrate that phosphorylation of cortactin by AKT1 is important for mutant PI3K-enhanced cell migration and invasion. Our study describes a quantitative and global approach for identifying mutation-specific signalling events and for discovering novel signalling molecules as readouts of pathway activation or potential therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Pik3ca, Proteome, Breast cancer, Mutation, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


