### Accession
PXD017994

### Title
Plasma-derived EV Phosphoproteomics through Chemical Affinity Purification

### Description
Invasive nature and pain caused to patients inhibit the routine use of tissue biopsy-based procedures for cancer diagnosis and surveillance. The analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from biofluids have recently gained significant traction in the liquid biopsy field. EVs offer an essential “snapshot” of their precursor cells in real time and contain information-rich collection of nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, etc. The analysis of protein phosphorylation, as a direct marker of cellular signaling and disease progression, could be an important stepstone to successful liquid biopsy applications. Here, we introduce a rapid EV isolation method based on chemical affinity called EVtrap (Extracellular Vesicles Total Recovery and Purification) for EV phosphoproteomics analysis of human plasma. Incorporating EVtrap with high performance mass spectrometry (MS), we were able to identify over 16,000 unique peptides representing 2,238 unique EV proteins from just 5 μL plasma sample, including most known EV markers, with substantially higher recovery levels compared to ultracentrifugation. Most importantly, more than 5,500 unique phosphopeptides representing almost 1,600 phosphoproteins in EVs were identified using only 1 mL of plasma. Finally, we carried out quantitative EV phosphoproteomics analysis of plasma samples from patients diagnosed with chronic kidney disease or kidney cancer (RCC), identifying dozens of phosphoproteins capable of distinguishing disease states from healthy controls. The study demonstrates the potential feasibility of our robust analytical pipeline for cancer signaling monitoring by tracking plasma EV phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from plasma using EVtrap method and dried completely. The isolated and dried EV samples were lysed to extract proteins using the phase-transfer surfactant (PTS) aided procedure. First, EVs were solubilized in the lysis solution containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Millipore-Sigma) in 50 mM Tris·HCl, pH 8.5 by incubating 10 min at 95°C. This step also denatured, reduced and alkylated the proteins. The samples were diluted fivefold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with Lys-C (Wako) at 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37°C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C. The samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% TFA. Ethyl acetate solution was added at 1:1 ratio to the samples. The mixture was vortexed for 2 min and then centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The organic phase (top layer) was removed, and the aqueous phase was collected, dried down to <10% original volume in a vacuum centrifuge, and desalted using Top-Tip C18 tips (Glygen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was split into 99% and 1% aliquots for phosphoproteomic and proteomic experiments respectively. The samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C. For phosphoproteome analysis, the 99% portion of each sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using PolyMAC Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit according to manufacturer’s instructions, and the eluted phosphopeptides dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge. For phosphoproteomics analysis the whole enriched sample was used, while for proteomics only 50% of the sample was loaded onto LC-MS. Dried peptide and phosphopeptide samples were dissolved in 10.5 μL of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid with 3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile containing spiked-in indexed Retention Time Standard containing 11 artificially synthetic peptides (Biognosys). The spiked-in 11-peptides standard mixture was used to account for any variation in retention times and to normalize abundance levels among samples (2). 10 μL of each sample was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nano UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were captured on a 2-cm Acclaim PepMap trap column and separated on a heated 50-cm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing C18 resin. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 60-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 300 nL/min. The UHPLC was coupled online with a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 375 to 1,500 with the resolution of 60,000) was followed by MS/MS of the 15 most intense ions (30,000 resolution; normalized collision energy - 28%; automatic gain control target (AGC) - 2E4, maximum injection time - 200 ms; 60sec exclusion].

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against the human Swiss-Prot database updated on July 16, 2019 with no redundant entries, using Byonic (Protein Metrics) and Sequest search engines loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS2 tolerance was set at 20ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da), and variable modifications of oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N terminus of proteins, and phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues. Search was performed with full trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false-discovery rates of proteins and peptides were set at 0.01. All protein and peptide identifications were grouped and any redundant entries were removed. Only unique peptides and unique master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
The invasive nature and the pain caused to patients inhibit the routine use of tissue biopsy-based procedures for cancer diagnosis and surveillance. The analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from biofluids has recently gained significant traction in the liquid biopsy field. EVs offer an essential "snapshot" of their precursor cells in real time and contain an information-rich collection of nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and so on. The analysis of protein phosphorylation, as a direct marker of cellular signaling and disease progression could be an important stepping stone to successful liquid biopsy applications. Here we introduce a rapid EV isolation method based on chemical affinity called EVtrap (extracellular vesicle total recovery and purification) for the EV phosphoproteomics analysis of human plasma. By incorporating EVtrap with high-performance mass spectrometry (MS), we were able to identify over 16&#x202f;000 unique peptides representing 2238 unique EV proteins from just 5 &#x3bc;L of plasma sample, including most known EV markers, with substantially higher recovery levels compared with ultracentrifugation. Most importantly, more than 5500 unique phosphopeptides representing almost 1600 phosphoproteins in EVs were identified using only 1 mL of plasma. Finally, we carried out a quantitative EV phosphoproteomics analysis of plasma samples from patients diagnosed with chronic kidney disease or kidney cancer, identifying dozens of phosphoproteins capable of distinguishing disease states from healthy controls. The study demonstrates the potential feasibility of our robust analytical pipeline for cancer signaling monitoring by tracking plasma EV phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kidney cancer, Exosomes, Evtrap

### Affiliations
Purdue University

### Submitter
Anton Iliuk

### Lab Head
Dr Andy Tao
Purdue University


