### Accession
PXD043952

### Title
Iron Drives Anabolic Metabolism Through Active Histone Demethylation and mTORC1

### Description
All living cells require a minimal iron threshold to sustain anabolic metabolism. However, the mechanisms by which cells sense iron to regulate anabolic processes are unclear. Here, we report a universal eukaryotic pathway for iron sensing in which molecular iron is required to sustain active histone demethylation and maintain the expression of critical components of the pro-anabolic mTORC1 pathway. Specifically, we identify the iron-binding histone-demethylase KDM3B as an intrinsic iron sensor that regulates mTORC1 activity by demethylating H3K9me2 at enhancers of a high-affinity leucine transporter and RAPTOR. By directly suppressing leucine availability and RAPTOR levels, iron deficiency (ID) supersedes other nutrient inputs into mTORC1. This process occurs in vivo, and is not an indirect effect by canonical iron-utilizing pathways. These data demonstrate a novel mechanism of eukaryotic iron sensing through dynamic chromatin remodeling and repression of mTORC1 mediated anabolism. Due to ancestral eukaryotes sharing homologues of KDMs and mTORC1 core components, this pathway likely predated the emergence of the other kingdom-specific nutrient sensors for mTORC1.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 1x10^6 cells per sample were treated with DFO or vehicle for 12 hours. Cells were then collected, lysed, nuclei were isolated, and histones were extracted as previously described (Garcia et al. 2007, Zheng et al. 2012). Histones were then digested with trypsin and separated by nano-liquid chromatography (75 μm i.d., 15 cm long, packed with MagicC18aq media, particle size 3 μm) coupled to a TSQ Quantum Ultra mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Skyline (MacLean et al 2010) and relative quantification was performed by peak area.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Methyation, Iron, Histone

### Affiliations
Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Hsiang-Chun Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Hossein Ardehali
Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University


