### Accession
PXD039827

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling reveals the therapeutic effects of the PPAR pan-agonist chiglitazar on insulin sensitivity, lipid metabolism, and inflammation in type 2 diabetes

### Description
Chiglitazar is a novel peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) pan-agonist, which passed phase III clinical trials and was newly approved in China for use as an adjunct to diet and exercise in glycemic control in adult patients with Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). To explore the circulating protein signatures associated with the administration of chiglitazar in T2D patients, we conducted a comparative longitudinal study using plasma proteome profiling. Of the 157 T2D patients included in the study, we administered chiglitazar to a specific group, while the controls were given either placebo or sitagliptin. The plasma proteomes were profiled at baseline and 12 and 24 weeks post-treatment using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). Our study indicated that 13 proteins were associated with chiglitazar treatment in T2D patients, including 10 up-regulated proteins (SHBG, TF, APOA2, APOD, GSN, MBL2, CFD, PGLYRP2, A2M, and APOA1) and 3 down-regulated proteins (PRG4, FETUB, and C2) after treatment, which were implicated in the regulation of insulin sensitivity, lipid metabolism, and inflammation response. Our study provides insight into the response of chiglitazar treatment from a proteome perspective and demonstrates the multi-faceted effects of chiglitazar in T2D patients, which would help the clinical application of chiglitazar and further study of its action mechanism. 

### Sample Protocol
Plasma was yielded from the anticoagulated blood of recruited T2D patients. 10 µL of plasma sample was diluted with 8 M Urea followed by disulfide reduction and alkylation. The protein was sequentially digested with trypsin overnight at 37 ℃, and the digested peptides were purified and desalted. Desalted peptides were then dried under vacuum and dissolved in MS buffer.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo .raw files were converted into .mzML format, and database searching was performed by applying the DIA-MS2pep framework for peptide identification. The BLIB library of DIA data was created based on identified peptides, and the peptide quantification was performed by using Skyline and the results were exported for further quantification. The iq R package was used for protein quantification and normalization adopting the top3 approach which is aggregating the abundance of the top3 most intense peptides from one protein as the protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Chiglitazar is a novel peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) pan-agonist, which passed phase III clinical trials and was newly approved in China for use as an adjunct to diet and exercise in glycemic control in adult patients with Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). To explore the circulating protein signatures associated with the administration of chiglitazar in T2D patients, we conducted a comparative longitudinal study using plasma proteome profiling. Of the 157 T2D patients included in the study, we administered chiglitazar to a specific group, while the controls were given either placebo or sitagliptin. The plasma proteomes were profiled at baseline and 12 and 24&#xa0;weeks post-treatment using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). Our study indicated that 13 proteins were associated with chiglitazar treatment in T2D patients, including 10 up-regulated proteins (SHBG, TF, APOA2, APOD, GSN, MBL2, CFD, PGLYRP2, A2M, and APOA1) and 3 down-regulated proteins (PRG4, FETUB, and C2) after treatment, which were implicated in the regulation of insulin sensitivity, lipid metabolism, and inflammation response. Our study provides insight into the response of chiglitazar treatment from a proteome perspective and demonstrates the multi-faceted effects of chiglitazar in T2D patients, which will help the clinical application of chiglitazar and further study of its action mechanism.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Chiglitazar, Dia-ms, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Xingyue Wang

### Lab Head
Professor Tao Xu
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


