### Accession
PXD022314

### Title
Low-expressing synucleinopathy mouse models based on oligomer formation and C-terminal truncation of α-synuclein

### Description
Two mouse models were developed that expressed mutated human alpha synuclein under the control of endogenous murine αSyn (mαSyn) regulatory regions. The expression of the mαSyn was thereby abolished. The genetically ingeneered mice expressed either human αSyn (hαSyn) with a C-terminal deletion ending hαSyn at amino acid 119 or hαSyn with 3 alanine to proline substitutions at residues 30, 56, and 76. Here we tested the expression of different αSyn variants in the hippocampus of respective mouse models and their parental lines.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted from hippocampus, striatum, olfactory bulb, and substantia nigra were digested using trypsin or LysN. Before digestion, 200 ng of 15N-labeled recombinant αSyn were spiked per 100 µg of protein in each sample. Protein digests were analyzed UltiMate 3000 UHPLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) equipped with a C18 PepMap100 Precolumn (0.3 x 5 mm, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an in-house packed C18 analytical column (75 µm x 300 mm; Reprosil-Pur 120C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Tryptic and LysN-generated peptides from hippocampal samples were eluted using a linear gradient ranging from 10 to 42% of mobile phase B (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA in water) over 43 min. Tryptic and LysN-generated peptides from striatum, olfactory bulb, and substantia nigra were eluted using linear gradient from 7 to 23.5% of mobile phase B over 15 min followed by increase to 28% B over next 15 min. Eluting peptides were sprayed into a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Quantiva, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in a single reaction monitoring mode. Cycle time was set to 1.6 s, Q1 and Q3 resolution to 0.7. Transition ions of the following αSyn peptides (light and 15N-labeled, when applicable) were monitored: EGVVHGVATVAEK, EQVTNVGGAVVTGVTAVAQK, TVEGAGSIAAATGFVK, EGVVHGVTTVAEK, TVEGAGNIAAATGFVK, EGVVHGVATVPEK, EQVTNVGGAVVTGVTPVAQK, and KNEEGAPQEGILEDMPVD (LysC).

### Data Protocol
Transition intensities were extracted from the raw data using Skyline (version 19.1.0.193)and further analyzed using in house written R scripts. Specifically, intensities of the six most intense transition ions were summed per precursor ion. Intensities of the 15N-labeled αSyn peptides were used to derive normalization factors as well as to estimate the absolute αSyn amount per sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Α-synuclein mutants, Oligomerization, Olfaction, Neuroinflammation, Transgenic mouse, Motor impairment, Parkinson’s disease, Truncation

### Affiliations
MPI Biophysical Chemistry
1. Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany; 2. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Ivan Silbern

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
1. Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany; 2. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany


