### Accession
PXD012547

### Title
EZH1/2 function mostly within canonical PRC2 and exhibit proliferation-dependent redundancy that shapes mutational signatures in cancer

### Description
The project aimed at determining whether the Polycomb complex PRC2 has a unique composition in androgen independent prostate cancer cells and the project aimed at determining whether EZH2, the enzymatic subunit of PRC2, retains any functional role in the context of Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) where either EED or SUZ12, two essential subunits of PRC2 are inactivated.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts from cell lines of interest were generated as described before (Dignam et al., 1983). For label free affinity purification experiments, three replicate pull downs were performed with 1mg of nuclear extract (NE) of from STS26T, 88-14 and LNCaP-abl cells expressing Flag-EZH2. As controls, three replicate pull-downs were performed from corresponding WT cells. NEs were incubated with 10 ul Flag m2 beads (Sigma) in buffer C containing 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, 20 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA and CPI (Roche) for 2 hours at 4°C in a rotation wheel. After incubation beads were washed with respectively 2 x 1 ml Buffer C  (300 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, 20 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA and CPI (Roche)); 2 x 1 ml PBS with 0.5% NP40 and 2 x 1 ml PBS.  After on-bead digestion (Smits et al., 2013) with trypsin overnight, peptides were acidified and desalted using Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Tryptic peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) connected online to a Thermo scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer or Thermo scientific Q-Exactive (QE) using a gradient of acetonitrile (7–32% or 5–30%, respectively), followed by washes at 50% then 90% acetonitrile. LNCaP-abl IP samples were measured on the Fusion in top speed mode with a 3s duty cycle for 140min. STS26T and 88.14 IP samples were measured on the QE in top10 mode for 120 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MAXQuant version 1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default settings and searched against the Uniprot human proteome (released version 2017_06 used for LNCaP-abl and released version 2015_12 used for STS26T and 88-14).  Perseus (version 1.3.0.4) was used for data filtering and analysis. Briefly, reverse database hits and contaminants were first removed. LFQ values were then transformed into log2 values and missing values were imputed assuming a normal distribution. A t-test was used to calculate significance. Volcanoplots were generated in R.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic mutations affecting chromatin modifiers are widespread in cancers. In malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs), Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which plays a crucial role in gene silencing, is inactivated through recurrent mutations in core subunits embryonic ectoderm development (EED) and suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (SUZ12), but mutations in PRC2's main catalytic subunit enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) have never been found. This is in contrast to myeloid and lymphoid malignancies, which harbor frequent loss-of-function mutations in EZH2. Here, we investigated whether the absence of EZH2 mutations in MPNST is due to a PRC2-independent (i.e., noncanonical) function of the enzyme or to redundancy with EZH1. We show that, in the absence of SUZ12, EZH2 remains bound to EED but loses its interaction with all other core and accessory PRC2 subunits. Through genetic and pharmacological analyses, we unambiguously establish that EZH2 is functionally inert in this context, thereby excluding a PRC2-independent function. Instead, we show that EZH1 and EZH2 are functionally redundant in the slowly proliferating MPNST precursors. We provide evidence that the compensatory function of EZH1 is alleviated upon higher proliferation. This work reveals how context-dependent redundancies can shape tumor-type specific mutation patterns in chromatin regulators.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Polycomb, Histone, Methylation

### Affiliations
Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University,  INSERM U934/ CNRS, UMR3215
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Raphaël Margueron
Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University,  INSERM U934/ CNRS, UMR3215


