### Accession
PXD035345

### Title
BRCA1/BARD1 intrinsically disordered regions facilitate chromatin recruitment and ubiquitylation

### Description
BRCA1/BARD1 is a tumor suppressor E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase with roles in DNA damage repair and in transcriptional regulation. BRCA1/BARD1 RING domains interact with nucleosomes to facilitate mono-ubiquitylation of distinct residues on the C-terminal tail of histone H2A. These enzymatic domains constitute a small fraction of the heterodimer, raising the possibility of functional chromatin interactions involving other regions such as the BARD1 C-terminal domains that bind nucleosomes containing the DNA damage signal H2A K15-Ub and H4 K20me0, or portions of the expansive intrinsically disordered regions found in both subunits. Herein, we reveal novel interactions that support robust H2A ubiquitylation activity mediated through a high-affinity, intrinsically disordered DNA-binding region of BARD1. These interactions support BRCA1/BARD1 recruitment to chromatin and sites of DNA damage in cells and contribute to their survival. We also reveal distinct BRCA1/BARD1 complexes that depend on the presence of H2A K15-Ub, including a complex where a single BARD1 subunit spans adjacent nucleosome units. Our findings identify an extensive network of multivalent BARD1-nucleosome interactions that serve as a platform for BRCA1/BARD1-associated functions on chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross­linking and mass spectrometry analysis (XL­MS) was carried out as described by Zelter et al., 2015 (https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms9673). Reactions were 90 µL of protein/nucleosome mix containing 2 mM BRCA1RING/BARD1FL and 2 mM of unmodified H2A or H2A K15-Ub nucleosomes wrapped with 147-bp ‘601’ DNA in crosslinking bufffer (25 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% glycerol, 1 mM DTT) plus 3.06 µL of 14.5 mM DSS or BS3 (final concentration 0.5 mM) (DSS: disuccinimidyl suberate, BS3: bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, ThermoFisher). Crosslinking was carried out for 10, 30 or 45 mins at room temperature before removing 30 µL and quenching by addition of 3 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 minutes. Four separate reaction conditions were performed: (1) WT-NCP DSS; (2) WT-NCP BS3; (3) K15Ub-NCP DSS; (4) K15Ub-NCP BS3.  Reactions were prepared for MS analysis by bringing them up to 0.1% PPS silent surfactant (Expedion Inc.), 5 mM TCEP. Samples were reduced for 60 mins at 60°C in an Eppendorf Thermomixer with shaking (1200 rpm). Alkylation was performed at room temperature in the dark for 30 mins with 6 mM iodoacetamide. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by addition of 5 mM DTT and samples were then digested by trypsin digestion (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega Corp) at 37°C for 6 hours in a Thermomixer with shaking (1000 rpm) at a substrate to enzyme ratio of 15:1 prior to acidification with 250 mM HCl (final concentration). Acidified samples were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, spun at max speed in a microfuge and supernatants containing peptides were transferred to autosampler vials and stored at ­80°C until analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis were performed on 3 µl injections of protein digest, which were loaded by autosampler onto a 150­μm Kasil fritted trap packed with 2 cm of Reprosil­Pur C18­AQ (3­μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min. After desalting with 8 µl of 0.1% formic acid plus 2% acetonitrile, the trap was brought online with a Self-Packed PicoFrit Column (New Objective part number PF360-75-10-N-5, 75 µm i.d.) packed with 30 cm of Reprosil­Pur C18­AQ (3­μm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) mounted to a heated nanospray ionization source (CorSolutions LLC) set at 50°C and placed in line with a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC pump plus autosampler. Peptides were eluted from the column at 0.25 µL/min using an acetonitrile gradient consisting of the following steps: (1) 0-10 mins; 6-10% B; (2) 10-90 mins; 10-32% B; (3) 100-130 mins; 32-75% B; (4) 130-135 mins; 75% B; (5) 135-136 mins; 75-100% B; (6) 136-151 mins; 100% B, followed by re-equilibration to 0% buffer B prior to the subsequent injection. Buffer A was: 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid 80% acetonitrile. A Thermo Fisher Scientific Exploris 480 was used to perform mass spectrometry in positive ion mode with the following settings. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used with a maximum of 20 tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra acquired per MS spectrum (scan range of m/z 400–1,600). The resolution for MS and MS/MS was 60,000 at m/z 200. The normalized automatic gain control targets for both MS and MS/MS were set to 100%, and the maximum injection times were 50 and 100 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an isolation width of 2 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS acquisitions were prevented for +1, +2, ≥+6 or undefined precursor charge states. Dynamic exclusion was set for 10 seconds. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were converted into mzML using ProteoWizard’s msconvert. All proteins in the sample were identified using Comet searching against a database including the entire S. frugiperda, E. coli and H. sapiens proteomes (Uniprot 7108, 83333 and 9606, respectively) plus common contaminants along with the sequences of all heterologously expressed proteins (FLAG-BRCA1, P38398; TwinStrepII-BARD1, Q99728; H2A-2A, Q99728; H2B-1K, O60814 ; H3.2 (C110A), Q71DI3; H4, P62805; Ub G76C, sequence derived from P0CG48). Smaller search databases were made for subsequent XL searching consisting only of proteins identified in initial comet searches by at least 3 peptides with a Percolator assigned q-value of ≤ 0.01. Decoy databases consisted of the corresponding set of reversed protein sequences. Cross­linked peptides were identified within these proteins by Kojak version 2.0.0-alpha8 available at (http://www.kojak-ms.org/). A statistically meaningful q­value was assigned to each peptide spectrum match (PSM) through analysis of the target and decoy PSM distributions using Percolator version 2.08. The complete unfiltered list of all PSMs and their Percolator assigned q values are available on the ProXL web application https://proxl.yeastrc.org/proxl/p/bard1nucleosome.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1/BARD1 is a tumor suppressor E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase with roles in DNA damage repair and in transcriptional regulation. BRCA1/BARD1 RING domains interact with nucleosomes to facilitate mono-ubiquitylation of distinct residues on the C-terminal tail of histone H2A. These enzymatic domains constitute a small fraction of the heterodimer, raising the possibility of functional chromatin interactions involving other regions such as the BARD1 C-terminal domains that bind nucleosomes containing the DNA damage signal H2A K15-Ub and H4 K20me0, or portions of the expansive intrinsically disordered regions found in both subunits. Herein, we reveal novel interactions that support robust H2A ubiquitylation activity mediated through a high-affinity, intrinsically disordered DNA-binding region of BARD1. These interactions support BRCA1/BARD1 recruitment to chromatin and sites of DNA damage in cells and contribute to their survival. We also reveal distinct BRCA1/BARD1 complexes that depend on the presence of H2A K15-Ub, including a complex where a single BARD1 subunit spans adjacent nucleosome units. Our findings identify an extensive network of multivalent BARD1-nucleosome interactions that serve as a platform for BRCA1/BARD1-associated functions on chromatin.

### Keywords
Kojak, Brca1, Ubiquitin ligase, Nucleosome, Cross-linking mass spectrometry, H2a, Xl-ms, Tumor, Proxl, Cancer, Bard1

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle

### Submitter
Alex Zelter

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel E. Klevit
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


