### Accession
PXD036880

### Title
Proteomic analyses of brassinosteroids mutants in response to salt stress in Arabidopsis

### Description
Salt stress is a major environmental factor limiting plant growth and development. Previous studies have indicated that the steroidal hormones—brassinosteroids (BRs) are important regulators of plant responses to salt stress. We found that bes1-D, a gain-of-function mutant of the BR-regulated transcriptional factor BES1 (AT1G19350) in Arabidopsis showed better salt tolerance than the wild-type plant (Col-0). Label-free based LC-MS/MS and proteomic analyses were performed to investigate protein expression in bes1-D and wild-type in response to salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
Six-day-old seedlings of Arabidopsis (the bes1D mutant and wild-type Col-0) were treated by salt tress (½ MS medium with 150 mM NaCl) or normal ½ MS medium. Seedlings of bes1-D and Col-0 treated with 150 mM NaCl or normal ½ MS medium were collected at 2 days of the treatment. Three independent biological repeats were prepared for each sample and the total sample size is 12. Total proteins were extracted from each seedling sample and digested by trypsin, respectively. LC-MS/MS (Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry) was performed by using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a QExactive Obitrap HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A nano-LC column (150 μm × 30 cm, 1.8 μm, 100 Å) was packed in-house as analytical column for peptide separation at a flowrate of 500 nL/min. Peptide samples were analyzed by DIA (data independent acquisition) analysis for protein quantification.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data from DDA mode were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. The A. thaliana proteome dataset (Araport11_genes.201606.pep.fasta.gz) which contains 40,785 entries were used as reference sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) and proteins were set as 0.01. Minimal peptide length was set as 7. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, while Methionine oxidation and N-termini acetylation were set as variable modifications. “Trypsin digestion” was chosen in the parameters setting while other searching parameters were kept as default. Raw MS/MS data from DIA mode were imported into Spectronaut for deconvolution and extraction. It used mProphet algorithm to perform analytical quality control and generate quantitative results. DEPs were identified by using MSstats package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Salt tolerance, Proteomics, Brassinosteroids, Bes1-d

### Affiliations
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Lei Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Feng
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong


