### Accession
PXD028061

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis identifies supervillin as a new ERK3 substrate regulating cytokinesis and ploidy of breast cancer cells

### Description
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 3 (ERK3) is a poorly characterized member of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family. Functional analysis of the ERK3 signaling pathway has been hampered by a lack of knowledge about the substrates and downstream effectors of the kinase. Here, we used large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics and targeted gene silencing to identify direct ERK3 substrates and gain insight into its potential cellular functions. Detailed validation of one candidate substrate identified the gelsolin/villin family member supervillin (SVIL) as a bona fide ERK3 substrate. We show that ERK3 phosphorylates SVIL on Ser245 to regulate myosin II activation and cytokinetic furrowing in dividing cells. Depletion of SVIL or ERK3 leads to cytokinesis failure and multinucleation, a phenotype rescued by wild type SVIL but not by the non-phosphorylatable S245A mutant. Our results unveil a new function of the atypical MAP kinase ERK3 in cell division and the regulation of cell ploidy

### Sample Protocol
Hs578T cells were cultured for 6 passages in SILAC DMEM medium  and either “light” (Lys(0) 640 µM and Arg(0) 380 µM) or “heavy” (Lys(8) 640 µM and Arg(10) 380 µM) amino acids. The cells were scraped directly in the culture media, and light and heavy SILAC cultures were combined at this point. Cell pellets were washed several times in cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and subsequently lysed in hypotonic buffer (10 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 3 mM MgCl2, 10% (v/v) glycerol and 0.3% (v/v) NP-40) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min, and the supernatants (cytosol) were transferred to new tubes. Proteins from cytosolic fractions were precipitated by MeOH/CHCl3. The pellets (nuclei) were washed in isotonic buffer (8.5 g sucrose/100 mL, 10 mM Tris-HCl(pH 7.4) and 5 mM MgCl2). The proteins were solubilized in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 40 mM chloroacetamide and 10 mM TCEP) and incubated at 95oC for 5 min, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin at 37oC (protein:enzyme mass ratio 100:1). Digestion was halted by acidification with formic acid (FA)(final concentration of 0.5%) and the peptides were desalted and concentrated on tC18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using TiO2beads as described (Kanshin et al., 2013.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.3 and searched against the SwissProt subset of the H. Sapiens uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/). A list of 248 common laboratory contaminants included in MaxQuant was also added to the database as well as reversed versions of all sequences. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass re‐ calibration) and then to 6 ppm for the main search. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was searched as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, protein and site identification was set to 1%, the minimum peptide length was set to 6, and the “peptide requantification” function was enabled. The option matchbetween runs (1 min time tolerance after the alignment) was enabled to correlate identification and quantitation results across different runs

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 3 (ERK3) is a poorly characterized member of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family. Functional analysis of the ERK3 signaling pathway has been hampered by a lack of knowledge about the substrates and downstream effectors of the kinase. Here, we used large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics and targeted gene silencing to identify direct ERK3 substrates and gain insight into its cellular functions. Detailed validation of one candidate substrate identified the gelsolin/villin family member supervillin (SVIL) as a bona fide ERK3 substrate. We show that ERK3 phosphorylates SVIL on Ser245 to regulate myosin II activation and cytokinesis completion in dividing cells. Depletion of SVIL or ERK3 leads to increased cytokinesis failure and multinucleation, a phenotype rescued by wild type SVIL but not by the non-phosphorylatable S245A mutant. Our results unveil a new function of the atypical MAP kinase ERK3 in cell division and the regulation of cell ploidy.

### Keywords
Ploidy, Erk3, Supervillin, Breast cancer, Cytokinesis, Phosphoprotoemic

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Sylvain Meloche
IRIC-Université de Montréal


