### Accession
PXD004881

### Title
Analysis of the psychrophilic fungus Mrakia psychrophila using shotgun proteomics

### Description
Comprehensive and quantitative information of the psychrophile proteome is an important source for understanding of the cold adaptation mechanism under low growth temperature. Mrakia psychrophila, a obligate fungus, was selected to quantitatively evaluate its protein abundance changes in response to three different temperatures. With optimized procedures of isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation quantitative proteomics(iTRAQ), high quality of the quantitative information of the peptides identified were acquired. In total, 1673 unique proteins were identified and defined 129 proteins as the temperature-dependent proteins. Function analysis revealed that energy metabolism is important for temperature adaptaion.

### Sample Protocol
M. psychrophila cultured at 4,12 and 20 C were harvested and lysed in a buffer containing 8M urea, 30mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, 1mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride, 2mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, and 10mM dithiothreitol. After centrifugation at 20,000×g for 30 min, the supernatants were reduced and alkylated by 10mM DTT and 55mM Iodoacetamide. The treated proteins were precipitated in 80% acetone at -20 C for 3h. After centrifugation at 20,000×g for 30 min, the precipitants were resuspended in 50% tetraethylammonium bromide and 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate and again centrifuged at 20,000×g for 30min. The protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford method. The proteins were digested with trypsin at 37 C for 12h. The tryptic peptides were labeled using an iTRAQ® reagents 8-plex multiplex kit (Applied Biosystems) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The iTRAQ labeled peptide mixtures were separated on a Luna SCX strong cation exchange high performance liquid chromatography column (Phenomenex) and desalted with strata-X C18 column (Phenomenex). The mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient of 5–80% mobile phase B over 65 min. The elutes were directly entered into a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer, setting in positive ion mode and data-dependent manner with full MS scan from 350–2000 m/z, resolution at 70,000.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched using Mascot 2.3.01 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the database with all predicted proteins in M. psychrophila. Only proteins identified below the 1% global FDR were qualified for further quantitative data analysis. The fold changes in protein abundance were defined as the median ratio of all significantly matched spectra with tag signals. DEPs were identified with fold changes >1.5.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mrakia psychrophila</i> is an obligate psychrophilic fungus. The cold adaptation mechanism of psychrophilic fungi remains unknown. Comparative genomics analysis indicated that <i>M. psychrophila</i> had a specific codon usage preference, especially for codons of Gly and Arg and its major facilitator superfamily (MFS) transporter gene family was expanded. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that genes involved in ribosome and energy metabolism were upregulated at 4&#xb0;, while genes involved in unfolded protein binding, protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, proteasome, spliceosome, and mRNA surveillance were upregulated at 20&#xb0;. In addition, genes related to unfolded protein binding were alternatively spliced. Consistent with other psychrophiles, desaturase and glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, which are involved in biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acid and glycerol respectively, were upregulated at 4&#xb0;. Cold adaptation of <i>M. psychrophila</i> is mediated by synthesizing unsaturated fatty acids to maintain membrane fluidity and accumulating glycerol as a cryoprotectant. The proteomic analysis indicated that the correlations between the dynamic patterns between transcript level changes and protein level changes for some pathways were positive at 4&#xb0;, but negative at 20&#xb0;. The death of <i>M. psychrophila</i> above 20&#xb0; might be caused by an unfolded protein response.

### Keywords
Fungi, Psychrophilic, Itraq

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No 3 Park 1, Beichen West Rd., Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China
Institute Of Microbiology Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yao  Su

### Lab Head
Dr Xingzhong Liu
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No 3 Park 1, Beichen West Rd., Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China


