### Accession
PXD029458

### Title
Assessing Interference in Isobaric Tag-based Sample Multiplexing using an 18-plex Interference Standard

### Description
Reporter ion interference remains a limitation of isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing. Advances in instrumentation and data acquisition modes, such as the recently developed real-time database search (RTS), can reduce interference. However, interference persists as does the need to benchmark upstream sample preparation and data acquisition strategies. Here, we present an updated Triple yeast KnockOut (TKO) standard as well as corresponding upgrades to the TKO Viewing Tool (TVT2.5, http://tko.hms.harvard.edu/). Specifically, we expand the TKO standard to incorporate the TMTpro18-plex reagents (TKO18). We also construct a variant thereof which has been digested only with LysC (TKO18L). We compare proteome coverage and interference levels of TKO18 and TKO18L data that were acquired under different data acquisition modes and analyzed using TVT2.5. Our data illustrate that  RTS reduces interference while improving proteome coverage and suggest that digesting with LysC alone only modestly reduces interference, albeit at the expense of proteome depth. Collectively, the two new TKO standards coupled with the updated TVT represent a convenient and versatile platform for assessing and developing methods to reduce interference in isobaric tag-based experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cultures were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with ice cold deionized water, and resuspended in lysis buffer: 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and protease (complete mini, EDTA-free) inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Cells were lysed using the MiniBeadbeater (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK) in microcentrifuge tubes at a maximum speed for three cycles of 60 sec each, with 1 min pauses on ice between cycles to avoid overheating of the lysates. After centrifugation, cleared lysates were transferred to new tubes. We determined the protein concentration in the lysate using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Proteins were subjected to disulfide reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at room temperature for 30 min followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts neat methanol was added to each sample and vortexed, then one-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 12,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and, after removing both the aqueous and organic phases, subsequently washed once with 100% methanol. Samples were not dried, rather, all but ~10 µL of methanol was aspirated to allow for better solubilization of the precipitated proteins. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 16 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. For the TKO18 standard (but not TKO18L standard), trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated 6 h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based software pipeline. Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database) (March 20, 2021). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da for SPS-MS3 and RTS-MS3 data, but this setting was  0.03Da for hrMS2 data. Enzyme specificity was assigned as LysC and trypsin for TKO18 and to only LysC for TKO18L. We selected these wide mass tolerance windows to maximize sensitivity for the Comet searches and subsequent linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, peptide length, ΔCn, charge state, missed cleavages, and mass accuracy of the precursor. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide FDR and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Peptide intensities were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs so as to give greater weight to more intense ions. We required an isolation specificity ≥ 0.8 (i.e., peptide purity >80%). In addition, PSMs of poor quality, spectra with TMT reporter ion summed signal-to-noise measurements that were less than 180, or with no MS3 spectra (for MS3-based methods) were excluded from quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Reporter ion interference remains a limitation of isobaric tag-based sample multiplexing. Advances in instrumentation and data acquisition modes, such as the recently developed real-time database search (RTS), can reduce interference. However, interference persists as does the need to benchmark upstream sample preparation and data acquisition strategies. Here, we present an updated Triple yeast KnockOut (TKO) standard as well as corresponding upgrades to the TKO viewing tool (TVT2.5, http://tko.hms.harvard.edu/). Specifically, we expand the TKO standard to incorporate the TMTpro18-plex reagents (TKO18). We also construct a variant thereof which has been digested only with LysC (TKO18L). We compare proteome coverage and interference levels of TKO18 and TKO18L data that are acquired under different data acquisition modes and analyzed using TVT2.5. Our data illustrate that RTS reduces interference while improving proteome coverage and suggest that digesting with LysC alone only modestly reduces interference, albeit at the expense of proteome depth. Collectively, the two new TKO standards coupled with the updated TVT represent a convenient and versatile platform for assessing and developing methods to reduce interference in isobaric tag-based experiments.

### Keywords
Rts, Tmtpro18, Eclipse, Sps-ms3, Faims, Ifi

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


