### Accession
PXD001687

### Title
Temporary Organ Specific Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Soybean under Flooding and Drought Stresses

### Description
To elucidate the mechanism of soybean responding to flooding and drought, organ specific proteomics and time course proteomics were carried out.

### Sample Protocol
For organ specific proteomics, protein of root tip, root, hypocotyl, and cotyledon of 2-day-old soybeans without stress (control), with flooding for 2 days (flooding), and drought for 2 days (drought) were extracted, respectively. For time course proteomics, protein of root of 2-day-old soybeans, 3-day-old soybeans, and 4-day-old soybeans (control); 2-day-old soybeans subjected to flooding for 1 or 2 days (flooding); 2-day-old soybeans subjected to drought for 1 or 2 days (drought). Proteins were extracted using TCA/Acetone method. Protein samples were purified with chloroform/methanol methods and subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase . The peptide samples were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system. The peptide samples were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid and eluted from the trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The eluted peptides were loaded and separated on a C18 NANO HPLC NTTC-360/75-3 capillary tip column (75 µm ID x 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using Mascot search engines (version 2.4.1., Matrix Science, London, UK) with a soybean peptide database (55,787 sequences) constructed from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.1, http://www/phytozome.net/soybean). Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to process the acquired raw data files. For the Mascot searches, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, the peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4.  Mascot results were filtered with the Percolator function to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. The acquired Mascot results were imported to SIEVE software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Growth in the early stage of soybean is markedly inhibited under flooding and drought stresses. To explore the responsive mechanisms of soybean, temporal protein profiles of root tip under flooding and drought stresses were analyzed using gel-free/label-free proteomic technique. Root tip was analyzed because it was the most sensitive organ against flooding, and it was beneficial to root penetration under drought. UDP glucose: glycoprotein glucosyltransferase was decreased and increased in soybean root under flooding and drought, respectively. Temporal protein profiles indicated that fermentation and protein synthesis/degradation were essential in root tip under flooding and drought, respectively. In silico protein-protein interaction analysis revealed that the inductive and suppressive interactions between S-adenosylmethionine synthetase family protein and B-S glucosidase 44 under flooding and drought, respectively, which are related to carbohydrate metabolism. Furthermore, biotin/lipoyl attachment domain containing protein and Class II aminoacyl tRNA/biotin synthetases superfamily protein were repressed in the root tip during time-course stresses. These results suggest that biotin and biotinylation might be involved in energy management to cope with flooding and drought in early stage of soybean-root tip.

### Keywords
Time dependency, Proteomics, Organ specificity, Soybean, Flooding, Drought

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Wang Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


