### Accession
PXD037092

### Title
Pharmacological perturbation of the phase-separating protein SMNDC1

### Description
SMNDC1 is an essential splicing factor that, like its better-studied paralog SMN, binds to di-methylated arginines using its Tudor domain. The specific contributions of the SMNDC1 Tudor domain to protein-protein interactions, subcellular localization, and molecular function have not been studied in detail. Here, we perform such analysis and develop first small molecule inhibitors targeting the dimethyl arginine binding pocket of the SMNDC1 Tudor domain. We find that SMNDC1 localizes to phase-separated membraneless organelles that partially overlap with nuclear speckles. This condensation behavior is driven by the unstructured C-terminus, dependent on RNA interaction and can be recapitulated in vitro. Inhibitors of the protein’s Tudor domain drastically alter protein-protein interactions and subcellular localization, causing splicing changes at SMNDC1 dependent genes. These compounds will enable further pharmacological studies on the role of SMNDC1 in the regulation of nuclear condensates, gene regulation and cell identity.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling with APEX2 was done following the described protocol for imaging and proteomic analysis (Hung et al., 2016). Cell lines with a stable expression of APEX2-fusion proteins were generated using lentiviral transduction of plasmids generated with Gateway cloning of the respective fusion protein into pLEX305. pLEX_305 was a gift from David Root (Addgene plasmid # 41390 ; http://n2t.net/addgene:41390 ; RRID:Addgene_41390). The APEX2 sequence was amplified from APEX2-csGBP which was a gift from Rob Parton (Addgene plasmid # 108874 ; http://n2t.net/addgene:108874 ; RRID:Addgene_108874). Briefly, cells were incubated with 0.5mM biotin-phenol for 30min, after which 1mM H2O2 was added for exactly 1min. Labeling reaction was quenched by 3 quick washes with Quenching solution (10mM sodium ascorbate, 10mM sodium azide, 5mM Trolox in PBS), followed by detaching the cells from the plates using a cell scraper. Cells were then lysed, and samples normalized to 500 µg total protein input. Lysates were reduced and alkylated. To enrich biotinylated proteins, 100 µl of Pierce™ Streptavidin Agarose beads, Thermo Scientific, 20353 per sample were washed with PBS and incubated with reduced and alkylated proteins for 1h at RT. Beads were washed 10x with 8M Urea in PBS, followed by 4 washes with PBS. Enriched biotinylated proteins on the beads were digested with Trypsin overnight. After trypsin digestion, samples underwent solid phase extraction using C18 columns. Samples were then labeled with TMTpro 16-plex, pooled and fractionated from C18 columns with increasing concentrations of Acetonitrile. The eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator at 45°C and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA before MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interface. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with an Acclaim PepMap nanoHPLC C18 analytical column (2.0 µm particle size, 75µm IDx500mm, catalog number 164942, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Column temperature was maintained at 50 °C. Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. Separation was achieved by applying a four-step gradient over 151 min at the flow rate of 230 nL/min (initial gradient increase from 6% to 9% solvent B within 1 min, 9% to 30% solvent B within 146 min, 30% to 65% solvent B within 8 min and, 65% to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before equilibrating at 6% solvent B for 23 min prior to next injection). In a liquid-junction set-up, electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV directly to the liquid to be sprayed, and non-coated silica emitters were used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) and used a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) approach, which enables more accurate multiplexed quantification of peptides and proteins at the MS3 level. For both MS2 and MS3 level we collected a survey scan of 400–1600 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 000 (FTMS1), an AGC target was set to ‘standard’ and a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms was applied. Precursor ions were filtered according to charge state (2-6), dynamic exclusion (60 s with a ±10 ppm window), and monoisotopic precursor selection. Precursor ions for data-dependent MSn (ddMSn) analysis were selected using 10 dependent scans (TopN approach). Charge state filter was used to select precursors for data-dependent scans. In ddMS2 analysis, spectra were acquired using a single charge state per branch (from z=2 to z=5) in a dual-pressure linear ion trap (ITMS2). Quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.7 Da and collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation technique was used at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Normalized AGC target value was set to 200% with a maximum IT of 35 ms. During the ddMS3 analyses, precursors were isolated using SPS waveform and different MS1 isolation windows (1.3 m/z for z=2, 1.2 m/z for z=3, 0.8 m/z for z=4 and 0.7 m/z for z=5). Target MS2 fragment ions were further fragmented by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) followed by Orbitrap analysis (FTMS3). The HCD normalized collision energy was set to 45% and normalized AGC target was set to 300% with a maximum IT of 100 ms. The resolution was set to 50 000 with defined scan range from 100 to 500 m/z. Xcalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v.2.4.1.15 platform, choosing a TMT16plex quantification method. In the processing step we used Sequest HT database search engine and Percolator validation software node to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the mouse SwissProtdatabase v.2017.10.25 (SwissProt TaxID=10090, 25 097 sequences and appended known contaminants and streptavidin) with a maximum of two allowed miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.994 Da) of methionine and acetylation of protein N termini (+42.011 Da), as well as methionine loss (-131.040 Da) and acetylation of protein N termini with methionine loss (-89.030Da) were set as variable modification, while carbamidomethylation (+57.021Da) of cysteine residues and tandem mass tag (TMT) 16-plex labeling of peptide N termini and lysine residues (+304.207Da) were set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence assigned by Percolator. MS3 signal-to-noise values (S/N) values of TMTpro reporter ions were used to calculate peptide/protein abundance values. Peptide spectrum matches with precursor isolation interference values of ≥70%, SPS mass matches ≤65% and average TMTpro reporter ion S/N≤10 were excluded from quantitation. Both unique and razor peptides were used for TMT quantitation. Isotopic impurity correction was applied. Data were normalized on total peptide amount for correction of experimental bias and scaled ‘on all average’. Protein ratios are directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances using an ANOVA hypothesis test.

### Publication Abstract
We report a copper-catalyzed ligand-controlled selective 1,2- and 1,4-hydrosilylation of 1,3-enynes, which furnishes enantiomerically enriched propargyl- and 1,2-allenylsilane products in high yields with excellent enantioselectivities (up to 99% ee). This reaction proceeds under mild conditions, shows broad substrate scope for both 1,3-enynes and trihydrosilanes, and displays excellent regioselectivities. Mechanistic studies based on deuterium-labeling reactions and density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggest that allenylcopper is the dominant reactive intermediate under both 1,2- and 1,4-hydrosilylation conditions, and it undergoes metathesis with silanes via selective four-membered or six-membered transition state, depending on the nature of the ligand. The weak interactions between the ligands and the reacting partners are found to be the key controlling factor for the observed regioselectivity switch. The origin of high enantiocontrol in the 1,4-hydrosilylation is also revealed by high level DLPNO-CCSD(T) calculations.

### Keywords
Nuclear speckles, Chemical screening, Tudor domain, Nmr structure, Splicing, Small molecule inhibitor, Pancreatic alpha cells

### Affiliations
The CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Stefan Kubicek Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Andrea Rukavina

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
Stefan Kubicek Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria


