### Accession
PXD026656

### Title
Proteomic analysis identified age-associated prognostic biomarkers in pneumonia-derived pediatric sepsis

### Description
Pediatric sepsis is a leading cause of mortality in children across the world. Within pediatric sepsis, how developmental age-specific host immune response impact on the occurrence and development of pediatric sepsis is still unknown, especially between infants and toddlers, which were the major susceptible age groups in sepsis. Experimental design In this study, we applied a nested case-control study strategy and analyzed the plasma proteomes of pediatric sepsis patients between infants and toddlers in comparison to their age-matched controls respectively. Each age group consists of three subgroups with different outcomes. One hundred and ten plasma samples were pooled into 16 samples for quantitative identification by LC-MS/MS. Results It was totally quantified 677 proteins. In comparison to toddlers, infant sepsis patients were characteristic with dominant neutrophil-mediated defense, suppressed adaptive immunity and NK-mediated cytotoxicity. Besides, pentose phosphate pathway was more up-regulated in infants and associated with poor outcome. Moreover, combined Hp and Thbs1 with the AUC value of 0.958 (95%CI, 0.868, 1.000) was confirmed as potential infant-adapted prognostic marker of poor outcome in sepsis.  Conclusion and clinical relevance Our proteomic analysis of age-associated pediatric sepsis combined with clinical laboratory data provided a comprehensive insight into the complex, multifactorial heterogeneous host response to pediatric sepsis and allowed identification of critical differences between infant and toddler sepsis. Moreover, we confirmed that combined Hp and Thbs1 is more infant-adapted and serves as a potential prognostic biomarker for poor outcome of infant sepsis, promoting the application of age-adapted precision medicine in pediatric sepsis.

### Sample Protocol
The highly abundant proteins of plasma samples were removed by Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (Thermo Fisher). After reduction and alkylation, the protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Protein samples were digested by trypsin in a trypsin-to-protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The digested peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5M TEAB and labeled with TMT, processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo fisher). Then the tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column. Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O, directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The binary mobile phase consisting of A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 98/2 ACN/H2O was applied for 45 min gradient elution: 0-5 min at 6% B, 26 min at 23% B, 8 min at 35%, 3 min at 80% and keep 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pediatric sepsis, Picu

### Affiliations
Hunan Children’s Hospital
Hunan Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Ting Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Xiulan Lu
Hunan Children’s Hospital


