### Accession
PXD005224

### Title
Identification of novel STAT6-regulated proteins in mouse B cells by comparative transcriptome and proteome analysis

### Description
IL-4/STAT6-regulated transcriptome and proteome were compared in primary B cells isolated from wild-type and STAT6-deficient mice. B cells were purified from the spleen and stimulated in vitro with anti-CD40 and LPS or anti-IgM-F(ab)2 in the presence or absence of IL-4. Transcriptome analysis was performed with oligonucleotide microarrays. Global relative quantification of proteins was achieved by gel-enhanced label-free liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS). Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis revealed that IL-4-induced changes of the transcriptome were almost completely dependent on STAT6. In contrast, the quantitative proteome analysis revealed that the expression of many IL-4-regulated proteins changes even in the absence of STAT6. The top 75 proteins with changes in abundance levels induced by IL-4 in a STAT6-dependent manner were also found to be regulated at the transcriptional level. Most of these proteins were not previously known to be regulated by STAT6 in B cells. We confirmed the MS-based quantitative proteome data by flow cytometric and Western blot analysis of selected proteins. This study provides a framework for further functional characterization of STAT6-regulated proteins in B cells that might be involved in germinal center formation and class switch recombination.

### Sample Protocol
Untouched B cells from WT and STAT6-deficient mice were isolated from the spleen using the Negative selection EasySep Mouse B cell isolation kit (StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada). 2x1E6 purified B cells were cultured in RPMI1640 (PAN-Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany) supplemented with 10% FCS (Gibco by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany), and stimulated with IL-4 (25 ng/ml; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), anti-CD40 antibody (10 µg/ml; BioXcell, West Lebanon, NH) and LPS (2 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 4 days. Fresh medium was added on day 3.  2x1E6 B cells were harvested from B cell cultures on day 4 and lysed in 80-90 µl RIPA lysis buffer (1% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 50mM Tris pH7.4 (Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany), 0.15 M NaCl (Carl Roth GmbH), 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0 (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.25% deoxycholic acid (Sigma-Aldrich). Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail tablet (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) and Protease Cocktail tablet (Roche Diagnostics) were added during cell lysis. 20 µg protein samples were resuspended in a 6x sample buffer (20% SDS (Carl Roth GmbH), ß-mercaptoethanol (Carl Roth GmbH), glycerol (AppliChem GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) and some grains bromophenole blue (Carl Roth GmbH)). 4-12% Bis-Tris Precast Gradient Gels (Life Technologies by Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for electrophoresis. Gels were washed several times in water and then fixed with fixation buffer (50% methanol, 2% phosphoric acid) for 30 min. Fixed gels were washed 3 times for 10 min in water, then incubated for 30 min in staining buffer consisting of 34% methanol, 2% phosphoric acid and 17% ammonium sulfate before adding Coomassie 250 G to stain the gel for 16 h.   Label-free quantitative LC/MS analysis.  Gel lanes were cut into ten slices, which were destained and subjected to alkylation of thiol groups by iodoacetamide and in-gel digestion using trypsin. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano online coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Samples were washed for 5 min on a 5 mm × 0.3 mm PepMapTM C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a 50 cm × 75 µm C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMapTM; 2 µm particle size; 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) at 40°C using  a linear gradient from 3% to 34% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in 2% (v/v) DMSO and 0.1% FA in 30 min and a subsequent increase to 82% ACN in 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. For electrospray ionization, a fused silica emitter (New Objective) and a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode at a voltage of 1.5 kV and a transfer capillary temperature of 200°C were used. MS survey scans were recorded between m/z 375 – 1,700 at a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×1E6 ions and a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms. The top 12 most intense multiple charged precursor ions exceeding the intensity threshold of 5.8×1E3 were subjected to MS/MS experiments using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD; normalized collision energy 28) with an AGC of 1×1E5 ions, a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 35,000. Previously fragmented precursor ions were excluded from additional MS/MS scans for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS raw data were analyzed using the Andromeda/MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.12) and protein sequences from the proteome set of mouse from the UniProt database (54,489 entries, including isoforms; version 2015_08) and the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Up to three missed sites for proteolytic cleavage by trypsin were accepted. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied to both peptide and protein level. . For protein identification, at least one unique peptide with a minimal length of six amino acids was required. For quantification, the “match between runs” option was enabled and the algorithm for label-free quantification (LFQ) was applied with a minimal ratio count of two. For statistical analysis of the protein abundance data, the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) was used. In brief, entries marked as only identified by site, reverse or potential contaminants were removed. Reproducibility of datasets across five biological replicates per condition was verified as reflected by Pearson correlation coefficients generally better than 0.95. Data from one sample (replicate 1 of WT without IL-4) showed poor correlation of below 0.7 with other replicates and were therefore excluded from further analysis. The dataset was filtered for at least two non-zero LFQ intensity values. Log10 values of LFQ intensities were calculated. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width of 0.3, down-shifted by 1.8 standard deviations) thereby modeling proteins of low expression under certain conditions. Mean log10 LFQ intensities of biological replicates were computed and a two-sample two-tailed student’s t-test was applied to identify candidate proteins significantly changed in abundance (p < 0.05) between different conditions.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor STAT6 plays a key role in mediating signaling downstream of the receptors for IL-4 and IL-13. In B cells, STAT6 is required for class switch recombination to IgE and for germinal center formation during type 2 immune responses directed against allergens or helminths. In this study, we compared the transcriptomes and proteomes of primary mouse B cells from wild-type and STAT6-deficient mice cultured for 4 d in the presence or absence of IL-4. Microarray analysis revealed that 214 mRNAs were upregulated and 149 were downregulated &gt;3-fold by IL-4 in a STAT6-dependent manner. Across all samples, &#x223c;5000 proteins were identified by label-free quantitative liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. A total of 149 proteins was found to be differentially expressed &gt;3-fold between IL-4-stimulated wild-type and STAT6<sup>-/-</sup> B cells (75 upregulated and 74 downregulated). Comparative analysis of the proteome and transcriptome revealed that expression of these proteins was mainly regulated at the transcriptional level, which argues against a major role for posttranscriptional mechanisms that modulate the STAT6-dependent proteome. Nine proteins were selected for confirmation by flow cytometry or Western blot. We show that CD30, CD79b, SLP-76, DEC205, IL-5R&#x3b1;, STAT5, and Thy1 are induced by IL-4 in a STAT6-dependent manner. In contrast, Syk and Fc receptor-like 1 were downregulated. This dataset provides a framework for further functional analysis of newly identified IL-4-regulated proteins in B cells that may contribute to germinal center formation and IgE switching in type 2 immunity.

### Keywords
Stat6, Il-4, B cells, Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


