### Accession
PXD024206

### Title
Global proteomics to study silica nanoparticle-induced cytotoxicity and its mechanisms in HepG2 cells

### Description
Silica nanoparticles (SiO2 NPs) are commonly used in medical and pharmaceutical fields. Research into the cytotoxicity and overall proteomic changes occurring during initial exposure to SiO2 NPs is limited. We investigated the mechanism of toxicity in human liver cells according to exposure time [0, 4, 10, and 16 hours (h)] to SiO2 NPs through proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. SiO2 NP-induced cytotoxicity through various pathways in HepG2 cells. Interestingly, when cells were exposed to SiO2 NPs for 4 h, the morphology of the cells remained intact, while the expression of proteins involved in mRNA splicing, cell cycle, and mitochondrial function was significantly downregulated. These results show that the toxicity of the nanoparticles affects protein expression even if there is no change in cell morphology at the beginning of exposure to SiO2 NPs. The levels of reactive oxygen species changed significantly after 10 h of exposure to SiO2 NPs, and the expression of proteins associated with oxidative phosphorylation, and the immune system was upregulated. Eventually, these changes in protein expression induced HepG2 cell death. This study provides insights into cytotoxicity evaluation at early stages of exposure to SiO2 NPs through in vitro experiments.

### Sample Protocol
In order to obtain the protein lysates from the HepG2 cells, 150 μl of lysis buffer composing of 0.2% DDM, 150 mM NaCl, and one tablet of protease inhibitor cocktail in 50 mM Tris-HCl solution was added to the cell pellets. The cell mixture was vortexed for 1 min, and then incubated at 4 ℃ for 1 min. The solution was centrifuged at 12,000  g for 15 min at 4 ℃, the supernatants were transferred into new tubes for the isolation of proteins. The concentration of protein lysates was measured by using a BCA protein assay. Twenty microgram of proteins was reduced by adding 50 mM AmBic buffer containing 10 mM DTT for 2 h at 37 ℃, and were subsequently alkylated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature, after addition of 20 mM IAA solution. In order to remove the remaining IAA, 40 mM L-cysteine was added and was allowed to incubate for 30 min at room temperature, followed by tryptic digestion of the samples (enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20). The digestion was carried out overnight at 37 ℃, and quenched with 5% FA. The digests were desalted by HLB cartridge and eluted with 0.5 ml H2O:ACN (50:50, v/v) solution containing 0.1% FA. After evaporation, the peptides were stored at -80 ℃ prior to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw data was submitted to PEAKS Studio 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) to search against the SwissProt database of Homo sapiens (human, UP00000564, downloaded 22/11/2019, 20379 entries) from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for protein identification and label free quantification (LFQ). The search parameters for identification were: (a) trypsin as specific enzyme, two missed cleavage allowed; (b) fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modification: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term, allowing for three variable PTM per peptide; (c) precursor mass error tolerance of 20.0 ppm; (d) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da. When protein identification was completed, label free quantification (LFQ) was carried out using the analyzed PEAKS file. LFQ analysis was performed by ANOVA method, and significance thresholds were set to two unique peptides, data filter in at least three samples per group, a significance of 20 (p-value=0.01) and 2.0-fold change. Normalization of data was conducted using total ion chromatography (TIC). The resulting data were exported to Microsoft Excel, and a Venn diagram was generated by using an online tool, Venny 2.1 (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). Heatmap and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed using the Perseus 1.5.8.5.

### Publication Abstract
Silica nanoparticles (SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs) are commonly used in medical and pharmaceutical fields. Research into the cytotoxicity and overall proteomic changes occurring during initial exposure to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs is limited. We investigated the mechanism of toxicity in human liver cells according to exposure time [0, 4, 10, and 16 h (h)] to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs through proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry. SiO<sub>2</sub> NP-induced cytotoxicity through various pathways in HepG2 cells. Interestingly, when cells were exposed to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs for 4 h, the morphology of the cells remained intact, while the expression of proteins involved in mRNA splicing, cell cycle, and mitochondrial function was significantly downregulated. These results show that the toxicity of the nanoparticles affects protein expression even if there is no change in cell morphology at the beginning of exposure to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs. The levels of reactive oxygen species changed significantly after 10 h of exposure to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs, and the expression of proteins associated with oxidative phosphorylation, as well as the immune system, was upregulated. Eventually, these changes in protein expression induced HepG2 cell death. This study provides insights into cytotoxicity evaluation at early stages of exposure to SiO<sub>2</sub> NPs through in vitro experiments.

### Keywords
Silica nanoparticles; cytotoxicity; label-free quantification; proteomic analysis; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science

### Submitter
Sun Young Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Gyeong Son
Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science


