### Accession
PXD012189

### Title
Paleoproteomics of archaeological fibres from Xinjiang

### Description
A large corpus of 112 keratin extracts from archaeological fibres collected in Bronze Age and Iron Age sites of the Keriya valley in the Taklamakan desert (Xinjiang, China) was analyzed by bottom-up proteomics for archaeological purpose.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were washed with milliQ water + 2% DECON, then in MeOH/CHCl3 solution (1:2) and finally in milliQ water under sonication. 3 mL Tris-HCl 25 mM, thiourea 2.4 M, urea 5 M (pH 8.5) and dithiothreitol (DTT, 100 mM) were added to 20 mg of washed sample. The solution was let three days under stirring, then filtered on Buchner. The samples (100 µL) were then reduced with DTT and alklylated with iodoacetamide. The samples wered digested with  trypsin gold for 16 h at 37°C. Then the samples were treated by solid phase extraction on a C8 cartridge (Sep-Pak C8 Plus, Waters), dried under vaccum, and resuspended in 1.5 mL of H2O + 0.1 % formic acid / acetonitrile 70:30 (v/v). The digests were analysed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) on an Ultimate 3000-RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to an electrospray ionization - quadrupole - time of flight (ESI Q-TOF) instrument (Maxis II ETD, Bruker Daltonics). The separation was achieved using a RSLC Polar Advantage II Acclaim column (2.2 μm, 120 Å, 2.1 x 100 mm, Thermo Scientific) with the following gradient of mobile phase A (milliQ water + FA 0.1 %) and B (LC-MS grade AcN + FA 0.08 %), at 300 μL/min: linear increase from 5% B to 60% B for 12 min, linear increase to 100% B for 0.5 min, plateau at 100% B for 0.5 min, decrease to 5% B for 0.5 min, equilibration for 4 min (total run time 17.5 min). The MS detection was carried out in positive mode in the range m/z 100 - 2000. Analyses were performed using collision-induced dissociation in data dependent auto-MS/MS mode, using the following set-up: preferred charge states: 1–4, unknown charge states excluded, cycle time 3 s, MS spectra rate: 2 Hz, MS/MS spectra rate: 2 Hz at 16 000 counts increasing to 6 Hz at 160 000 counts or above. MS/MS active exclusion was set after one spectrum unless intensity increased fivefold. Collision energy was automatically calculated from m/z and charge states. The MS instrument was calibrated at each run start using a sodium formate solution consisting of 10 mM sodium hydroxide in isopropanol / 0.2% formic acid (1:1 v/v).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were converted to mgf files using DataAnalysis software (Bruker Daltonics). Database search was carried out against SwissProt and NCBI databases simultaneously with Mascot (MatrixScience.com, using the online version or an in-house licence). We restricted the search to mammalia (mammals) and allowed 2 missed cleavages. We considered carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as well as oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Charge states 1+, 2+ and 3+ were considered with 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.05 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragments. The statistic decoy was applied to avoid false positive match. In addition, the samples with highest scores were treated using the error-tolerant mode in order to identify potential additional modifications. A new search was then performed in the decoy mode on the samples with ambiguous or failed identification, considering lysine carbamylation as variable modification. The mass spectrometry proteomics data and Mascot results have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange  The LC-MS/MS data were also analysed using PEAKS DB Studio software (7.5 version, BioInformatics Solutions, hereafter PEAKS). PEAKS searches (including de novo and PEAKS PTM algorithms) were set using the same parameters as in Mascot, but the searches were performed against a restrained database constituted of the mammal keratin sequences present in NCBI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Keratin, Animal fibres, Iron age, Bronze age, Xinjiang, Textiles

### Affiliations
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle

### Submitter
Severine Zirah

### Lab Head
Dr Séverine Zirah
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle


