### Accession
PXD041355

### Title
Identification of an outer membrane protease of Rickettsia rickettsii responsible for maturation of surface exposed autotransporters

### Description
Strains of R. rickettsii, the agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, differ greatly in the severity of the disease caused. The genetic differences responsible for this disparity are only now being uncovered. An avirulent, laboratory adapted strain of R. rickettsii fails to proteolytically process several large surface protein antigens. We have identified a protease that cleaves the protein precursors to their mature form. The gene encoding this protease is mutated in the avirulent strain. Complementation of the active form of the gene identifies proteolytic processing of surface antigens as important to virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were diced into 1 mm cubes and washed by 25 mM NH4HCO3, 50% ACN for three times. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 56 °C for 45 min, and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Gels were incubated with trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 solution at 12.5 ng/μL at 37 °C overnight.  The resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Millipore) and analyzed by a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system. The Q Exactive plus was controlled by the Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA, USA).  Peptide samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 trap column (75 μm × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å) in 0.1% formic acid and further separated on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 250 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) using an acetonitrile-based gradient (Solvent A: 0% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was as follows: 0-30 min, 2-40% B; 30-31 min, 30-100% B, 31-32 min, 100% B followed by column wash and re-equilibration to 2% B. The electrospray ionization was carried out with an EASY-Spray™ Source at a 275 °C capillary temperature, 50 °C column temperature, and 1.9 kV spray voltage. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with mass range 375 to 1600 m/z. Full scan resolution was set to 140,000 with AGC target at 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 30 ms. Fragment scan resolution was set to 17,500 with AGC target at 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 70 ms. Normalized collision energy was set to 27. The dynamic exclusion was set with 60 s duration and a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw data of in-gel digestion samples were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The raw files were searched against Rickettsia rickettsii str. 'Sheila Smith' (NCBI GenBank: CP000848.1, band 1-3), Rickettsia rickettsii str. Iowa (NCBI GenBank: CP000766.3, band 4), Rickettsia rickettsii str. Iowa 4EP (NCBI GenBank:  CP018914.1, band 5-9) and common contaminants (MaxQuant).  Search parameters were as follows: Trypsin semi (C-term) with two missed cleavages was set as cleavage enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine residue was set as the fixed modification. A total of five variable modifications were allowed per peptide from the following list: oxidation on Methionine, acetylation on protein N-term, pyro-Glutamate conversion on N-term Glutamate, Methionine-loss on protein N-term, and Methionine-loss and acetylation on protein N-term Methionine. The precursor peptide mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The Percolator algorithm PSM validator was used for PSM validation. Proteins reported in the result have at least two distinct peptides detected in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rickettsia rickettsii, Autotransporter

### Affiliations
Indiana University
Host-Parasite Interactions Section, RML/NIAID/NIH

### Submitter
Yixiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Hackstadt
Host-Parasite Interactions Section, RML/NIAID/NIH


