### Accession
PXD038761

### Title
Optimizing High-Throughput Shotgun Immunoproteomics for Antigen Identification

### Description
Identification of individual proteins (i.e., antigens) which initiate and/or perpetuate adaptive immune responses has potential to greatly impact pre-clinical and clinical work across numerous fields. To date, however, the methodologies available to identify antigens responsible for driving adaptive immune responses have been plagued by numerous issues which have drastically limited their widespread adoption. Therefore, in this study, we sought to optimize a shotgun immunoproteomics approach to alleviate these persistent issues and create a high-throughput, quantitative methodology for antigen identification. Three individual components of a previously published approach, namely the protein extraction, antigen elution, and LC-MS/MS analysis steps, were optimized in a systematic manner. These studies determined that preparation of protein extracts using a one-step tissue disruption method in immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer, eluting antigens from affinity chromatography columns with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and TMT-labeling & multiplexing equal volumes of eluted samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, resulted in quantitative longitudinal antigen identification, with reduced variability between replicates and increased total number of antigens identified. This optimized pipeline provides a multiplexed, highly reproducible, and fully quantitative approach to antigen identification which is broadly applicable to determine the role of antigenic proteins in inciting (i.e. primary antigens) and perpetuating (i.e., secondary antigens) a wide range of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine pericardium strips were cut into pieces approximately 1x1 cm in size and were either manually minced or pulverized using a Cellcrusher. Protein extraction was performed from homogenized BP via either a one-step IP buffer containing 0.25% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (w/v) octyl-β-D-glucopyranoside, 1 mM EDTA pH 8, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride & 1X Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail or two step (Hydrophile & Lipophile Buffers) protocol containing either 134 mM NDSB-256 (Hydrophile buffer) or both 134 mM NDSB-256 and 1% (w/v) n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (Lipophile buffer) in a standard extraction buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl2-6H2O, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM Pefabloc. Rabbit poly-polyclonal IgG affinity chromatography columns were created using Protein A HP SpinTrap columns. In brief, per column, serum from rabbits immunized with native BP (D84) or a pooled baseline from unvaccinated rabbits (n=6) (D0) was first diluted 1:10 in binding buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.5)). For rabbit longitudinal non-immunized experiments, separate columns were formed using serum (D0, D7, D14, D28, D42 and D56) from rabbits implanted with native BP. Following column equilibration, 200 µL of the diluted rabbit serum was added to the column and the system was mixed with end-over-end rotation for 30 min. Columns were subsequently washed with 400 µL binding buffer and 400 µL of triethanolamine (200 mM) (pH 8.9). Antibodies were cross-linked to Protein A by incubating 400 µL of dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (DMP) (50 mM) in triethanolamine (200 mM) in the column for 1 hr with end-over-end rotation. Following crosslinking and an additional wash, columns were blocked with 400 µL of ethanolamine (100 mM (pH 8.9)) for 15 min, after which unbound antibodies were eluted from the column with 200 µL of pH 2.9 elution buffer (0.1 M glycine and 2 M urea (pH 2.9)). Depending on the particular experiment being conducted, columns were next exposed to 200 µL of protein extract prepared from native BP (IP, hydrophile or lipophile protein extract), as described above for 1 hr with end-over-end rotation. Columns were washed a total of five times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 M urea (pH 7.5)) prior to elution of captured antigens. After the antigen capture and column wash steps, bound antigenic proteins were then eluted off the columns via a series of sequential step-down elution steps. All columns were initially washed with 200 µL of glycine-urea elution buffer (pH 5) (0.1 M glycine & 2 M urea), followed by 200 µL of glycine-urea elution buffer (pH 4) (0.1 M glycine & 2 M urea) to reduce any non-specific binding. According to the individual experiment, antigenic proteins were eluted from columns with either 200 µL of glycine-urea elution buffer (pH 2.9) (0.1 M glycine & 2 M urea) or 1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA). All elution samples were collected in tubescontaining 15 µL of neutralizing buffer (1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9)) and stored at -80oC for downstream analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were first loaded on trap column using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and then separated on analytical column using a gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Both the columns were equilibrated with solvent A for 5 min before loading the next sample. Peptides eluted from the analytical column were ionized and precursor ions were recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer as a survey MS scan. Mass range of 350-1500 m/z, 120,000 resolution setting, normalized AGC target of 250% and ion injection time of 50 ms were used for the MS scan. Precursor ions were analyzed in a data dependent manner with top intense ions were sequentially filtered by quadrupole with 1.6 m/z isolation width and fragmented using 34% normalized high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) energy. Fragmented ions were analyzed in Orbitrap analyzer as MS/MS spectra using 30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target of 250% and injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions selected for MS/MS were filtered for a minimum intensity threshold of 10,000, charge state of 2–6 and excluded for repeated MS/MS analysis for 40 s. A cycle time of 2 sec was used for MS followed by MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.5. MS/MS spectra were extracted from the raw files and searched against Bovine and Rabbit UniProt protein database using Sequest search engine with full tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 missed cleavages, precursor and fragment ion tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications and TMTpro at peptide N-terminus, lysine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were specified as fixed modifications. False discovery rate was maintained to 1% at peptide and protein-level using Percolator. TMT channel intensities were calculated using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of proteins which initiate and/or perpetuate adaptive immune responses has potential to greatly impact pre-clinical and clinical work across numerous fields. To date, however, the methodologies available to identify antigens responsible for driving adaptive immune responses have been plagued by numerous issues which have drastically limited their widespread adoption. Therefore, in this study, we sought to optimize a shotgun immunoproteomics approach to alleviate these persistent issues and create a high-throughput, quantitative methodology for antigen identification. Three individual components of a previously published approach, namely the protein extraction, antigen elution, and LC-MS/MS analysis steps, were optimized in a systematic manner. These studies determined that preparation of protein extracts using a one-step tissue disruption method in immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer, eluting antigens from affinity chromatography columns with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and TMT-labeling &amp; multiplexing equal volumes of eluted samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, resulted in quantitative longitudinal antigen identification, with reduced variability between replicates and increased total number of antigens identified. This optimized pipeline provides a multiplexed, highly reproducible, and fully quantitative approach to antigen identification which is broadly applicable to determine the role of antigenic proteins in inciting (i.e., primary antigens) and perpetuating (i.e., secondary antigens) a wide range of diseases. SIGNIFICANCE: Using a systematic, hypothesis-driven approach, we identified potential improvements for three individual steps of a previously published approach for antigen-identification. Optimization of each step created a methodology which resolved many of the persistent issues associated with previous antigen identification approaches. The optimized high-throughput shotgun immunoproteomics approach described herein identifies more than five times as many unique antigens as the previously published method, greatly reduces protocol cost and mass spectrometry time per experiment, minimizes both inter- and intra-experimental variability, and ensures each experiment is fully quantitative. Ultimately, this optimized antigen identification approach has the potential to facilitate novel antigen identification studies, allowing evaluation of the adaptive immune response in a longitudinal manner and encourage innovations in a wide array of fields.

### Keywords
Antigen identification, Affinity chromatography, Proteomics, Humoral immune response, Xenogeneic biomaterials, Tandem-mass tag labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Professor Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology  Mayo Clinic 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN – 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Professor Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology  Mayo Clinic 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN – 55905, USA


