### Accession
PXD034916

### Title
Systemic knockout of the guanine-rich RNA sequence binding factor 1 gene (Grsf1-/-) induces gender specific developmental retardation in male individuals when aging.

### Description
The guanine-rich RNA sequence binding factor 1 (GRSF1) is an RNA-binding protein of the heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H/F (hnRNP H/F) family that binds to guanine-rich RNA sequences forming G-quadruplex structures. In mice and humans there are single copy GRSF1 genes, but multiple transcripts have been reported. The RNA-binding protein GRSF1 has been implicated in a number of physiological processes (e.g. embryogenesis, erythropoiesis, redox homeostasis, RNA metabolism) but also in the pathogenesis of viral infections and hyperproliferative diseases. These postulated biological functions of GRSF1 originates from in vitro studies rather than complex in vivo systems. To assess the in vivo relevance of these findings, we created systemic Grsf1-/- knockout mice lacking exons 4 and 5 of the Grsf1 gene and compared the basic functional characteristics of these animals with those of wildtype controls. We found that Grsf1-deficient mice are viable, reproduce normally and have fully functional hematopoietic systems. Up to an age of 15 weeks they develop normally but when male individuals grow older, they gain significantly less body weight than wildtype controls in a gender specific way. Profiling Grsf1 mRNA expression in different mouse tissues we observed high concentrations in testis. Comparison of the testicular transcriptomes of Grsf1-/- mice and wildtype controls confirmed near complete knock-out of Grsf1 but otherwise subtle differences in transcript regulations. Comparative testicular proteome analyses suggested perturbed mitochondrial respiration in Grsf1-/- mice which may be related to compromised expression of complex I proteins. Here we present, for the first time, an in vivo complete Grsf1 knock-out mouse with comprehensive physiological, transcriptomic and proteomic characterization to improve our understanding of the GRSF1 beyond in vitro cell culture models.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic samples (tissue from mouse testes): two backgrounds (GRSF1_KO vs WT) three biological replicates each 2 x 3 = 6 samples  Each tryptic digest was fractionated and desalted using high pH reverse phase fractionation in stage tips. 6 samples x 3 fractions = 18 MS/MS runs  Testicular tissue was homogenised, lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, supplemented with 1x Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Samples were first homogenised at 30 Hz for 1 minute, then sonicated, reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated using 10 mM IAA. Overnight digestion was carried out using trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were acidified using formic acid to pH2-pH3.The acidified tryptic digests were fractionated and desalted using high pH reverse phase fractionation in stage tips. 1 µg of protein was used for LC-MS/MS acquisition. Liquid-chromatography-coupled to tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) measurements were performed on a quadrupole- ion-trap-orbitrap MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher) operated in positive ion mode coupled to a nano-UPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using a 140-minute gradient with linearly increasing ACN concentration from 2% to 30% ACN in 120 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched, quantified and normalized using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 with default settings for orbitraps. The match between runs (MBR) feature was disabled. The LFQ, IBAQ and classical normalization features were enabled. We used the UniProt mouse reference proteome as database (downloaded in April 2021 with 21994 entries) with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite (V1.6.15.0)

### Publication Abstract
The guanine-rich RNA sequence binding factor 1 (GRSF1) is an RNA-binding protein of the heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H/F (hnRNP H/F) family that binds to guanine-rich RNA sequences forming G-quadruplex structures. In mice and humans there are single copy GRSF1 genes, but multiple transcripts have been reported. GRSF1 has been implicated in a number of physiological processes (e.g. embryogenesis, erythropoiesis, redox homeostasis, RNA metabolism) but also in the pathogenesis of viral infections and hyperproliferative diseases. These postulated biological functions of GRSF1 originate from in vitro studies rather than complex in vivo systems. To assess the in vivo relevance of these findings, we created systemic Grsf1<sup>-/-</sup> knockout mice lacking exons 4 and 5 of the Grsf1 gene and compared the basic functional characteristics of these animals with those of wildtype controls. We found that Grsf1-deficient mice are viable, reproduce normally and have fully functional hematopoietic systems. Up to an age of 15&#xa0;weeks they develop normally but when male individuals grow older, they gain significantly less body weight than wildtype controls in a gender-specific manner. Profiling Grsf1 mRNA expression in different mouse tissues we observed high concentrations in testis. Comparison of the testicular transcriptomes of Grsf1<sup>-/-</sup> mice and wildtype controls confirmed near complete knock-out of Grsf1 but otherwise subtle differences in transcript regulations. Comparative testicular proteome analyses suggested perturbed mitochondrial respiration in Grsf1<sup>-/-</sup> mice which may be related to compromised expression of complex I proteins. Here we present, for the first time, an in vivo complete Grsf1 knock-out mouse with comprehensive physiological, transcriptomic and proteomic characterization to improve our understanding of the GRSF1 beyond in vitro cell culture models.

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Hematopoiesis, Redox homeostasis, Rna binding proteins, Gene expression regulation, Lipoxygenase

### Affiliations
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
Zentrum für Innere Medizin, III. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik (Nephrologie/Rheumatologie/Endokrinologie), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Moritz Lassé

### Lab Head
Dr Markus M. Rinschen
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


