### Accession
PXD017674

### Title
Influence of substrate stiffness on the proteome of undifferentiated human umbilical cord matrix mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (hUCM-MSCs)

### Description
Cells sense the biophysical properties of the surrounding microenvironment. In particular, the stiffness of the extracellular milieu can be interrogated by cells and integrated through mechanotransduction. Many cellular processes (like proliferation, migration, or differentiation) depend on the mechanical status of the cell (being largely dictated by actomyosin-dependent intracellular contractility), which in turn is influenced by the mechanical properties of the microenvironment. In this study, we explored the influence of substrate stiffness on the proteome of undifferentiated human umbilical cord matrix mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (hUCM-MSCs). The relative abundance of several identified proteins suffered significant changes when comparing between substrates. Interestingly, many of such proteins are related to the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, a main player of mechanotransduction and cell physiology in response to mechanical cues.

### Sample Protocol
hUCM-MSCs were expanded in TCPS until P1 and then seeded and maintained on the distinct cell culture substrates between P2 and P4. Subproteome fractionation: Briefly, cells were washed with PBS and then incubated with extraction buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 supplemented with protease inhibitors – Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets, Complete EDTA-free (Roche)]. Next, cells were subjected to ultrasonication in a water-bath (VibraCell 750 watts, Sonics) with 40% amplitude and 30 sec cycles. After centrifugation (1,000 × g) for 5 min at 4 C, supernatants were ultracentrifuged (126,000 × g) for 1 h at 4 C (Beckman Coulter), and the pellet corresponding to the membrane-enriched fraction was solubilised in SDS sample buffer [1.7% (w/v) SDS and 100 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris pH 6.8]. Five volumes of cold acetone were added to each supernatant (corresponding to the soluble fraction) and samples were stored at -20 C to precipitate the protein content, which was recovered by centrifugation at 4,000 × g during 30 min at 4 C and then the protein pellets were washed with cold acetone. Next, the pellet corresponding to the soluble fraction was resuspended in SDS sample buffer. Protein quantification was performed using the Direct Detect Spectrometer (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and 100 µg of protein (soluble or membrane fraction) were used for sequential windowed data independent acquisition of total high-resolution mass spectra (SWATH-MS) analysis.  SWATH-MS analysis: After denaturation at 95 °C, samples were alkylated with acrylamide and subjected to in-gel digestion using the short-GeLC approach. Pooled samples were created for protein identification and the same amount of MBP-GFP was added to all samples to be used as an internal standard. Samples were analyzed on a Triple TOF™ 5600 System (ABSciex®) in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of the pooled samples for protein identification and SWATH acquisition of each individual sample for quantification. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column ChromXPTM C18CL (300 μm ID × 15cm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5μL/min. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer with an acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% FA (5% to 35% ACN, in a linear gradient for 45 min), using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex®). For information dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments were performed for each 3 peptides mixtures per samples. The mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000  – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5.  The 3 peptide mixtures of each sample were combined and concentrated, and a single analysis of each sample was set for quantitative analysis by acquisition in SWATH mode. The SWATH setup was essentially as described by Anjo et al.. The mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode, and specifically tuned to allow a quadrupole resolution of 25 m/z mass selection. Using an isolation width of 26 m/z (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), a set of 30 overlapping windows was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 350–1100 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-1500 m/z for 100 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.1 s. Collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion-centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15.

### Data Protocol
A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. Libraries were obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v5.1, ABSciex®) searching against a database composed by Homo sapiens from SwissProt (release of December 2015) and the sequence of the recombinant protein MBP-GFP. SWATH data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). Peptides were selected automatically from the library and up to 15 peptides with up to 5 fragment ions were chosen per protein. Quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from ProteinPilot™ searches, by extracting the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 3 and 4 min (for soluble and membrane-enriched fraction, respectively) with 20 ppm XIC width. All the peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least one sample were retained and the levels of the proteins were estimated by summing the respective transitions and peptides that met the criteria established. For comparisons between experimental conditions, the protein levels were subjected to two steps of data normalization: (1) normalized to the internal standard (MBP-GFP) followed by (2) a normalization using the sample total intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mechanotransduction; cytoskeleton; mscs; proteomics; swath-ms

### Affiliations
CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Mário Grãos
CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra


