### Accession
PXD012142

### Title
Proteomics analysis of goat milk peptides with potential biological activity

### Description
Time course profile comparison of goat kefir peptides with potential biological activity

### Sample Protocol
Kefir grains were added to semi-skimmed goat milk (8% w/v) and fermentation was carried out for 12, 24 and 36 hours. Raw milk was used as control.  Peptides present either in the raw milk or the fermented products were collected using diafiltration devices (Amicon, Millipore). The fraction containing the peptides were cleaned with Oasis-HLB cartridges (Waters) and analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed with Sequest HT from Proteome Discoverer 2.1 setting Precursor Ions Detector Algorithm to peptide quantitation. Peptides were identified against Uniprot_Capra hircus_Nov2016 fasta database. Non-specific Enzyme were set to on.

### Publication Abstract
Kefir is a fermented dairy product, associated to health benefits because of being a probiotic and due to the presence of molecules with biological activity. In this work, we have profiled the peptide composition of goat milk kefir at three different fermentation times using a peptidomics approach, in order to study changes in peptide concentrations and patterns of protein digestion throughout the fermentation time. We identified 2328 unique peptides corresponding to 22 protein annotations, with a maximum of peptides found after 24&#x202f;h fermentation. We established different digestion patterns according to the nature of the proteins, and quantified the changes in the peptides appearing in all the fermentation times. We also identified 11 peptides that matched exactly to sequences with biological activity in databases, almost all of them belonging to caseins. This is the most comprehensive proteomic analysis of goat milk kefir to date.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Kefir, Biopeptides, Goat

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Córdoba, Campus de Excelencia Internacional CeiA3, Córdoba, Spain.
Proteomics Expert at University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Carlos Fuentes

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel J. Rodriguez-Ortega
Associate Professor Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Córdoba, Campus de Excelencia Internacional CeiA3, Córdoba, Spain.


