### Accession
PXD022863

### Title
Maize seed proteome of autophagy deficient plants throughout development

### Description
Autophagy or ‘self-eating’ is a conserved and essential route for recycling intracellular constituents in eukaryotes.  For plants, autophagy supports robust crop performance by regulating traits such as nitrogen-use efficiency, carbon allocation, reproduction, grain fill, and protection against various environmental stresses.  To define the autophagic mechanisms underlining nutrient partitioning, which are used to sustain plant fitness during rapid growth of sink tissues, we applied a comprehensive multi-omic approach using maize (Zea mays) mutants lacking the core autophagy component ATG12.  A sink tissue of particular interest are seeds, which require massive investments of fixed carbon for development. The transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, and ionome of developing seeds from atg12 mutants at 8 and 18 days after pollination (DAP) were analyzed. Developing atg12 seeds exhibited pronounce transcriptional reprogramming at 8 DAP, which may contribute to the observed hyperaccumulation of proteins, metabolites, and ions at 18 DAP. Collectively, this multi-omic approach should provide new perspectives into the adaptive role(s) of autophagy in coordinating nutrient allocation.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was ground under liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted from approximately 300 mg of ground tissue using the phenol extraction protocol described by Slade et al.,1. In brief, proteins were initially extracted in 5 volumes (v:w) of Tris buffered phenol pH 8 (Invitrogen) vortexed for 1 minute, mixed with 5 volumes of extraction buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA pH 8, 0.9 M sucrose), and then separated by centrifugation at 13,000 xg for 10 minutes at 4°C. The top phenol phase was collected, and a second phenol extraction was performed on the aqueous phase using 5 volumes of phenol. Both phenol phases were combined, and proteins were precipitated for 1 hour at -80°C using 5 volumes of -20°C chilled 0.1 M ammonium acetate prepared in methanol. Samples were centrifuged at 4,500 xg for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was carefully decanted. The pellet was then washed twice with 5 volumes of -20°C chilled 0.1 M ammonium acetate prepared in methanol and once with 5 volumes of -20°C chilled 70% methanol. Between each wash, proteins precipitated at -20°C for 30 minutes before being centrifuged at 4,500 xg for 10 minutes at 4°C.  After the final 70% methanol wash, the pellet was lyophilized to dryness, resuspended in100mL of 8Murea, and reduced at 22°C for 1h with 6mLof 200 mM DTT, followed by alkylation with 25 mL of 200 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h. The reaction was quenched with 25mL of 200mM DTT, diluted with 900mL of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1.5 M, and digested overnight at 37°C with 0.5 mg of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a final volume of ~300 µL, acidified with 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (pH< 3.0), and desalted and concentrated using a 100-mL Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bound peptides were eluted in 50 mL of 75% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized, and resuspended in 20 mL of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Nano-scale liquid chromatography separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µ m × 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), in combination with a 2-h linear 4–36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nl min-1. Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q-ExactivePlus spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the positive electrospray ionization (ESI) mode. Data-dependent acquisition of full mass spectrometry scans (mass range of 380–1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was collected, with the automatic gain control target set to 3 × 106 and the maximum fill time set to 200 ms. High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the 15 strongest peaks was performed with an intensity threshold of 4 × 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, and excluded precursors that had unassigned, + 1, + 7, + 8 or > + 8 charge states. Tandem mass spectrometry scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an automatic gain control target of 2 × 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 s, while the minimum mass spectrometry ion count for triggering tandem mass spectrometry was set to 4 × 103 counts. Each sample was analyzed in quadruplicate; the first two runs were performed without an exclusion list, while the third and fourth runs were performed with an exclusion list containing the 5000 most abundant peptides that were detected in the first two runs, to increase sample coverage by maximizing the suppression of abundant peptides2.  1.  Slade WO, Werth EG, McConnell EW, Alvarez S, Hicks LM. Quantifying reversible oxidation of protein thiols in photosynthetic organisms. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2015;26(4):631-640. doi:10.1007/s13361-014-1073-y 2.  McLoughlin F, Augustine RC, Marshall RS, et al. Maize multi-omics reveal roles for autophagic recycling in proteome remodelling and lipid turnover. Nat Plants. 2018;4(December). doi:10.1038/s41477-018-0299-2

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data sets were queried by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0.0.802; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the maize B73 proteome database (Zea-mays.AGPv3.21.pep.all from www.maizegdb.org) and a list of common protein contaminants. Pairs of raw MS2 files (one without an exclusion list and one with the exclusion list) were analyzed as fractions, resulting in two technical replicates per sample. Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT3, allowing a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 D. Carbamidomethylation of Cys and oxidation of Met were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. FDRs of 0.01 (high confidence) and 0.05 (medium confidence) validated peptide spectral matches. Label-free quantification based on MS1 precursor ion intensity was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 for unique peptides; the ‘3 Top N’ peptides were used for area calculation4.  3.  Eng JK, McCormack AL, Yates JR. An approach to correlate tandem mass spectral data of peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein database. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 1994;5(11):976-989. doi:10.1007/s13361-015-1181-3 4.  Silva JC, Gorenstein M V., Li GZ, Vissers JPC, Geromanos SJ. Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: A virtue of parallel MS acquisition. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2006;5(1):144-156. doi:10.1074/mcp.M500230-MCP200

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seed development, Maize, Autophagy, Atg12

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis
Corteva Agriscience

### Submitter
Elizabeth Chatt

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Vierstra
Department of Biology, Washington University in St. Louis


