### Accession
PXD009703

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis revealed complex responses to classical/novel duck reovirus infections in the spleen cells of Cairna moschata

### Description
Duck reovirus (DRV), a member of the genus Orthoreovirus in the family Reoviridae, was first isolated from Muscovy ducks. The disease associated with DRV causes great economic losses to the duck industry. However, the responses of duck (Cairna moschata) to the classical/novel DRV (C/NDRV) infections are largely unknown. To reveal the relationship of pathogenesis and immune response, the proteomes of duck spleen cells under the control and C/NDRV infections were compared. In total, 5986 proteins were identified, of which 5389 proteins were quantified. The different expressed proteins (DEPs) under the C/NDRV infections showed displayed various biological functions and diverse subcellular localizations. The proteins related to the serine protease system were siginificantly changed, suggesting that the activated serine protease system may play an important role under the C/NDRV infections. Furthermore, the differences in the responses to the C/NRDV infections between the duck liver and spleen cells were compared. Only a small number of common DEPs were identified in both liver and spleen cells, suggesting diversified pattern involved in the responses to the C/NRDV infections. However, the changes in the proteins involved in the serine protease systems were similar in both liver and spleen cells. Our data may give a comprehensive resource for investigating the responses to C/NDRV infections in ducks.

### Sample Protocol
Information of experimental birds and virus The experimental infection was conducted in 1-day-old healthy Muscovy ducklings, and the blood samples of each duckling were checked by RT-PCR to ensure their healthy (no DRV has been detected). Twenty seven 1-day-old Muscovy ducklings were randomly divided into three groups and were housed in the isolation facility. For the CDRV infection, one group (9 ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 0.5 mL of CDRV ZJ2000M strain at a titer of 105.19 median tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) per mL. For the NDRV infection, another group (9 ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 0.5 mL of cell culture medium infected by NDRV HN10 strain contained the same TCID50, the titer of NDRV HN10 strain is 106.4 TCID50 per mL. Additionally, nine un-infected ducklings were treated with sterile DMEM in the same manner. Ducklings of each groups were euthanatized after 72 hours post infection (hpi). Their spleens were collected and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently, frozen tissues were kept at − 80 °C until further processing.  Protein extraction and trypsin digestion   For each treatment group, nine ducklings were divided into three independent subgroups (three ducklings as a repeat). Samples were first grinded by liquid N2 and then were transferred into a 5 mL tube. The cell powder was sonicated using a high intensity ultrasonic processor in pre-cooled lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI. The remaining debris was discarded by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. At last, the samples were precipitated with pre-cooled 15% TCA buffer for 2 h, and the supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Again, the remaining precipitate was washed for three times with pre-cooled acetone and was redissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). The resulting solution was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37 °C and was alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C in darkness for 45 min. For trypsin digestion, the samples were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) to produce the digested peptides. The trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) for a overnight digestion and at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) for a 4 h digestion. Approximately 100 μg of each sample was digested for the further experiments.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis   Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of all identified proteins was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The IDs of all identified proteins were converted to the UniProt IDs, which could be mapped to the GO maps. The unannotated proteins were annotated by the InterProScan software by the protein sequence alignment method.    Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate metabolic and biological processes (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). KEGG description of each identified protein was annotated by a KEGG online service tool, KAAS. Then, all annotated proteins were mapped onto the KEGG pathway using KEGG mapper, another KEGG online service tool.    An updated version of PSORT/PSORT II was used to predict the subcellular localizations of all identified proteins (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html).     Protein domain was analyzed by a sequence analysis software, InterProScan, basing on protein sequence alignment method (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/).

### Publication Abstract
Bordetella bronchiseptica (B. bronchiseptica) causes a respiratory disease in rabbits. To determine the proteins of B. bronchiseptica in rabbits related to the disease, differentially accumulated proteins in B. bronchiseptica-infected cells are identified by comparative proteomic analysis. Comparative proteomic analysis detects 5814 proteins and quantifies 4854 of these. Fifty eight upregulated and 38 downregulated proteins are identified in spleen tissue after B. bronchiseptica infection of rabbits (both p &lt; 0.05). The significantly enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways are ribosome, biosynthesis of amino acids, biosynthesis of amino acids, protein export, and carbon metabolism etc. (all p &lt; 0.01). Significantly enriched KEGG pathways include 'ocu03010 ribosome' (a); 'ocu00260 glycine, serine threonine metabolism'. Analyses of control and infected spleen cells detect responses to B. bronchiseptica infection. Many differentially affected proteins are evident, and reflect different biological changes and diverse subcellular localizations between control and infected spleen cells. Infection markedly alters the expressions of proteins linked to the serine protease system, with the 'phagosome,' 'biosynthesis of amino acids,' 'glycine, serine threonine metabolism,' 'intestinal immune network for IgA production', and 'amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism' associated with B. bronchiseptica infection. The result will inform studies of responses to B. bronchiseptica infections in rabbits.

### Keywords
Cairna moschata; differential expressed protein; duck reovirus; proteome; serine protease; spleen

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Chenyu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Yun
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


