### Accession
PXD028563

### Title
Proteomic analysis of different pgr5 mutants and pgrl1ab in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
PGR5 is a small chloroplast protein that performs cyclic electron flow (CEF) around photosystem I and it is required for the proton gradient generation across the thylakoid membrane. The level of this protein is closely regulated by PGRL1. However, the molecular mechanism of PGR5 is still elusive. In this work, we have generated a new pgr5 mutant in Arabidopsis using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, pgr5-Cas, completely devoid of PGR5. We performed comparative proteomic analysis on pgr5-1 and pgr5-Cas lines (#1 and #2), as well as on pgrl1ab mutant.

### Sample Protocol
For the isolation of chloroplasts, leaf samples (10 g fresh weight) from 7-week-old dark adapted plants were homogenized in 330 mM Sorbitol, 20 mM Tricin-NaOH (pH 7.6), 10 mM Na2CO3, 5 mM EGTA, 0.1% (w/v) BSA, and 330 mg/l ascorbate. The extract was filtered through two layers of Miracloth and concentrated by centrifugation for 5 min at 2,000 g.  The pellet was resuspended in 330 mM Sorbitol, 20 mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.6), 10 mM Na2CO3, 5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM EDTA and 0.1% (w/v) BSA, and layered on a discontinuous 40% (w/v) / 70% (w/v) Percoll gradient.  Intact chloroplasts were isolated from the interphase after centrifugation for 10 min at 1,500 g. Isolated chloroplasts were ruptured by hypotonic shock on ice for 10 min. After removing cell debris by centrifugation, proteins were precipitated in chloroform-methanol and solubilized in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride. Protein concentration was determined by a bicinchoninic assay (BCA), and proteome aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37°C) and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, dark). The samples were digested with trypsin (proteome/enzyme ratio 100:1 [w/w]) at 37° C, overnight. After elution, the peptide mixtures were acidified to pH ≤ 3 using formic acid and desalted with home-made C18 stage tip. LC-MS/MS was performed on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled online to an Impact II Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight. The nano-LC system was operated in a two-column setup with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). The columns were kept at 50°C throughout the run. Full MS scans in the mass range 200–2000 m/z were acquired at 3 Hz, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS2 analysis using an intensity dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz. To minimize repeated sequencing, dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). Peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome (Uniprot, version April 2021) using the built‐in Andromeda search engine. The search parameters were set as follow: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N‐termini as variable modifications. The specific digestion enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The false discovery rate at the protein and PSM level was set to 1%. The match between runs option was enabled and proteins were quantified across samples using the label‐free quantification (LFQ) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION5 (PGR5) protein is required for trans-thylakoid proton gradient formation and acclimation to fluctuating light (FL). PGR5 functionally interacts with two other thylakoid proteins, PGR5-like 1 (PGRL1) and 2 (PGRL2); however, the molecular details of these interactions are largely unknown. In the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) pgr5-1 mutant, the PGR5G130S protein accumulates in only small amounts. In this work, we generated a knockout allele of PGR5 (pgr5-Cas) using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Like pgr5-1, pgr5-Cas is seedling-lethal under FL, but photosynthesis and particularly cyclic electron flow, as well as chlorophyll content, are less severely affected in both pgr5-Cas and pgrl1ab (which lacks PGRL1 and PGR5) than in pgr5-1. These differences are associated with changes in the levels of 260 proteins, including components of the Calvin-Benson cycle, photosystems II and I, and the NDH complex, in pgr5-1 relative to the wild type (WT), pgr5-Cas, and pgrl1ab. Some of the differences between pgr5-1 and the other mutant lines could be tentatively assigned to second-site mutations in the pgr5-1 line, identified by whole-genome sequencing. However, others, particularly the more pronounced photosynthetic defects and PGRL1 depletion (compared to pgr5-Cas), are clearly due to specific negative effects of the amino-acid substitution in PGR5G130S, as demonstrated by complementation analysis. Moreover, pgr5-1 and pgr5-Cas plants are less tolerant to long-term exposure to high light than pgrl1ab plants. These results imply that, in addition to the previously reported necessity of PGRL1 for optimal PGR5 function, PGR5 is required alongside PGRL1 to avoid harmful effects on plant performance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lfq, Impactii, Bruker, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Faculty of Biology, Chair of Plant Molecular Biology (Botany), Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried,Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Dario Leister
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Faculty of Biology, Chair of Plant Molecular Biology (Botany), Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried,Germany


