### Accession
PXD033349

### Title
Comparative analyses of vertebrate CPEB-family of proteins define two sub-families with distinct, but coordinated, functions in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression

### Description
Background: The vertebrate CPEB-family of RNA-binding proteins promote translational repression or activation of their target mRNAs, which harbor cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs) in their 3’ UTRs, through cytoplasmic changes in their poly(A) tail lengths. However, their regulation(s) and mechanism(s) of action have not been systematically addressed as a family. Results: Here we perform a comparative analysis of the four vertebrate CPEBs in their regulation by phosphorylation, supramolecular assemblies’ composition and properties and in their mRNA targets. Conclusions: We show that although all four CPEBs are able to recruit CCR4-NOT deadenylation complex when not phosphorylated, their mechanisms of action determine two subfamilies with distinct, but coordinated, regulation by phosphorylation and target specificity. Thus, CPEB1 forms ribonucleoprotein complexes that are remodeled upon a single phosphorylation event, by AurkA, and are associated with mRNAs containing canonical CPEs. On the other hand, CPEB2-4 are regulated by multiple proline-directed phosphorylations that control their liquid-liquid phase-separation. CPEB2-4 mRNA-targets include CPEB1-bound transcripts, with canonical CPEs, but also a specific subset of mRNAs with non-canonical CPEs. In turn, CPEB2-4 coacervates display compositional, morphological and dynamic differences. Altogether, these results show how, globally, the CPEB family of proteins is able to integrate cellular cues to generate a finetuned adaptive response in gene expression regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Selected fully-grown oocytes at the maturation stages specified were lysed by pipetting in 9 μL/oocyte cold IP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.4% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 1x Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche)). Homogenates were spun 10 minutes at 12000 x g 4ºC, after which the clear phase was recovered. 1 μL of 10x H1K phosphatase inhibitors (80 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate, 0.5 mM sodium orthovanadate) were added per 9 μL of recovered aqueous phase. The homogenates were subjected to a second clarification. The cleared lysates precipitated with 100 μM b-isox (900572, Merck) in DMSO, overnight on a rotating wheel at 4ºC. The incubated reactions were precipitated by centrifugation for 10 minutes, 10000 x g at 4ºC. The pellets were washed twice in cold lysis buffer (vortexing, incubating 10 minutes on ice and spinning for 10 minutes at 10000 x g 4ºC) and resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer. The precipitated proteins were run on precast 7.5% gels (Mini-Protean TGX, Bio-Rad). The gels were silver-stained using the Pierce Silver Stain for MS kit (24600, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. The molecular weights of interest were cut and placed on microcentrifuge tubes. Peptide purification Samples were tryptic digested directly in polyacrylamide gel. Briefly, stained electrophoretic protein bands were reduced with DTT 10mM for 45min at 56ºC and alkylated for 30 min in the dark with IAA 55 mM. Then, in-gel digestion was performed with trypsin (0.1 μg/μL) in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 37ºC overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid. Peptides were extracted with 100 % acetonitrile and completely evaporated. Samples were reconstituted in 15 μL of 1% formic acid aqueous solution for MS analysis.  Nano-LC-MS/MS The nano-LC-MS/MS set up was as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 1% FA. Samples were loaded to 100 μm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100, 5 μm, 100 Å, C18 (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) with a 120 min run from 3 to 35% B in 120 min (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented in the HCD cell and detected in the orbitrap. The ion count target value was 400,000 and 50,000 for the survey scan and for the MS/MS scan respectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 50,000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
A database search was performed with Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo) using Sequest HT search engine and UniProt database [Xenopodinae release 2017_02; contaminants database and user proteins manually introduced xCPEB2, xCPEB3 and xCPEB4). Searches were run against targeted and decoy databases to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, Methionine oxidation, Phosphorylation in serine/threonine/tyrosine, Ubiquitination in lysine/serine/threonine and acetylation in N-terminal as dynamic modifications and Carbamidomethyl in cysteine as static modification. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da. Peptides with a FDR < 1% were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Deadenylation, Phosphorylation, Phase-separation, Ccr4-not complex, Cpeb, 3’utr, Mrna translation

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Raul Mendez
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona, Spain


