### Accession
PXD016299

### Title
CHIP controls the expression of the neuropeptide precursor protein VGF

### Description
CHIP is a neuroprotective E3-ubiquitin ligase that supports longevity and healthy ageing. Loss of CHIP function has a major impact on life expectancy in animal models, whilst in humans’ mutations that compromise the E3-ligase activity of CHIP are causative for forms of Spinocerebellar Ataxia (SCA) that are accompanied by cognitive decline and/or dementia. The pathways regulated by CHIP to maintain neuronal health remain to be discovered. Gene-edited neuroblastoma cells were produced and used as a model to study the effects of CHIP loss on the steady state proteome in the absence of proteotoxic stress. Label free quantitative proteomic analysis (SWATH-MS) highlighted VGF, a member of the neuropeptide precursor family of proteins, as being a dominant protein responding to loss of CHIP function. By studying the dependence of VGF expression on CHIP using SILAC and RNA-Seq we have defined a role for the ligase in regulated neuropeptide expression.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the cell lysates were digested according to FASP protocol using trypsin, peptides were desalted on C18 Micro spin columns. Evaporated peptides were dissolved in 100 μl of 5 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05 % TFA and separated on liquid chromatograph Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 400 online connected to TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. Samples were pre-concentrated on a cartridge trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm) packed with C18 PepMap100 sorbent with 5 μm particle size (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) using a mobile phase composed from 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 2 % acetonitrile (ACN). Pre-concentrated peptides were separated on a capillary analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 500 mm) packed with C18 PepMap100 sorbent, 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Mobile phase A composed of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water while mobile phase B composed of 0.1 % (v/v) FA in ACN. Analytical gradient started from 2% B, the proportion of mobile phase B increased linearly up to 40% B in 120 min, flow was 300 nl/min. The analytes were ionized in nano-electrospray ion source, where temperature and flow of drying gas was set to 150 °C and 12 psi. Voltage at the capillary emitter was 2.65 kV. SWATH data was acquired in high sensitivity mode. Precursor range was set from 400 Da up to 1200 Da and it was divided to 67 precursor SWATH windows with 12Da width and 1Da overlap. Cycle time was 3.5 sec. Product ions were scanned in a range from 360 to 1360 amu. Rolling collision energy with 15 mV energy spread was used. SILAC labelled samples (CHIP WT and CHIP KO each in biological triplicate) were processed as described above (proteomic sample preparation section). Desalted tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated using an UltiMate 3000  RSLCnano  chromatograph. Peptides were loaded on a pre-column (µ-precolumn, 30 m i.d., 5 mm length, C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm i.d., length 250 mm, C18, particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å) with a flow rate of 300 nl/minutes using a linear gradient: 2% B for 4 minutes, 2 – 40% B for 64 minutes, 40 – 98% B for 2 minutes, with A (0.1% aq. FA) and B (80% ACN in 0.08% aq. FA). Peptides eluted from the column were ionized in nano-electrospray ion source and introduced into an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) operating in Top20 data dependent acquisition mode. A survey scan of 400 – 2000 m/z was performed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and 200 ms injection time followed by twenty data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the LTQ linear ion trap with 1 microscan, 10 ms injection time and 10,000 AGC.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition for spectral library measurement: Spectral library was measured as described in. Briefly, pooled spectral library sample was measured in information dependent mode (IDA). Precursor range was set from 400 Da up to 1250 Da in MS mode and from 200 Da up to 1600 Da in MS/MS mode. Cycle time was set to 2.3 sec and during each cycle top 20 the most intensive precursor ions were fragmented. Precursor exclusion time was set to 12 sec. IDA data were searched against Homo sapiens reference database (Uniprot 2016_02) in ProteinPilot 4.5 (AB-SCIEX, Canada). Resulting GROUP file was imported into PeakView 1.2.0.3. SWATH data extraction and statistical analysis: Quantitative data extraction was performed in PeakView 1.2.0.3. Quantitative data were extracted for 1424 proteins (FDR<1 %). Quantitative SWATH data were extracted using a method with 8 min extraction window. Extracted data were analysed in MarkerView 1.2.1.1. Extracted peak areas were normalised on total ion current. T-testing was used to determine changes in protein level across compared samples. Database Annotation and Analysis: The data from Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer was processed through Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). The raw files from biological triplicates of pulse SILAC samples were evaluated using the processing and consensus workflows with subsequent nodes: the Minora feature detector, the Precursor ion quantifier, and the Feature mapper. The data were processed using the Sequest HT engine with the following search settings: database Swiss-Prot TaxID=9606, 2017-10-25, # sequences 42252, taxonomy: Homo sapiens (updated November 2018) and database with contaminants: PD_Contaminants_2015_5fasta; enzyme trypsin; 2 missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.6 Da; static modification carbamidomethyl [+57.021 Da, (C)], label 13C(6) [+6.020 Da (R)] and label 2H(4) [+4.025 Da (K)]; dynamic modifications oxidation [+15.995 Da (M)], Met-loss+Acetyl [protein terminus, -89.030 Da (M)]. The results were further submitted to generate the final report with an 1% FDR using Percolator. For the protein quantification and statistical assessment of the biological triplicates, the Precursor Ions Quantifier was applied with the following parameters: using only unique peptides and razor peptides, normalization on total peptide amount, pairwise ratio calculation and ANOVA (background based) hypothesis test. The relative quantification value was represented as the relative peak area of the peptides with the heavy isotope labels with CHIP WT cells/CHIP KO cells ratios. The mass spectrometric data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pulse silac, Swath, Lc-ms/ms, Chip, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, Scotland
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Ball
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, Scotland


