### Accession
PXD018640

### Title
A novel USP30 inhibitor recapitulates genetic loss of USP30 and sets the trigger for PINK1-PARKIN amplification of mitochondrial ubiquitylation.

### Description
The mitochondrial deubiquitylase USP30 negatively regulates the selective autophagy of damaged mitochondria. It has been proposed as an actionable target to alleviate the loss of function of the mitophagy pathway governed by the Parkinson’s Disease associated genes PINK1 and PRKN. We present the characterisation of a N-cyano pyrrolidine derived compound, FT3967385, with high selectivity for USP30. The compound is well tolerated with no loss of total mitochondrial mass. We demonstrate that ubiquitylation of TOM20, a component of the outer mitochondrial membrane import machinery that directly interacts with USP30, represents a robust biomarker for both USP30 loss and inhibition. We have conducted proteomics analyses on a SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cell line model to directly compare the effects of genetic loss of USP30 with selective inhibition in an unbiased fashion. We have thereby identified a subset of ubiquitylation events consequent to mitochondrial depolarisation, that are USP30 sensitive. Within responsive elements of the ubiquitylome, several components of the outer mitochondrial membrane transport (TOM) complex are most prominent. Thus, our data support a model whereby USP30 can regulate the availability of ubiquitin at the specific site of mitochondrial PINK1 accumulation following membrane depolarisation. In this model, USP30 deubiquitylation of TOM complex components dampens the trigger that unleashes the Parkin-dependent amplification of mitochondrial ubiquitylation leading to mitophagy. Accordingly PINK1 generation of phospho-Ser65 Ubiquitin proceeds more rapidly and to a greater extent in cells either lacking USP30 or subject to USP30 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelled USP30 cells were processed for LC-MS/MS by reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin. The digested sample was partially used for ubiquitylome enrichment using immuno-precipitation method and the remaining was used for basic-RPLC fractionation. The samples were then analysed on an Orbitrap instrument (QE-HF/Fusion-Lumos). LC parameters for the fractionation: Peptides were fractionated on a Basic Reverse Phase column (Gemini C18, 3um particle size, 110A pore, 3 mm internal diameter, 250 mm length, Phenomenex #00G-4439-Y0) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Off-line LC system. All solvent used were HPLC grade (Rathburn). Peptides were loaded on column for 1 minute at 250 μL/min using 99% Buffer A (20mM Ammonium Formate, pH=8) and eluted for 28 minutes on a linear gradient from 1 to 37.5% Buffer B (100% ACN). The column is then washed with 90% Buffer B for 5 minutes and equilibrated for 5 minutes for the next injection. Peptide elution was monitored by UV detection at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 45s from 2 min to 38 min for a total of 48 fractions. Non-consecutive concatenation of every 13th fraction was used to obtain 12 pooled fractions (Pooled Fraction 1: Fraction 1 + 13 + 25 + 37, Pooled Fraction 2 : Fraction 2 + 14 + 26 + 38 ...).

### Data Protocol
LC parameters for all MS instruments: Peptides were analysed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000. Samples were injected on a 300 μm ID × 5 mm trap (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC, # 160454) and separated on a 75 μm × 50 cm nano LC column (EASY-Spray LC Columns #ES803)). All solvents used were HPLC or LC-MS Grade (Millipore). Peptides were loaded for 5 minutes at 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile in Water. The column was conditioned using 100% Buffer A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in Water) and the separation was performed on a linear gradient from 0 to 35% Buffer B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO, 20% Water in Acetonitrile), over 120,160 or 240 minutes at 300 nL/min. The column was then washed with 90% Buffer B for 5 minutes and equilibrated 10 minutes with 100% Buffer A.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ubiquitin, Deubiquitylase, Ubiquitylome, Mitophagy, Usp30, Dub inhibitor, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Professor of Proteomics at the Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Professor of Proteomics at the Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University


