### Accession
PXD018331

### Title
Control of assembly of extra-axonemal structures: the paraflagellar rod of trypanosomes

### Description
Eukaryotic flagella are complex microtubule based organelles and in many organisms there are extra-axonemal structures present, including the outer dense fibres of mammalian sperm and the paraflagellar rod (PFR) of trypanosomes. We have discovered two cytoplasmic proteins in T. brucei that are required for PFR formation, PFR assembly factors 1 and 2 and specifically interact.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from the immunoprecipitation were reduced, alkylated and then digested overnight with trypsin. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system and then directly electrosprayed into the coupled QExactive mass spectrometer. The raw data was acquired on the mass spectrometer in a data-dependent mode and full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using MaxQuant, integrated with the Andromeda search engine. For protein identification, peak lists were searched against T. brucei database and a list of common contaminants.  Protein and PSM false discovery rate were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic flagella are complex microtubule-based organelles that, in many organisms, contain extra-axonemal structures, such as the outer dense fibres of mammalian sperm and the paraflagellar rod (PFR) of trypanosomes. Flagellum assembly is a complex process occurring across three main compartments, the cytoplasm, the transition zone and the flagellum itself. The process begins with the translation of protein components followed by their sorting and trafficking into the flagellum, transport to the assembly site and incorporation. Flagella are formed from over 500 proteins and the principles governing assembly of the axonemal components are relatively clear. However, the coordination and location of assembly of extra-axonemal structures are less clear. We have discovered two cytoplasmic proteins in <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> that are required for PFR formation, PFR assembly factors 1 and 2 (PFR-AF1 and PFR-AF2, respectively). Deletion of either PFR-AF1 or PFR-AF2 dramatically disrupted PFR formation and caused a reduction in the amount of major PFR proteins. The existence of cytoplasmic factors required for PFR formation aligns with the concept that processes facilitating axoneme assembly occur across multiple compartments, and this is likely a common theme for extra-axonemal structure assembly.

### Keywords
Extra axonemal structure, Flagellum, Trypanosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Biological and Medical Sciences Oxford Brookes University
Oxford Brookes University

### Submitter
Jack Sunter

### Lab Head
Dr Jack Daniel Sunter
Department of Biological and Medical Sciences Oxford Brookes University


