### Accession
PXD003719

### Title
The ambiguous Caveolin-3 G55S sequence variant: Muscle biopsy findings and cell biological analysis

### Description
Caveolins are structural and functional proteins in plasma membrane invaginations called caveolae. Mutations in Caveolin-3 cause myopathies of variable severity. The pathogenicity of the Caveolin-3 variant G55S is still unclear. Here, we report on three patients suffering from mild to moderate myopathy. In all three patients, but also in two seemingly unaffected family members of patient one the G55S variant was found. Histology revealed moderate chronic myopathic changes and reduced sarcolemmal Caveolin-3 immunoreactivity in all three cases. Immunoblots for Caveolin-3 were abnormal in all cases. By electron microscopy, enlarged caveolae were detected in case one and three and vacuolar myopathy in case two. EM studies of RCMH myoblasts transfected with G55S Caveolin-3 revealed autophagic vacuoles. The alterations in Golgi morphology were in line with pathological Caveolin-3 deposits in this organelle detected by immunofluorescence and indicative for activation of autophagy. Phospho-blotting demonstrated that G55S affects EGFR signaling. Proteomic profiling of transfected RCMH myoblasts demonstrated alterations in levels of physiologically relevant proteins which are indicative for antagonization of G55S Caveolin-3 expression. Some proteomic alterations were enhanced by osmotic/mechanical stress. In conclusion, our results suggest that the G55S Caveolin-3 sequence variant can be compensated by cellular defense mechanisms and that additional stress may lead to vulnerability of G55S Caveolin-3 expressing muscle cells.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1 mg of cells was lysed in 0.3 ml of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, protease (cOmplete mini, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) cocktail tablets. After addition of 5 µl benzonase (25 U/µl; Novagen) and 2 mM MgCl2 lysates were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged at 4 °C and 18.000 g for 20 min. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA (Pierce) assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cysteines were reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Sample preparation and proteolysis were performed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) with minor changes. Briefly, 70 µl of each sample lysate corresponding to 100 µg of protein were diluted up to 400 µl with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) buffer and loaded on a Nanosep centrifugal device (PALL, 30 kDa cutoff). The devices were centrifuged at 13,500 g at room temperature for 20 min. All the following centrifugation steps were performed under similar conditions. To eliminate residual SDS, three washing steps were carried out using 100 µl of 8.0 M urea buffer and finally for the buffer exchange, the devices were washed thrice with 100 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. To the concentrated proteins, 100 µl of proteolysis buffer comprising of trypsin (Sigma Aldrich  – T1426) (1:40 w/w, enzyme to protein), 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8 were added and incubated at 37 °C for 14 h. The generated tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation with 50 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 followed by 50 µl of ultra-pure water. Finally, the peptides were acidified to pH < 3 using 10 % TFA (v/v) and the digests were quality controlled by monolithic column HPLC. All twelve samples (three biological replicates, each 1 µg) were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were preconcentrated on a 75 µm x 2 cm C18 trapping column for 16 min using 0.1% TFA (v/v) with a flow rate of 20 µl/min followed by separation on a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 main column (both Pepmap, Thermo Scientific) with a 189 min LC gradient ranging from 4-50 % ACN in 0.1 % FA (v/v) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z 300 to 1500 at a resolution of 60,000 using the polysiloxane ion at m/z 371.101236 as lock mass. The fifteen most intense signals were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 30  s. CID spectra were acquired with a normalized collision energy of 35 % and an activation time of 10  ms. AGC target values were set to 106 for Orbitrap MS and 104 for ion trap MSn scans.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification of the acquired MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Raw files were imported and the alignment of the MS runs was done automatically by the software by choosing one of the runs as reference. After peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows 7-196 min and 300-1500, respectively, and with charge states +2, +3 and +4 were considered for peptide statistics, analysis of variance (ANOVA) and principal component analysis (PCA). In total 416,480 MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists and searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 30th of July 2012, containing 20,232 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science), OMSSA 2.1.9 and X!Tandem cyclone (version 2013.02.01.1) with the help of searchGUI 1.12.2 [58]. Trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages was selected as enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed, acetylation of N-terminus, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr were selected as variable modifications. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Search results were combined at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on the protein level using the PeptideShaker software 0.22.0 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/) and processed for re-import as peptide spectrum matches into Progenesis. Finally, 1803 proteins which were quantified from the non-conflicting features (i.e. only unique peptides) were exported. For all proteins, the normalized abundances from Progenesis were used to calculate standard deviations (SD) and coefficients of variation (CV) using all three replicates per condition. Proteins which had CVs >50 % in more than one of the four conditions (G55S/wild-type, treated and untreated) were removed and average abundances used to calculate ratios between conditions. For each comparison (e.g. wild-type untreated vs. G55S untreated) Student’s T-test p-values and average ratios were calculated using the three replicates per condition, and only proteins with a p-value <0.05 and showing an average ratio <0.7 or >1.4 were considered as regulated. In addition, to evaluate the global regulation, all six wild-type and six G55S samples were grouped and the potential regulation between those was determined accordingly.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caveolin-3, Rcmh, Lgmd1d, Proteome profile of muscle cells

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Group Leader Protein Dynamics  ISAS e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. René Zahedi
Group Leader Protein Dynamics  ISAS e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


