### Accession
PXD011816

### Title
Proteomic analysis of multiple pig tissues reveals hundreds of Toxoplasma gondii responsive proteins that could participate in Toxoplasma gondii control in vivo

### Description
Proteomic analysis of multiple pig tissues reveals hundreds of Toxoplasma gondii responsive proteins that could participate in Toxoplasma gondii control in vivo

### Sample Protocol
(Liver tissu) Protein extraction and iTRAQ were performed as previously described (He et al. 2016a). Briefly, pig tissues were individually ground into powder by using liquid nitrogen and extracted with lysis buffer. Protein quantification was measured by Bradford assay (Bradford 1976). The extracted proteins were kept at -80 °C until used for iTRAQ test. Before iTRAQ labeling, protein of each sample of the same group were equally pooled as one replicate. 100 μg protein of each replicate was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein:trypsin = 30:1 at 37 °C for 16 h.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was analyzed by commercial Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against Uniprot database and two unique peptides were required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is a leading cause of foodborne illness and consumption of undercooked pig meat is a major risk factor for acquiring toxoplasmosis, which causes a substantial burden on society. Here, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labelling coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify cellular proteins and pathways altered during <i>T. gondii</i> infection in pigs. We also used parallel reaction monitoring-based LC-MS/MS to verify the levels of protein expression of infected spleens and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs). At 6 days post-infection (dpi), 156, 391, 170, 292, and 200 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were detected in the brain, liver, lung, MLNs and spleen, respectively. At 18 dpi, 339, 351, 483, 388, and 303 DEPs were detected in the brain, liver, lung, MLNs and spleen, respectively. Although proteins involved in immune responses were upregulated in all infected tissues, protein expression signature in infected livers was dominated by downregulation of the metabolic processes. By weighted gene co-expression network analysis, we could further show that all proteins were clustered into 25 co-expression modules and that the pink module significantly correlated with the infection status. We also identified 163 potential anti-<i>T. gondii</i> proteins (PATPs) and provided evidence that two PATPs (HSP70.2 and PDIA3) can reduce <i>T. gondii</i> burden in porcine macrophages in vitro. This comprehensive proteomics analysis reveals new facets in the pathogenesis of <i>T. gondii</i> infection and identifies key proteins that may contribute to the pig's defense against this infection.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Toxoplasma gondii, Liver, Proteomic, Itraq, Pig

### Affiliations
He JunJun
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
he junjun

### Lab Head
Dr Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)
He JunJun


