### Accession
PXD023438

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Datasets for Mec1/ATR Signaling Upon Hyper-Resection (TMT Supplement)

### Description
The Mec1/ATR kinase is crucial for genome maintenance, although the mechanisms by which it controls DNA repair pathways remain elusive. Here we uncovered a role for Mec1/ATR in controlling homologous recombination (HR) factors in response to hyper-resection of DNA ends. Cells lacking RAD9, a checkpoint activator and an inhibitor of resection, exhibit Mec1-dependent hyper-phosphorylation of proteins associated with single strand DNA transactions, including the ssDNA binding protein Rfa2, the translocase/ubiquitin ligase Uls1 and the HR-regulatory Sgs1-Top3-Rmi1 (STR) complex. Extensive Mec1-dependent phosphorylation of the STR complex, mostly on the Sgs1 helicase subunit, promotes an interaction between STR and the DNA repair scaffolding protein Dpb11.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphoproteomic experiments, 150mL of yeast were grown to mid-log phase and treated as described in the figure legend. Cells were pelleted at 1000rcf and washed with TE buffer containing 1mM PMSF, Phosphatase Inhibitors (5mM NaF and 10mM beta-glycerophosphate). Pellets were lysed by bead beating with 0.5mm glass beads for 3 cycles of 10 minutes with 1-minute rest time between cycles, at 4˚C. Ten mg of protein lysate was denatured and reduced with 1% SDS and 5mM DTT at 65˚C, then alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide. Lysates were precipitated with a cold solution of 50% acetone, 49.9% ethanol, 0.1% acetic acid. Protein pellet was resuspended with 2M urea and subsequently digested with TPCK-treated trypsin overnight at 37˚C. Phosphoenrichment was performed using a Thermo-Fisher Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (cat# A32992) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified phosphopeptides were then fractionated using HILIC chromatography and subjected to LC-MS/MS on a Thermo-Fisher Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomic data were analyzed using an in-house pipeline. Briefly, spectral data were analyzed using the COMET search engine and budding yeast database downloaded from SGD. TMT experiments were performed in duplicate.  See supplemental figure 2A for consistency in quantified sites on Sgs1, Uls1, and Rfa2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mec1, Resection, Phosphoproteomics, Sgs1, Silac

### Affiliations
Graduate Student, Smolka Lab, Cornell University
Marcus Smolka's Lab, Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University

### Submitter
Ethan Sanford

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan Sanford
Marcus Smolka's Lab, Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University


