### Accession
PXD036632

### Title
Integrative analysis of KRAS wildtype metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma reveals mutation and expression-based similarities to cholangiocarcinoma

### Description
Oncogenic KRAS mutations are absent in approximately 10% of patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (mPDAC) and may represent a subgroup of mPDAC with therapeutic options beyond standard-of-care cytotoxic chemotherapy. While distinct gene fusions have been implicated in KRAS wildtype mPDAC, information regarding other types of mutations remain limited, and gene expression patterns associated with KRAS wildtype mPDAC have not been reported. Here, we leverage sequencing data from the PanGen trial to perform comprehensive characterization of the molecular landscape of KRAS wildtype mPDAC and reveal increased frequency of chr1q amplification encompassing transcription factors PROX1 and NR5A2. By leveraging data from colorectal adenocarcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma samples, we highlight novel similarities between cholangiocarcinoma and KRAS wildtype mPDAC involving both mutation and expression-based signatures and validate these findings using an independent dataset. These data further establish KRAS wildtype mPDAC as a unique molecular entity, with therapeutic opportunities extending beyond gene fusion events.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics sequencing of clinical (PanGen) tumor samples from patients diagnosed with mPDAC (n=46) was performed using the SP3-CTP pipeline. 400 µL of supernatant containing protein in RLT buffer from sequencing pipeline was heated at 95 °C for 15 min with mixing at 1200 rpm. 50 µL of 400 mM chloroacetamide was added to each sample at room temperature and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. Further sample preparation was as described previously38. MS2-TMT data were collected on a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer coupled with low pH LC-MS. As the previous data was collected on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion, differences in instrument parameters are as follows: for MS1 scans Application Mode was Peptide, Advanced Peak Determination was True, Xcalibur AcquireX was off. For MS2 scans, 9 minimum points across the peak were defined, Normalized AGC Target was 100%, Enhanced Resolution Mode was off, Relaxed Restrictions when too few Precursors are Found was True, Intensity threshold range was 5000 to 1 x 10, Auto PTE Windows were not enabled, Collision Energy Mode was Fixed, the Normalized AGC target was 100%, maximum injection time was auto, and Enhanced Resolution Mode was off.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were converted to mzML by ThermoRawFileParser v1.339. Spectra were searched using the MSFragger search engine v3.340 in FragPipe computational platform v16.0 against the UniProt Human proteome (20,371 sequences, downloaded July 16, 2021) database appended to a list of common contaminants. Identification parameters in MSFragger were specified as trypsin digestion, maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. MS and MS/MS mass calibration, MS/MS spectral deisotoping, and parameter optimization were enabled. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215), lysine TMT labeling (+229.1629), and peptide N-terminal TMT labeling (+229.1629) were included as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949) and serine TMT labeling (+229.1629) were included as variable modifications. Search output was processed by Philosopher workflow41 and Percolator42. Proteins were filtered to 1% protein-level False Discovery Rate (FDR) using the best peptide approach and picked FDR target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic KRAS mutations are absent in approximately 10% of patients with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (mPDAC) and may represent a subgroup of mPDAC with therapeutic options beyond standard-of-care cytotoxic chemotherapy. While distinct gene fusions have been implicated in KRAS wildtype mPDAC, information regarding other types of mutations remain limited, and gene expression patterns associated with KRAS wildtype mPDAC have not been reported. Here, we leverage sequencing data from the PanGen trial to perform comprehensive characterization of the molecular landscape of KRAS wildtype mPDAC and reveal increased frequency of chr1q amplification encompassing transcription factors PROX1 and NR5A2. By leveraging data from colorectal adenocarcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma samples, we highlight similarities between cholangiocarcinoma and KRAS wildtype mPDAC involving both mutation and expression-based signatures and validate these findings using an independent dataset. These data further establish KRAS wildtype mPDAC as a unique molecular entity, with therapeutic opportunities extending beyond gene fusion events.

### Keywords
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, Tmt

### Affiliations
gsc
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada

### Submitter
Gian Luca Negri

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3, Canada


