### Accession
PXD004739

### Title
Identification of Direct Upstream Kinases by Fluorescence Complementation Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Kinase-substrate networks are the main components of many signal transduction pathways. Although proteome-wide studies have been successful in elucidating many important biological events including the cataloging of thousands of sites of protein phosphorylation, there is a lack of a universal method to identify the direct upstream kinases responsible for many of these modifications. We have introduced Fluorescence ComplementatiKinase-substrate networks are the main components of many signal transduction pathways. Although proteome-wide studies have been successful in elucidating many important biological events including the cataloging of thousands of sites of protein phosphorylation, there is a lack of a universal method to identify the direct upstream kinases responsible for many of these modifications. We have introduced Fluorescence Complementation Mass Spectrometry (FCMS) as the first proteomic approach that identifies direct upstream kinases in living cells by stabilizing and capturing the kinase-substrate pairs. Using FCMS, we have identified both known and novel direct kinases of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). on Mass Spectrometry (FCMS) as the first proteomic approach that identifies direct upstream kinases in living cells by stabilizing and capturing the kinase-substrate pairs. Using FCMS, we have identified both known and novel direct kinases of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB).

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC cell culture, 293T cells were cultured at 37°C in DMEM lacking Lysine and Arginine (Thermo scientific) which contained 10% dialyzed FBS (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5% streptomycin/penicillin, and either L-Lysine and L-Arginine or 13C6-Arginine and 13C6-Lysine (Isotec). The cells were grown at least four generations to incorporate the labeled amino acids. When cells were 50%-60% confluent, modified plasmids containing either CREB or the human kinase library (AddGene) were transfected. After 48 hours, cells were collected, lysed, and subjected to an IP by GFP Nanotrap (Chromotek) for 1 hour at room temperature. Bead-bound protein complexes were denatured with 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hr at 37°C, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr in the dark at room temperature. The samples were diluted 5-fold and then incubated with proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma) at a 1:50 ratio overnight at 37°C. On the next day, peptides were desalted with C18 NuTips (Glygen) and dried in a speed vac. Peptide samples were re-dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid and injected into the EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph coupled to a hybrid linear ion trap Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos). Peptides were separated on a C18 analytical column produced in-house (3 um Magic C18 resin; 12 cm bed length) over a 120 min shallow linear LC gradient at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The MS was operated in the DDA mode, with the top 12 ions being subjected to CID. Ions with a +1 charge state were excluded, and the mass dynamic exclusion was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw files were searched directly against human database (Uniprot, April, 2014) using SEQUEST on Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher). Proteome Discoverer created DTA files from raw data files with minimum ion threshold 15 and absolute intensity threshold 50. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static modification of cysteine residues of +57.0214Da and a variable modification of +15.9949 Da to include potential oxidation of methionine and a modification of +79.996Da on serine, threonine or tyrosine for the identification of phosphorylation. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. False discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% for each analysis. For SILAC experiments, in addition to the above parameters, a dynamic modification of +6.020 Da was added on arginine and lysine. The event detector and precursor ion quantifier algorithms of Proteome Discoverer were used and the quantification method was set to SILAC 2plex (Arg6, Lys6). Quantitation used 2 ppm mass variability and a 0.2 min retention time tolerance on precursor ion pairs. Quantitation is based on the ratio of the summed areas of two matched isotope patterns (a feature) across the eluting chromatographic peak of that feature. The peptide ratios are calculated using the same number of isotopes. Protein ratios are based on the median peptide ratio and heavy/light ratio is reported. Ratios were normalized by protein median.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinases and their substrates comprise extensive signaling networks that regulate many diverse cellular functions. However, methods and techniques to systematically identify kinases directly responsible for specific phosphorylation events have remained elusive. Here we describe a novel proteomic strategy termed fluorescence complementation mass spectrometry (FCMS) to identify kinase-substrate pairs in high throughput. The FCMS strategy employs a specific substrate and a kinase library, both of which are fused with fluorescence complemented protein fragments. Transient and weak kinase-substrate interactions in living cells are stabilized by the association of fluorescence protein fragments. These kinase-substrate pairs are then isolated with high specificity and are identified and quantified by LC-MS. FCMS was applied to the identification of both known and novel kinases of the transcription factor, cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). Novel CREB kinases were validated by <i>in vitro</i> kinase assays, and the phosphorylation sites were unambiguously located. These results uncovered possible new roles for CREB in multiple important signaling pathways and demonstrated the great potential of this new proteomic strategy.

### Keywords
Fcms, Phosphorylation, Fluorescence complementation, Kinases

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN USA
Purdue University

### Submitter
Justine  Arrington

### Lab Head
Dr Weiguo Andy Tao
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN USA


