### Accession
PXD019042

### Title
Identification of immunoglobulin switch (S) region binding proteins by insertional ChIP (iChIP)

### Description
We used insertional ChIP (iChIP) based approach to identify proteins that bind to mouse immunoglobulin switch (S) region. To perform iChIP, we inserted an 8X-repeat of the LexA-binding element (LexA-BE) downstream of the Sα region in CH12F3-2A cells, a mouse B-cell line. The DNA-binding domain and dimerization domain of the LexA protein fused with a FLAG tag and a nuclear localization signal (NLS) was expressed in WT (FNLDD-alone) or Sα-engineered (FNLDD-Sα-LexA) CH12F3-2A cells. The resultant cells were subjected to stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), stimulated with CIT (CD40L, IL4, and TGFβ), immunoprecipitated with an anti-FLAG antibody, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. The identities of the deposited data are as follows: F: WT (FNLDD-alone); D: Sα-engineered (FNLDD-Sα-LexA).

### Sample Protocol
The mouse cell line was cultured in SILAC heavy(13C6 L-Lysine, 13C6 15N4 L-Arginine) or light(12C6 L-Lysine, 12C6 15N4 L-Arginine) media. The harvested heavy and light media cultured cells were mixed and subjected to immunoprecipitation of the target genome region. The collected proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE for about 1cm and cut into 6 gel pieces after staining CBB. The proteins in each gel piece were digested by typsin, extracted and subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis by using LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos(Thermo Scientific) equipped with nano-LC (Advance) and HTC-PALautosampler(CTC Analytics). Peptide separation was carried out using the C18 reversed phase analytical column (0.1 mm ID x 15 cm, 3 µm resin, L-column Micro; CELI).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw files were searched by Mascot server(Matrix science) against SwissProt 2015_04 with following parameters: taxonomy limited for Mus musculus, enzyme was Trypsin, fixed modifications was carbamidomethyl(C), variable modifications were Acetyl(N-term), Oxidation(M), Label:13C(6)15N(4)(R), Label: 13C(6)(K), peptide mass tolerance was +/- 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance was +/- 0.8Da, max missed cleavages was 2. SILAC quantification was carried out by Proteome Discoverer(Thermo Scientific) and data was exported in Excel format.

### Publication Abstract
Sterile alpha motif and histidine-aspartic acid domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1), a dNTP triphosphohydrolase, regulates the levels of cellular dNTPs through their hydrolysis. SAMHD1 protects cells from invading viruses that depend on dNTPs to replicate and is frequently mutated in cancers and Aicardi-Gouti&#xe8;res syndrome, a hereditary autoimmune encephalopathy. We discovered that SAMHD1 localizes at the immunoglobulin (Ig) switch region, and serves as a novel DNA repair regulator of Ig class switch recombination (CSR). Depletion of SAMHD1 impaired not only CSR but also IgH/c-Myc translocation. Consistently, we could inhibit these two processes by elevating the cellular nucleotide pool. A high frequency of nucleotide insertion at the break-point junctions is a notable feature in SAMHD1 deficiency during activation-induced cytidine deaminase-mediated genomic instability. Interestingly, CSR induced by staggered but not blunt, double-stranded DNA breaks was impaired by SAMHD1 depletion, which was accompanied by enhanced nucleotide insertions at recombination junctions. We propose that SAMHD1-mediated dNTP balance regulates dNTP-sensitive DNA end-processing enzyme and promotes CSR and aberrant genomic rearrangements by suppressing the insertional DNA repair pathway.

### Keywords
Recombination, Csr, Lc-ms/ms, Samhd1, Silac, Immunoglobulin locus

### Affiliations
Osaka Univ.

### Submitter
Fuminori Sugihara

### Lab Head
Dr Fuminori Sugihara
Osaka Univ.


