### Accession
PXD019728

### Title
Elucidating the role of the kinase activity of endothelial cell focal adhesion kinase in angiocrine signalling and tumour growth

### Description
A common limitation of cancer treatments is chemotherapy resistance. We have previously identified a molecular mechanism where chemotherapy resistance is regulated by endothelial cells. Endothelial cell specific knockout of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) sensitises tumour cells to DNA-damaging therapies, reducing tumour growth in mice. Our current study addresses the kinase dependent component of endothelial cell FAK sensitisation to the DNA damaging chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin. FAK is recognised as a therapeutic target in tumour cells, leading to the development of a range of inhibitors, the majority being ATP competitive kinase inhibitors. We demonstrate that specific inactivation of the FAK kinase domain in endothelial cells of blood vessels in established subcutaneous B16F0 tumours sensitises melanoma cells to doxorubicin. Tumour growth was reduced in response to doxorubicin treatment in FAK kinase-dead but not in wild-type mice. Furthermore, we demonstrate that doxorubicin reduces perivascular proliferation, enhances apoptosis and DNA-damage in endothelial cell FAK kinase dead tumours. When we treated human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells with the FAK kinase inhibitors defactinib, PF-562,271 and PF-573,228 in combination with doxorubicin, we observed a reduction in cytokine levels, implying a possible mechanism for FAK kinase domain in chemosensitisation. Together, these results confirm the role of the kinase domain of EC-FAK in chemosensitising tumour cells to doxorubicin.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF). Cells were lysed in Urea buffer [8 M Urea in 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0)] supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerol-phosphate, 2.5 mM Na4P2O7). Cell lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g at 4 °C and supernatant transferred to fresh low protein binding tubes. Protein amount was quantified using BCA. 160 µg of protein per sample were diluted in a volume of 400 µl in urea buffer. Samples were sequentially incubated at 24 °C and shaking with 10 mM Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) for 1h and 16.6 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 min. Urea concentration was diluted to 2 M with 1.2 mL of 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0), 90 µL of conditioned trypsin beads [50 % slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, 20230) conditioned with 3 washes of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0)] were added and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 5 min at 5 °C. 140 µg of digested protein were used for phosphoproteomics and 20 µg were used for proteomics. Samples were desalted using Carbon C18 Top tips (Glygen, TT2MC18). CTop tips were activated with 100 µL of elution solution (70% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and equilibrated twice with 200 µL of wash solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Samples were loaded and columns washed twice with 200 µL of wash solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). For phosphoproteomics, phosphopeptides were eluted 4 times with 50 µl of glycolic acid solution 1 (1 M glycolic acid in 50% ACN, 5% TFA) and subjected to phosphoenrichment. For proteomics samples, peptides were eluted 4 times with 50 µL of elution solution, dried in a speed vac and stored at -80 °C. In all steps, column spin tips were centrifuged at 2,000 g for 5 min at 5 °C. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads (Capital HPLC ltd, 5020-75010). Desalted samples were diluted to a volume 500 µL using glycolic acid solution (1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 5% TFA) and incubated for 5 min with 50 µL of titanium bead solution (500 µg/ml TiO2 beads in 1% TFA). Samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 1,500 rpm at room temperature (RT) and two thirds of the supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes. The pellets of TiO2 beads were resuspended in the remaining third of supernatant and pack into empty spin tips (Glygen, TT2EMT) by centrifugation. The supernatants collected in the previous step were run through the TiO2 loaded spin columns by centrifugation. TiO2 beads were sequentially washed by centrifugation with 100 µL of glycolic solution 2, ammonium acetate solution (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and twice with neutral solution (10% ACN). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads by centrifugation with 4 times 50 µL of phosphopeptide elution solution (5% NH4OH). All centrifugations were done at 1,500 rpm at RT. Phosphopeptide solutions were frozen in dry ice for 15 min, dried in a speed vac and stored at -80 °C. Phosphopeptide pellets were re-suspended in 7μL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µl enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5µl were injected into LC-MS/MS platform. The LC system (Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC) used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were trapped in a μ-pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 160454) and separated in an analytical column (EASY-SPRAY RSLC C18 2µM, 50CM X 75µM, #ES803). The following parameters were used: 3% to 23% B gradient for 90 min and a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. Samples were run in the Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS system in a randomized manner by shuffling samples before loading. As they eluted from the nano-LC system, peptides were infused into the online connected Q-Exactive Plus system via an Easy Spray Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument operated a 2.1s duty cycle consisting in the acquisition of a full scan survey spectra (375-1,500 m/z) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution was followed by, a data-dependent acquisition process in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10 ppm mass window. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30 s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least 10 data points. Peptide pellets for proteomics analysis were resuspended in reconstitution buffer (0.5 µg/µL) and 2 µL were injected into the LC-MS/MS platform. Samples were run in a 120 min gradient (3% to 23% B) and the rest of the LC-MS/MS parameters were kept as indicated for phosphoproteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Daemon 2.6.0 automated peptide identification from MS data. Mascot Distiller v2.7.1.0 generated Peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data. Mascot search engine (v2.5) matched data stored in MGF files to peptides. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) with a FDR of ~1% and the following parameters: 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr as variable modifications. The in-house developed Pescal software was used for label-free peptide quantification, XICs for all the identified peptides across all samples were constructed with ±7 ppm and ±2 min mass and retention time windows, respectively. Peak areas from all XICs were calculated. Missed datapoints were given an intensity value equal to the minimal value obtained in the assessed sample divided by 10. Intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. For proteomics analysis, phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr was not considered in Mascot searches. Peptides were quantified with Pescal as previously indicated. Protein amount was inferred using the quantitative data for all peptides identified in the same protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fak, Endothelial cell, Doxorubicin, Micro-environment

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary Universty of London

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary Universty of London


