### Accession
PXD003211

### Title
C2C12 Phosphoproteome -  Myofibrillar Z-discs are a protein phosphorylation hot spot with PKC α modulating protein dynamics

### Description
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for myofibril development and integrity. Since a role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established a site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc in skeletal myocytes and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in living cells.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 myoblasts were grown to confluency, differentiated and sarcomere formation was improved by electrical pulse stimulation. Cell lysates were reduced and alkylated and tryptical digested, desalted and lyophilised. Subsequently, peptides were seperated via strong cation exchange chromatography and fractionated. 10 µl of each fraction was used for LC-MS/MS analysis and the remaining volume was subjected to titanium dioxide based phosphopeptide enrichment. Analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL using collision-induced dissociation (CID) for SCX fractions and multi-stage activation (MSA) with neutral loss (NL) masses of 32.7, 49 and 98 Da for TiO2-enriched samples.

### Data Protocol
For global phosphoproteomics data, Andromeda integrated in MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 (Cox et al, 2011) was used to search peak list against the UniProt ProteomeSet mouse isoform database (release 17.10.2013, 51,248 protein entries). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 6 ppm for the main search. For MSA data, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The database search was performed with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were set as variable modifications. Phosphosites scored with a MaxQuant localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were deemed “localized”, while sites with a localization probability of < 0.75 were counted as putative sites.

### Publication Abstract
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for the development and integrity of myofibrils, which are the contractile organelles of cross-striated muscle cells. We here used mouse C2C12 myoblast, which were differentiated into myotubes, followed by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to generate contracting myotubes comprising mature Z-discs. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we found significant changes in the relative abundance of 387 proteins in myoblasts <i>versus</i> differentiated myotubes, reflecting the drastic phenotypic conversion of these cells during myogenesis. Interestingly, EPS of differentiated myotubes to induce Z-disc assembly and maturation resulted in increased levels of proteins involved in ATP synthesis, presumably to fulfill the higher energy demand of contracting myotubes. Because an important role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape further warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established, by global phosphoproteomics of EPS-treated contracting myotubes, a comprehensive site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in skeletal myocytes, underscoring its functions in signaling and disease-related processes. In an illustrative fashion, we analyzed the actin-binding multiadaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC&#x3b1; phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that this phosphorylation modulates FLNc dynamics. Moreover, FLNc lacking the cleaved Ig-like domain 24 exhibited remarkably fast kinetics and exceedingly high mobility. Our data set provides research community resource for further identification of kinase-mediated changes in myofibrillar protein interactions, kinetics, and mobility that will greatly advance our understanding of Z-disc dynamics and signaling.

### Keywords
C2c12 myotubes, Phosphoproteomics, Scx, Tio2

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg


