### Accession
PXD021830

### Title
Proteomics of Btk haemolymph stimulon

### Description
The spore-forming bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) of B. cereus group uses toxin-opened breaches at the insect midgut epithelium to infest the haemolymph where it rapidly propagates despite antimicrobial host defences to induce eventually host death by acute septicaemia. The response of Bt to haemolymph and the latter’s role in bacterial pathogenesis is an area that needs clarification. We report the proteome analysis of Bt subsp. kurstaki (Btk) haemolymph stimulon consisted of significant changes in 60 (34 up- and 26 down-regulated) differentially accumulated proteins (DAPs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed Btk haemolymph-responsive DAPs were mainly involved in glutamate metabolism, transketolase activity and ATP-dependent transmembrane transporters. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis disclosed that DAPs were highly enriched in enzymes related to the biosynthesis of ansamycins, a family of bacterial polyketides with antimicrobial activity. Interestingly, around 30% of DAPs were putative virulence factors, including polyketide synthase, ABC transporter, and cytotoxin. Collectively, our findings suggest Btk haemolymph stimulon could be partially driven bacterial survival and propagation within the haemolymph of infected insects, contributing to its remarkable success as entomopathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Insects and Bt strain A B. mori population was raised on leaves of white mulberry (Morus alba) at the Insect facility of Biology Department at the Nanyang Normal University (Nanyang, Henan, P.R. China). B. mori rearing conditions were 25°C ± 2°C, ca. 60% relative humidity and 12:12 h (light: dark) cycle. The insect haemolymph was collected from a droplet squeezed from an abdominal incision in larvae from early fifth (last) larval instar. B. thuringiensis kurstaki (Btk) catalogue no. BGSC-4D4 of the Bacillus Genetic Stock Centre (Columbus, Ohio) was kindly gifted by Daniel R. Zeigler and preserved in our lab as bacterial spores on filter disks at 4°C. Bacterial exposure to insect haemolymph A filter disk containing Btk spores was hydrated with Luria broth (LB) and inoculated onto LB agar plates overnight at 30°C to revive the culture. Cells were streaked on fresh LB agar plates for isolation of single colonies. For Btk liquid cultures, a 10-ml LB culture was inoculated with a single colony and grown with vigorous shaking (220 rpm) overnight at 30°C to reach saturation. This culture was then used to inoculate a fresh 50-ml LB (1:100, v/v) in a 250-ml flask and allowed to grow until OD600 nm reached approximately 0.4–0.6 (mid-log) when it was divided into two 25-ml cultures in 100-ml flasks. B. mori haemolymph was added to one of the cultures (1:20, v/v). Following 60 min of static incubation at room temperature haemolymph-treated (Btk-T) and untreated (Btk) cultures were centrifuged (3000 ×g, 10 min, 4°C) and resultant cell pellets washed twice with PBS 1X buffer (137mM NaCl; 10mM Na2HPO4; 1.8mM KH2PO4; 2.7mM KCl; pH 7.4) and stored frozen at -80°C for further uses. Protein extraction, digestion and TMT labelling Btk-T and Btk pellets were resuspended in SDT buffer (4% SDS; 100mM Tris-HCl; 1mM DTT, pH7.6) for bacterial lysis and protein extraction. Protein concentration was determined with a detergent-compatible formulation based on bicinchoninic acid (BCA) in the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the standard. Trypsin digestion of proteins (trypsin/protein mass ratio 1:50 overnight at 37°C) was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Digested peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges, Sigma), freeze dried, reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and quantified in a spectrophotometer (OD280 nm). The tryptic peptides (100 μg protein) were categorised to label with 126-tag (Btk1), 127-tag (Btk2), 128-tag (Btk3), 129-tag (Btk-T1), 130-tag (Btk-T2) and 131-tag (Btk-T3) using TMT labelling kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed by the Shanghai Applied Protein Technology (Shanghai, China). The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalised collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative analysis The MS raw data for each sample were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for identification and quantitation analysis. Search parameters were set as follows: Missed Cleavages: 2; Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 20 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.1 Da; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 6-plex; Variable modifications: Oxidation (M); Database: uniprot_Bacillus_thuringiensis_466681_20191013.fasta; protein false discovery rate (FDR) threshold: ≤0.01. All contaminant and decoy proteins were removed from the data sets before downstream analysis. Proteins identification and quantification by at least one unique peptide were analysed with the median ratio of its matching peptides and normalised through taking the median of all calculated proteins. Bioinformatic analysis Homologue sequences of identified proteins were retrieved using the NCBI BLAST + client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe). Then, GO terms were mapped and sequences were annotated using Blast2GO. The prediction of subcellular localisation was done through CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/); domain functional descriptions were annotated by the InterPro database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/search/sequence/). Proteins with enzymatic functions, possibly involved in metabolic pathways, were predicted by KEGG Pathway Database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html). Putative virulence proteins were in silico predicted by analyses for protein sequence similarity to virulence factors of pathogenic bacteria using the online tool VFDB (Virulence Factor Database; http://www.mgc.ac.cn/VFs/) (Chen et al., 2016), using BLASTP homology searches (Altschul et al., 1997). A cut-off for significant sequence homology was set at an E-value less than 10-4 to indicate homology between Btk sequences and bacterial sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Bacillus thuringiensis, Insect pathogen, Tmt

### Affiliations
Nanyang Normal University
China-UK-NYNU-RRES Joint Laboratory of Insect Biology, Nanyang Normal University (NYNU), Nanyang 473061, Henan, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
Camilo Ayra-Pardo

### Lab Head
Dr Yunchao Kan
China-UK-NYNU-RRES Joint Laboratory of Insect Biology, Nanyang Normal University (NYNU), Nanyang 473061, Henan, People’s Republic of China


