### Accession
PXD018554

### Title
Identification of the Cfap206 interactome from mouse testis to identify its role in cilia function

### Description
Cfap206 was immunoprecipitated from mouse testis to identify the interactome of this protein for further functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse testis were isolated and lysed before a self-made anti-Cfap206 antibody (rabbit against Cfap206 peptide aa194-207) was used to enrich the protein complexes. Testis from knock-out animals was used as negative control. Eluates were precipitated with chloroform and methanol followed by trypsin digestion as described before [36]. C-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm Pre collumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 117 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an LTQ Fusion mass spectrometer. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the orbitrap depending by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 27 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass [37]. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.    [36] C.J. Gloeckner, K. Boldt, M. Ueffing, Strep/FLAG tandem affinity purification (SF-TAP) to study protein interactions., Curr. Protoc. Protein Sci. Chapter 19 (2009) Unit19.20. doi:10.1002/0471140864.ps1920s57. [37] J. V Olsen, L.M.F. De Godoy, G. Li, B. Macek, P. Mortensen, R. Pesch, A. Makarov, O. Lange, S. Horning, M. Mann, Parts per Million Mass Accuracy on an Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer via Lock Mass Injection into a C-trap, (2010) 2010–2021. doi:10.1074/mcp.T500030-MCP200.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) [25,38]. As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification with the minimum ratio count of 3. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (release 2014_04) was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 2 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. 8 immunoprecipitations from 3 wild type and 8 immunoprecipitations from 3 knock-out mice were analyzed. The statistical analysis including ratio, t-test and significance A calculation was done using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3,[26]).  [25] M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, 26 (2008) 1367–1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511. [26] S. Tyanova, T. Temu, P. Sinitcyn, A. Carlson, M.Y. Hein, T. Geiger, M. Mann, J. Cox, The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of ( prote ) omics data, (2016). doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901. [38] J. Cox, I. Matic, M. Hilger, N. Nagaraj, M. Selbach, J. V Olsen, M. Mann, A practical guide to the MaxQuant computational platform for SILAC-based quantitative proteomics., Nat. Protoc. 4 (2009) 698–705. doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.36.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia are complex cellular protrusions consisting of hundreds of proteins. Defects in ciliary structure and function, many of which have not been characterised molecularly, cause ciliopathies: a heterogeneous group of human syndromes. Here, we report on the FOXJ1 target gene <i>Cfap206</i>, orthologues of which so far have only been studied in <i>Chlamydomonas</i> and <i>Tetrahymena</i> In mouse and <i>Xenopus</i>, <i>Cfap206</i> was co-expressed with and dependent on <i>Foxj1</i> CFAP206 protein localised to the basal body and to the axoneme of motile cilia. In <i>Xenopus</i> crispant larvae, the ciliary beat frequency of skin multiciliated cells was enhanced and bead transport across the epidermal mucociliary epithelium was reduced. Likewise, <i>Cfap206</i> knockout mice revealed ciliary phenotypes. Electron tomography of immotile knockout mouse sperm flagella indicated a role in radial spoke formation reminiscent of FAP206 function in <i>Tetrahymena</i> Male infertility, hydrocephalus and impaired mucociliary clearance of the airways in the absence of laterality defects in <i>Cfap206</i> mutant mice suggests that <i>Cfap206</i> may represent a candidate for the subgroup of human primary ciliary dyskinesias caused by radial spoke defects.

### Keywords
Mouse testis, Cfap206

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls-University Tuebingen


