### Accession
PXD003847

### Title
Canine subcellular Proteomics

### Description
To facilitate canine proteomics research, we have generated a non-redundant canine protein sequence database, with entry name annotation based on sequence similarity to the human proteome. To evaluate the sequence-based annotation transfer, we performed a shotgun proteomics experiment on subcellular fractions of canine spleen.

### Sample Protocol
One cubic centimeter of an apparently normal end of a spleen was collected from a whole spleen resected due to a splenic mass. The tissue was transferred to the laboratory on ice and processed immediately. Tissue subcellular fractionation was performed to generate cytosol, microsome, nucleus (soluble and membrane), mitochondria (soluble and membrane) fractions. In our experiment, the cytosol was collected in 3 fractions due to excess volume in the first step. Each of the 3 fractions were evaluated separately by LC-MS/MS and the results combined. For proteomics analysis, 40 µg of proteins from each fraction was separated by SDS-PAGE gel to 8 mm. Gel slices (8x 1 mm) were excised for in-gel digest on a liquid handler as previously described (46-48). Peptides were analyzed on a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source, with Shimadzu Prominance Nano HPLC on the front end. The samples were de-salted on a 50 mm x 300 µm C18 trapping column (Agilent Technologies) for 5 minutes using 0.1% formic acid at 30 µl/min. The trapping column was placed in-line with the analytical 150 mm x 75 µm 300 SB C18, 3.5 µm HPLC column (Agilent Technologies) for mass spectrometry analysis. Linear gradients of 2-40% solvent B over 50 min at 300 nl/minute flow rate, followed by a steeper gradient from 40% to 80% solvent B in 6 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B was held at 80% for 6 min to wash the column and returned to 2% solvent B for equilibration prior to the next sample injection. The ion spray voltage was set to 2400V, declustering potential 100V, curtain gas flow 25, nebulizer gas 1 (GS1) 12 and interface heater at 160oC. The mass spectrometer acquired 250 ms full scan TOF-MS data followed by 20 by 100 ms full scan product ion data in an information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. Full scan TOF MS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1800 and for product ion ms/ms 100-1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 150 counts and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ions of the resultant 20 most intense ions. The data was acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.6.1 software (AB Sciex).

### Data Protocol
he raw data files were processed with the demo version of ProteinPilot (AB Sciex) using Paragon as the search engine with the non-redundant canine protein database. The parameters used for the database search were defined as follows: (i) Sample Type: identification; (ii) Cysteine alkylation: iodoacetamide; (iii) Digestion: Trypsin; (iv) Instrument: AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600; (v) Special factors: Gel-based ID; (vi) Species: none; (vii) Specify Processing: none; (viii) ID Focus: biological modifications; (ix) Database: non-redundant canine database and PSPEP feature “reverse” was used for false discovery rate (FDR) analysis; (x) Search effort: rapid. Peptides were filtered at 1% FDR. Proteins identified by a single peptide, with less than 0.40 “Total” score and 0 unused were excluded. This led to a protein conﬁdence level of > 99 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Proteome, Canis familiaris, Pancreas, Dog

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Head, Cancer Proteomics Group,  The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute

### Submitter
Anup Shah

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Michelle Hill
Head, Cancer Proteomics Group,  The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute


