### Accession
PXD006341

### Title
SGBS iron secretome - To identify differentially expressed proteins in the secretome of differentiated SGBS cells human adipocytes) in response to iron.

### Description
To identify differentially expressed proteins in the secretome of differentiated SGBS cells human adipocytes) in response to iron.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldowns were eluted in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels to 10mm. Protein visualisation, excision of bands and in-gel trypsin digest were performed using a semi-automated method as described (Ruelcke et al. 2016). A band corresponding to the same molecular weight as transferrin was removed prior to digestion. Peptides were analysed using the following method.   Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer coupled with Easy-nLC 1000 and EASY-spray ion source was used to analyze the digested peptides. Sample were loaded onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 2µm column (50cm x 75µm ID), with a nanoviper acclaim C18 guard (75um x 2cm). A 90 min method was run using a combination of Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid:Acetonitrile). A two-step gradient was run comprising a 60min gradient from 3% to 25% Buffer B and a 12 min gradient from 25% to 40% Buffer B. Flow rate was at 250nL/min. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire a full MS resolution of 70,000 with an ACG target of 3e6 with a maximum injection time of 100ms. The MS scan range was from 350 to 1400m/z. MS/MS was set to acquire a resolution of 17,500 with an ACG target of 5e5 and maximum injection time of 55ms. The loop count was set to 20 with a dynamic exclusion after 30sec.  Ruelcke JE, Loo D, Hill MM. 2016 Reducing the Cost of Semi-Automated In-Gel Tryptic Digestion and GeLC Sample Preparation for High-Throughput Proteomics. J Proteomics. 149:3-6.  Inder KL, Zheng YZ, Loo D, Moon H, Nguyen H, Davis M, Clements J, Parton RG, Foster LJ, Hill MM. 2012 Expression of PTRF in PC-3 cells modulates cholesterol dynamics and the actin cytoskeleton impacting secretion pathways. Mol Cell Proteomics. 11:M111.012245.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with Spectrum mill (Rev B.05.00.181 SP1). Selected modifications included fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and silac labels (Arg 0-6-10Da Lys 0-4-8Da) and variable oxidized methionine. Results were searched against the Human SwissProt database (06/01/2015, with 547085 entries). Trypsin was selected for enzyme digest, with 2 maximum missed cleavages allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set at +/- 20 ppm and product mass tolerance was +/- 20ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sgbs, Iron, Secretome, Adipocytes

### Affiliations
UQDI
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Level 5, Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102 Australia

### Submitter
Jayde Ruelcke

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Hill
The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Level 5, Translational Research Institute, 37 Kent Street, Woolloongabba, QLD 4102 Australia


