### Accession
PXD044525

### Title
Eggs of the mosquito Aedes aegypti survive desiccation by rewiring their polyamine and lipid metabolism

### Description
Upon water loss, some organisms pause their life cycles and escape death. While widespread in microbes, this is less common in animals. Aedes mosquitoes are vectors for viral diseases. Aedes eggs can survive dry environments, but molecular and cellular principles enabling egg survival through desiccation remain unknown. In this report, we find that Aedes aegypti eggs, in contrast to Anopheles stephensi, survive desiccation by acquiring desiccation tolerance at a late developmental stage. We uncover unique proteome and metabolic state changes in Aedes embryos during desiccation that reflect reduced central carbon metabolism, rewiring towards polyamine production, and enhanced lipid utilization for energy and polyamine synthesis. Using inhibitors targeting these processes in blood-fed mosquitoes that lay eggs, we infer a two-step process of desiccation tolerance in Aedes eggs. The metabolic rewiring towards lipid breakdown and dependent polyamine accumulation confers resistance to desiccation. Furthermore, rapid lipid breakdown is required to fuel energetic requirements upon water re-entry to enable larval hatching and survival upon rehydration. This study is fundamental to understanding Aedes embryo survival and in controlling the spread of these mosquitoes.

### Sample Protocol
150 fresh and desiccated eggs of Aedes aegypti were collected and transferred to clean 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes and crushed on ice using a micro-pestle in 100µl of 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with 3X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, P8340).  For protein extraction from 1st instar larvae, synchronous hatching from fresh and desiccated eggs was induced for 1 hour. Approximately 300 hatched larvae were crushed in 500µl 1X PBS containing 3X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, P8340) supplemented with 10mM PMSF, 10mM iodoacetamide and 4mM EDTA. The samples were sonicated for 5 minutes (5 seconds pulse and 3 seconds rest). The supernatant was collected after centrifuging at 13,000 RPM (10 mins, 4°C) and total protein was estimated by BCA (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific, 23225). The supernatant was mixed with 1X Laemmli buffer and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes. 10ug of each sample was resolved on a 4-12% precast gradient gel (Invitrogen, NP0322BOX), by standard electrophoresis. The gel was stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G – 250 (ThermoFisher Scientific, LC6060) for 1 hour, destained, and imaged using the iBright imaging system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The gel was washes twice in ultrapure water. Each lane was cut into 4 slices and was separately in gel digested with trypsin, extracted and vacuum dried according to the standard protocol described in (Shevchenko et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Nano-flow liquid chromatography system (EASY-nLC  1200 series). Dried digests were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 0.3µg injected onto a LC pre-column (ThermoFisher Scientific Acclaim Pep map 100, 75µm x 2cm, Nanoviper C18, 3µm, 100Å) for separation followed by loading onto the column (ThermoFisher Scientific Easy Spray Pep map, RSLC C18 3µm, 50cm x 75µm, 100Å) at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Solvents used were: 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 10% to 95% of Buffer B for 60 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 - 1700) were acquired at a resolution of 120000. Precursor ions were sent for subsequent fragmentation by HCD at a collision energy of 32%. MS and MS/MS data were obtained in the orbitrap (Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS, ThermoFisher Scientific).  Data analysis. Data analysis was performed using proteome discoverer (version 2.1). The resulting MS/MS data was searched against the Aedes aegypti database (Taxonomy id: 7159, 36,032 sequences and 19,407,208 residues). Trypsin was the enzyme used and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.6 Da resulting in a 1% false discovery rate. A comparison of the identified peptides in desiccated and fresh eggs was done and the data was organised into categories of (i) increased post desiccation (ii) found equally in fresh and desiccated eggs and (iii) decreased post desiccation based on their emPAI scores. Uncharacterised proteins were assessed using PFAM (http://pfam.xfam.org/) for known protein domains and functions were manually assigned (see Table S1 for a complete list of proteins increasing or decreasing post desiccation in Aedes eggs). Gene ontology analysis was carried out using VectorBase (https://vectorbase.org/vectorbase/app/). GO terms with corrected p-value <0.05 (Benjamini correction) were considered significantly enriched (see Table S2 for list of all the enriched GO terms).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Regeneration, Metabolic rewiring, Desiccation, Lipid metabolism, Aedes mosquito

### Affiliations
Institue for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine
Associate Investigator, Metabolic Regulation of Cell Fate, inStem

### Submitter
Sreesa Sreedharan

### Lab Head
Dr Sunil Laxman
Associate Investigator, Metabolic Regulation of Cell Fate, inStem


