### Accession
PXD003239

### Title
Global Subcellular Characterization of Protein Degradation Using Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Protein degradation provides an important regulatory mechanism used to control cell cycle progression and many other cellular pathways. To comprehensively analyze the spatial control of protein degradation in U2OS osteosarcoma cells, we have combined drug treatment and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry with subcellular and protein fractionation. The resulting data set analyzed more than 74,000 peptides, corresponding to ∼5000 proteins, from nuclear, cytosolic, membrane, and cytoskeletal compartments. These data identified rapidly degraded proteasome targets, such as PRR11 and highlighted a feedback mechanism resulting in translation inhibition, induced by blocking the proteasome. We show this is mediated by activation of the unfolded protein response. We observed compartment-specific differences in protein degradation, including proteins that would not have been characterized as rapidly degraded through analysis of whole cell lysates. Bioinformatic analysis of the entire data set is presented in the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics, a web-based resource, with proteins annotated for stability and subcellular distribution.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/l penicillin, and 100 μg/l streptomycin at 37 °C in 10% CO2, and passaged at ∼80% confluence. For SILAC labeling of U2OS cells arginine and lysine free DMEM was used and supplemented with stable isotope labeled arginine and lysine in addition to dialyzed FCS as described previously (21). After splitting by trypsinization, cells in SILAC media were grown to ∼80% confluence over 2–3 days before drug treatment and lysis for fractionation. For the SILAC screen U2OS cells were treated with either DMSO, 40 μg/ml cycloheximide or 10 μM MG132 for 6 h and then combined in a 1:1:1 ratio of cells and fractionated by detergent solubility with the subcellular protein fractionation kit (Pierce). These fractions were then chloroform-methanol precipitated (22) and further separated by molecular weight using denaturing size exclusion chromatography before digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
p values were calculated using a Student's t test comparing the three biological replicate SILAC ratios of each protein, to the three biological replicate SILAC ratios for the control, known stable proteins, i.e. β-tubulin, histone H2A, and GAPDH. For the CHX/DMSO (M/L) and MG132/DMSO (H/L) SILAC ratios a one-tailed and two-tailed t test was used respectively. Values were tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test.

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation provides an important regulatory mechanism used to control cell cycle progression and many other cellular pathways. To comprehensively analyze the spatial control of protein degradation in U2OS osteosarcoma cells, we have combined drug treatment and SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry with subcellular and protein fractionation. The resulting data set analyzed more than 74,000 peptides, corresponding to ~5000 proteins, from nuclear, cytosolic, membrane, and cytoskeletal compartments. These data identified rapidly degraded proteasome targets, such as PRR11 and highlighted a feedback mechanism resulting in translation inhibition, induced by blocking the proteasome. We show this is mediated by activation of the unfolded protein response. We observed compartment-specific differences in protein degradation, including proteins that would not have been characterized as rapidly degraded through analysis of whole cell lysates. Bioinformatic analysis of the entire data set is presented in the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics, a web-based resource, with proteins annotated for stability and subcellular distribution.

### Keywords
Nuclear, Cytosolic, U2os, Membrane, Prr11, Osteosarcoma cells, Cytoskeletal

### Affiliations
Principle Investigator
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Principle Investigator


