### Accession
PXD010582

### Title
Maize AF F24 Shotgun Proteomics

### Description
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. To downregulate immune responses and promote host colonization, U. maydis secretes a set of effector proteins into the plant apoplast. An effector essential for U. maydis virulence is Pit2, an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs). Pit2 virulence function relies on a 14 amino acids motif (PID14). While sequence of the Pit2 effector is highly diverse amongst related pathogen species, the PID14 motif is highly conserved. Interestingly, synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. In line with this finding, mass spectrometry showed processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif of the PID14. Mutational analysis demonstrated that two residues of the released inhibitor peptide are essential for Pit2 function and, consequently, for U. maydis virulence. Based on these findings, we propose a model, in which the Pit2 effector functions as a decoy: Pit2 represents a favorable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs, which are central hubs of the maize immune system. Processing of Pit2 releases the inhibitor peptide, which in turn efficiently blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity.

### Sample Protocol
F24 fractions were adjusted to 3M Guanidiniumhydrochloride and carbamidomethylated using DTT/IAA. Samples were precipitated with 10% v/v trichloroacetic acid (TCA) o/N at 4 °C, followed by two subsequent washes with 100% ice-cold methanol. Air-dried pellets were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES and digested with MS-grade Trypsin for 3h at 42 °C. Sample cleanup was performed using C18 StageTips. Separation was performed with a binary gradient from 5-32% B for 90 minutes with a total runtime of 2 h per sample on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC, Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, ID 75 µm, trap column length 2 cm, particle size 3 µm, analytical column length 15 cm, particle size 2 µm, Thermo) coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (ImpactII, Bruker) as described in Rinschen et al. (2017). The Bruker HyStar Software (v3.2) was used to acquire line-mode MS spectra in a mass range from 200-1750 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz and the Top17 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package, v1.6.0.16 was used to identify peptides & proteins with the help of the UniProt Zea mays canonical protein dataset, downloaded on April 2018 (39442 entries) and default settings for LFQ quantification. Validation of protein identification required at least 2 unique peptides for each protein and a LFQ quantification in 2 out of 3 biological replicates

### Publication Abstract
Ustilago maydis is a biotrophic fungus causing corn smut disease in maize. The secreted effector protein Pit2 is an inhibitor of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) essential for virulence. Pit2 inhibitory function relies on a conserved 14 amino acids motif (PID14). Here we show that synthetic PID14 peptides act more efficiently as PLCP inhibitors than the full-length Pit2 effector. Mass spectrometry shows processing of Pit2 by maize PLCPs, which releases an inhibitory core motif from the PID14 sequence. Mutational analysis demonstrates that two conserved residues are essential for Pit2 function. We propose that the Pit2 effector functions as a substrate mimicking molecule: Pit2 is a suitable substrate for apoplastic PLCPs and its processing releases the embedded inhibitor peptide, which in turn blocks PLCPs to modulate host immunity. Remarkably, the PID14 core motif is present in several plant associated fungi and bacteria, indicating the existence of a conserved microbial inhibitor of proteases (cMIP).

### Keywords
Maize proteomics f24 plcps apoplastic fluid

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


