### Accession
PXD008204

### Title
Proteomic Identification of Interferon-induced Proteins with Tetratricopeptide Repeats (IFITs) as Markers of M1 Macrophage Polarization

### Description
Proteomic studies of macrophage polarization to pro-inflammatory (M1) or tissue reparative (M2) phenotypes has identified interferon-induced proteins with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFIT1, IFIT2 and IFIT3) as potential biomarkers of inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare samples for analysis of global proteomes, THP-1 cells were thawed and then lysed in 100 mM HEPES, 1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8.2. The sample was sonicated and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two hundred µg of proteins from the cell lysate were reduced with 10 mM TCEP, alkylated with 40 mM CAA and then digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) with the ratio of 1:100 (trypsin to total protein, w/w) at 37°C, overnight. Phase transfer was used to remove sodium deoxycholate [10]. For better coverage of the proteome, off-line basic pH reverse-phase fractionation was performed using an Agilent Zorbax 300 Extend-C18 5 µM column (4.6*250 mm) on a HPLC 1100 (Agilent Technologies). The gradient was run as follows: 100% buffer A (10mM ammonium hydroxide) for 10min, 2.5% buffer B (10mM ammonium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile) for 4min, 2.5% buffer B to 40% buffer B for 60min, 55% buffer B for 8 min, 100% buffer B for 8min, 0% buffer B for 10 min. The fractions were collected from 10 to 82 min. Seventy-two fractions were collected and pooled in a non-contiguous manner as previously described to obtain a total of 6 fractions [12]. Fractions were then dried completely in a lyophiliser (Labconco) and dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile).  To prepare samples for protein quantification by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), the cells were identically processed, but the fractionation step was omitted. Instead, the tryptic peptides were directly desalted with C18 StageTips [7], dried in a Speed Vac and dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile). To prepare samples for the analysis of secreted proteins, 8 mL of media from the THP-1 cell cultures were concentrated with 3 kDa-cutoff Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Devices (Millipore) and the buffer was exchanged to 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 by centrifuging multiple times for 30-40 min, 4000g, 4°C. The protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay (Expedeon). Two milligrams of protein were reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 50°C for 20 min and alkylated by incubation with 20 mM CAA for 20 min in the dark. The protein mixture was loaded into a 50 kDa-cutoff Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Device (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min. The concentration of the filtrate was determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and the sample incubated overnight at 37 °C. The sample was acidified with formic acid and desalted using C18 Omix tips (Agilent). The eluted peptides were dried in a Speed Vac (Labconco) and dissolved in buffer A.

### Data Protocol
For identification of the global cellular proteome, all generated files were submitted to MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8), coupled with the Andromeda search engine [8], to generate a list of proteins with label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensities. Database searching was performed with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; up to 2 missed cleavages permitted; mass tolerance of 20 ppm; 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification; and minimum 2 peptides for pair-wise comparison in each protein. The human protein sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot in July 2014. The lists of proteins with LFQ values were processed with Perseus (Version 1.5.0.31), a module from the MaxQuant suite. After removing the reversed and known contaminating proteins, the LFQ values were log2 transformed and the reproducibility across the biological replicates was evaluated by Pearson’s correlation analysis. The replicates were grouped into M0, M1 and M2 with categorical annotation rows. At least 2 valid values out of the 3 repeats in at least one treatment condition was set to filter out the proteins without LFQ intensity. Missing values after filtering were replaced by imputation. Multiple-samples Test based on ANOVA (FDR = 5%) was performed to obtain identify the proteins with significantly changed expression levels. Only the proteins with ANOVA significant were used for the subsequent analyses. For identification of the secretome under each treatment condition, LFQ values were generated in the same manner as for the global cellular proteome, except we used updated versions of MaxQuant (1.5.3.30), Perseus (1.5.4.0) and the protein sequence database (May 2016). The proteins were submitted to ProteinSide (http://www.proteinside.org/) for signal peptide prediction.  The secreted proteins were imported back into Perseus for statistical analysis. The statistical analysis was the same as that used for the global cellular proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages, which accumulate in tissues during inflammation, may be polarized toward pro-inflammatory (M1) or tissue reparative (M2) phenotypes. The balance between these phenotypes can have a substantial influence on the outcome of inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis. Improved biomarkers of M1 and M2 macrophages would be beneficial for research, diagnosis, and monitoring the effects of trial therapeutics in such diseases. To identify novel biomarkers, we have characterized the global proteomes of THP-1 macrophages polarized to M1 and M2 states in comparison with unpolarized (M0) macrophages. M1 polarization resulted in increased expression of numerous pro-inflammatory proteins including the products of 31 genes under the transcriptional control of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1). In contrast, M2 polarization identified proteins regulated by components of the transcription factor AP-1. Among the most highly upregulated proteins under M1 conditions were the three interferon-induced proteins with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFITs: IFIT1, IFIT2, and IFIT3), which function in antiviral defense. Moreover, IFIT1, IFIT2, and IFIT3 mRNA were strongly upregulated in M1 polarized human primary macrophages and IFIT1 was also expressed in a subset of macrophages in aortic sinus and brachiocephalic artery sections from atherosclerotic ApoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice. On the basis of these results, we propose that IFITs may serve as useful markers of atherosclerosis and potentially other inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Lfq, Ifit, Thp-1 macrophage polarisation

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Stone
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute & Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia


