### Accession
PXD022152

### Title
Functional analyses of human LUC7-like proteins involved in splicing regulation and myeloid neoplasms

### Description
We chracaterized the functions of the understudied LUC7-like family of splicing factors in human cells using seCLIP-seq, RBP knockdown followed by RNA-seq, and Co-IP mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
LUC7-like genes were endogenously tagged at the C-terminus with HA, V5, and FLAG epitopes.  Protein Extraction 100 million cells from each cell line were pelleted and washed in cold PBSW (1x PBS supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail at 1:100 (Sigma, P8340)) and re-pelleted. To separate the nuclei from the cytoplasmic fraction, 1:50 NP-40 was added to cells and the mixture was shaken and centrifuged (8800 rpm, 10 minutes). The supernatant containing the cytoplasmic fraction was removed and the cells were treated with benzonase to degrade RNA and DNA.      The nuclei were incubated on ice for 90 minutes and vortexed periodically. 500mM NaCl, 2% NP-40, PBSW were added to the nuclear pellet and the mixture was homogenized and spun down. The supernatant was collected and the process was repeated. An additional 250mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, PBSW was added to the pellet, homogenized, incubated on ice, and spun down followed by collecting the supernatant. A final wash of the nuclear pellet was performed with PBSW. Nuclear extracts were collected and stored at -80°C. Immunoprecipitation Protein A/G beads (SCBT, sc2003) were washed and incubated with FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma, F3165) for 1 hour at room temperature. Then, the antibody-bound protein A/G beads were incubated with 1% BSA in 1x PBS to block non-specific binding sites. Upon the third wash, 25mg of Dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride powder (DMP) (Sigma, D8388-1G) in 1 mL of 200mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to the bound beads and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. The reaction was repeated 2 more times. 50mM Glycine/HCl was added after the third wash and the beads were washed extensively with PBSW + 2% NP-40 before immunoprecipitation. The protein extracts were incubated with Protein A/G beads for 30 minutes at room temperature and then spun to clear the supernatant. The supernatants were incubated with the antibody-bound Protein A/G beads (4°C, overnight) and the bead-antibody-protein complexes were washed three times with IP buffer. 10% SDS was added to the beads and incubated (15 minutes, 37°C) followed by collecting the supernatant. The process was repeated twice with 1% SDS and the washes were combined. Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry Analysis The immunoprecipitated samples were run on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel and stained with Coomassie Blue (Gel Code Blue, Pierce Chemical). Each lane was cut into eight sections for processing. Proteins in each section were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, D0632) and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) then digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from gel slices three times with 60% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid/water. The peptide mixture was dissolved in 1% formic acid before submission for mass spectrometric analysis. The gel slices were submitted for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The sequenced peptides from each gel slice were aligned to the human proteome (Uniprot database, September 2017 release) using MASCOT Daemon software (version 2.3.2) [Perkins et al., 1999]. MASCOT peaks for each gel slice were filtered and downloaded: file=../data/20191108/F008409.dat do_export=1 prot_hit_num=1 prot_acc=1 pep_query=1 pep_rank=1 pep_isbold=1 pep_isunique=1 pep_exp_mz=1 export_format=CSV _sigthreshold=0.05 report=AUTO _server_mudpit_switch=0.000000001 _requireboldred=1 search_master=1 show_header=1 show_mods=1 show_params=1 show_format=1 protein_master=1 prot_score=1 prot_desc=1 prot_mass=1 prot_matches=1 prot_cover=1 prot_empai=1 peptide_master=1 pep_exp_mr=1 pep_exp_z=1 pep_calc_mr=1 pep_delta=1 pep_miss=1 pep_score=1 pep_expect=1 pep_seq=1 pep_var_mod=1 pep_scan_title=1 show_unassigned=1 query_master=1   The MASCOT peaks were further filtered by a minimum MASCOT ion score of 25 and peptide rank of 1. Data from all gel slices were combined for each biological sample. The proteins that displayed a 1.9-fold or greater difference in spectral counts between experimental conditions and input controls for both replicates were considered to be enriched. Enriched KEGG pathways were identified by inputting the enriched protein lists for each LUC7-like protein in STRING v11.0 [Szklarczyk et al., 2019].

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrates have evolved three paralogs, termed LUC7L, LUC7L2, and LUC7L3, of the essential yeast U1 small nuclear RNA (snRNA)-associated splicing factor Luc7p. We investigated the mechanistic and regulatory functions of these putative splicing factors, of which one (LUC7L2) is mutated or deleted in myeloid neoplasms. Protein interaction data show that all three proteins bind similar core but distinct regulatory splicing factors, probably mediated through their divergent arginine-serine-rich domains, which are not present in Luc7p. Knockdown of each factor reveals mostly unique sets of significantly dysregulated alternative splicing events dependent on their binding locations, which are largely non-overlapping. Notably, knockdown of LUC7L2 alone significantly upregulates the expression of multiple spliceosomal factors and downregulates glycolysis genes, possibly contributing to disease pathogenesis. RNA binding studies reveal that LUC7L2 and LUC7L3 crosslink to weak 5' splice sites and to the 5' end of U1 snRNA, establishing an evolutionarily conserved role in 5' splice site selection.

### Keywords
Pre-mrna splicing, Aml, Splicing, Luc7l3, Luc7l, Mds, Luc7l2

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute

### Submitter
Noah Daniels

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Padgett
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute, Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences


