### Accession
PXD007836

### Title
PVY Coat Protein Interactome - In order to identify cellular proteins interacting with the coat protein (CP) of Potato virus Y (PVY), we used coimmunoprecipitation of GFP-CP in PVY-infected Nicotiana benthamiana plants. To be able to pull down non-abundant interactors and to stabilize transient interactions, we used the crosslinker dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP). With this we were able to identify a total of 147 potential CP interactors.

### Description
In order to identify cellular proteins interacting with the coat protein (CP) of Potato virus Y (PVY), we used coimmunoprecipitation of GFP-CP in PVY-infected Nicotiana benthamiana plants. To be able to pull down non-abundant interactors and to stabilize transient interactions, we used the crosslinker dithiobis(succinimidyl propionate) (DSP). With this we were able to identify a total of 147 potential CP interactors.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-CP (or free GFP as control) was transiently expressed in PVY-infected Nicotiana benthamiana plants using Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation ten days after PVY-inoculation. Twelve days after inoculation leaf material was harvested and homogenized in ice-cold buffer (50mM Hepes pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10mM EDTA, 1mM PMSF, 1µg/ml Pepstatin). DSP was added to a concentration of 1mM. After 30min of incubation, DSP was quenched by addition of TRIS buffer to a final concentration of 50mM and 30min incubation. Membranes were solubilized by addition of 0,4% Triton X-100 and 20min incubation at 4°C. After centrifugation, supernatant was incubated with GFP-Trap magnetic beads. Beads were washed with buffer (see above). Precipitated proteins were eluted by addition of 4% Sodium deoxycholate, 20mM DTT and 50mM Tris pH 8.0 followed by 5min incubation at 95°C. Alkylation, tryptic digest, desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described earlier (Lamm et al. 2016, see PXD004254).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were evaluated using Peaks7 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) and a Nicotiana benthamiana proteome database (Sol Genomics Network). The amino acid sequences of the PVY proteome were additionally added to this database. Peptide identification was based on two missed trypsin cleavages maximum and 10 ppm mass tolerance for survey scans. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine residues was regarded optional. Resulting peptides were only considered as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. For label free quantification, two groups containing four biological replicates were used. The samples were normalized by the total ion count (TIC) and only proteins with one or more unique peptides were included in the calculation. Finally, only proteins that were two times (or more) more abundant in the GFP-CP-samples (with a significance of 13 -10lgP or higher) were included in the list used in this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dsp, Pvy, Nicotiana benthamiana, Potato virus y, Crosslinking, Coat protein, Cp

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen

### Submitter
Christian Lamm

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Sonnewald
Division of Biochemistry, Department of Biology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Staudtstraße 5, 91058 Erlangen


