### Accession
PXD033124

### Title
Proteomics of ectopic endometrial cell-derived exosomes in endometriosis

### Description
We primary cultured ectopic endometrial cells from patients with endometriosis (2 cases) and without endometriosis(2 cases) and collected  cell culture supernatants（P0). We isolated exosomes from cell culture supernatants by differential centrifugation and then performed proteome analysis on the two groups of exosomes to investigate the role of ectopic endometrial cell-derived exosomes in the development of endometriosis.

### Sample Protocol
1. Thaw 40-50 mL of cell supernatant at 4°C or on ice and centrifuge at 2,000g for 30 min at 4°C. Filter through a 0.22μm membrane and superfuse at 120,000g at 4°C overnight. Discard the supernatant and leave the precipitate. Wash the precipitate with cold PBS and centrifuge at 120,000 g 4°C for 2 h. Resuspend the precipitate with an appropriate amount of cold PBS or SDT lysis buffer and store at -20°C (or freeze at -80°C). 2. SDS-PAGE electrophoresis 20µg of each sample was added to 6X loading buffer, boiling water bath for 5min, 12% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis (constant pressure 250V, 40min), and Komas Brilliant Blue staining. 3. FASP enzymatic digestion 200 µg of protein solution was taken from each sample, DTT was added to a final concentration of 100 mM, boiling water bath for 5 min and cooled to room temperature. Add 200 µL of UA buffer and mix well, transfer to a 30 kD ultrafiltration tube, centrifuge at 12500g for 15min and discard the filtrate (repeat this step once). Add 100 μL IAA buffer (100 mM IAA in UA), shake at 600 rpm for 1 min, centrifuge at room temperature for 30 min, and centrifuge at 12500 g for 15 min. Add 100 μL UA buffer and centrifuge at 12500 g for 15 min. Add 100μL of 40mM NH4HCO3 solution, centrifuge at 12500g for 15min and repeat the procedure twice. Add 40μL Trypsin buffer (4μG Trypsin in 40μL 40mM NH4HCO3 solution), shake at 600rpm for 1min and leave at 37°C for 16-18h. Replace the collection tube with a new one and centrifuge at 12500g for 15min; add 20μL 40mM NH4HCO3 solution and centrifuge at 12500g for 15min. The filtrate was collected. The peptide was desalted using a C18 Cartridge, lyophilised and then re-solubilised by adding 40μL of 0.1% formic acid solution and the peptide was quantified (OD280). 4. Easy nLC chromatography Each sample was separated using a nanoliter flow rate Easy nLC system. Buffer solution A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solution B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile in water (80% acetonitrile). The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 100% of liquid A. Samples were separated by autosampler loading onto an analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50um X 15cm, nano viper,P/N164943) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The appropriate liquid phase was selected according to the project experimental protocol Gradient. i. 1 hour gradient: 0min-5min, 3% for liquid B; 5min-45min, linear gradient from 3%-28% for liquid B; 45min-50min, linear gradient from 28%-38% for liquid B; 50min-55min, linear gradient from 38%-100% for liquid B; 55min-60min, liquid B maintained at 100%. ii. 2 hour gradient: 0min-5min, Liquid B 3%; 5min-95min, Liquid B linear gradient from 3%-28%; 95min-110min, Liquid B linear gradient from 28%-38%; 110min-115min, Liquid B linear gradient from 38%-100%; 115min-120min, Liquid B maintained at 100% . iii. 3 hour gradient: 0min-7min, B 4%; 7min-159min, B linear gradient from 4%-28%; 159min-166min, B linear gradient from 28%-38%; 166min-173min, B linear gradient from 38%-100%; 173min-180min, B maintained at 100%. 5. Mass spectrometric identification Samples were separated by chromatography and then analysed by mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The length of analysis was 60/120 min (depending on the specific experimental protocol), detection was positive ion, parent ion scan range 350-1800 m/z, primary mass resolution was 70,000, AGC target was 3e6 and primary Maximum IT was 50 ms. mass-to-charge ratios of peptides and peptide fragments were collected according to the following method: 10 fragments were collected after each full scan ( MS2 scan, MS2 Activation Type was HCD, Isolation window was 2 m/z, secondary mass resolution was 17,500, Microscans were 1, secondary Maximum IT was 45ms and Normalized Collision Energy was 27 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data for the mass spectrometry analysis were raw files, identified and quantified using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1)

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Endometriosis (EMs) is the most common gynaecological disorder with its etiology and/or pathophysiology remains enigmatic. Recent studies showed that extracellular vesicles (EVs), exosomes in particular, play a critical role in developing various clinical disorders. However, the implication of exosomes in endometriosis progression has not been well elucidated. <b>Method:</b> The ectopic stromal cellular exosomes (eEVs) were assessed by transwell assay, scratch tests, tube formation assay, western blot, and qRT-PCR analysis. Protein expression profiles of exosomes in endometrial tissue and vaginal discharge collected from patients with EMS and healthy donors were analysed by Mass spectrometry. siRNA interference technology was used to inhibit the expression of exosomal protein for the functional analysis in <i>in-vivo</i>. Finally, <i>in-vitro</i> experiments were performed to validate the results that we observed in EMs mouse model. <b>Results:</b> <i>In vitro</i>, we discovered that eEVs improved NSC migratory potential by upregulating MMP9 expression and activity. eEVs also aided angiogenesis and elevated the expression of inflammatory cytokines in ovarian epithelial cells, according to our findings. Moesin (MSN) levels in ESC exosomes were substantially greater than in NSC exosomes (1.22e<sup>8</sup>&#xb1;5.58e<sup>6</sup> vs. 6.605e<sup>7</sup>&#xb1;4.574e<sup>6</sup>, LFQ intensity), as shown by protein mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analysis. In ectopic stromal cells, ERa receptors stimulated the RhoA/Rock-2/MSN pathway. We discovered that downregulating exosomal moesin reduced NSC migration (about 3-fold change) and MMP9 expression (about 2-fold change). On the other hand, Exomsni inhibited angiogenesis and inflammatory cytokine release. <i>In vivo</i> the result of immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence demonstrated that exosomal MSN substantially modified the expression of MM9, VEGFR and p-VEGFR in polyclonal lesions. In addition, we discovered an elevation in the expression of proinflammatory factors in the surrounding tissue. <b>Conclusion:</b> Exosomal MSN derived from ectopic stromal cells can contribute to endometriosis progression by mediating the construction of a "migration-vascularization-inflammation" loop in the ectopic environment.

### Keywords
Human, Endometriosis, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Ningbo Institute of Medical Science
Ningbo Women and Children’s Hospitalen’s Hospitalgbo Women and Children’s Hospital

### Submitter
yichen chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yichen Chen
Ningbo Women and Children’s Hospitalen’s Hospitalgbo Women and Children’s Hospital


