### Accession
PXD008716

### Title
GlobaGlobal involvement of lysine crotonylation in protein modification and transcription regulation in ricel involvement of lysine crotonylation in protein modification and transcription regulation in rice

### Description
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered post-translational modification (PTM) existing in mammalian. Here, we performed a global crotonylome analysis of rice (Oryza sativa L. japonica) using high accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with crotonylated peptide enrichment. A total of 1,265 lysine crotonylation sites were identified on 690 proteins in rice seedlings. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that 51% of the crotonylated proteins identified were predicted to be associated with chloroplasts. The photosynthesis-associated proteins were also mostly enriched in total crotonylated proteins. Furthermore, to assess the relevance between histone Kcr and the genome, we performed a genomic localization analysis of histone Kcr by ChIP-seq analysis. Of the 10,923 identified peak regions, the majority (86.7%) of the enriched peaks were located in genes, especially exons. Furthermore, the degree of histone Kcr modification was positively correlated with gene expression in genic regions. Compared with other published histone modification data, the Kcr was co-located with the active histone modifications. Interestingly, histone Kcr facilitated expression of genes with existing active histone modifications. In addition, 77% of histone Kcr modifications overlapped with DNase hypersensitive sites (DHSs) in intergenic regions of the rice genome, and might mark other cis-regulatory DNA elements which are different from IPA1, a transcription activator in rice seedling. Overall, our results provide a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the crotonylome and new active histone modification in transcriptional regulation in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Whole protein extraction Two-week-old rice seedling leaves (0.2 g) were first ground under liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was then transferred to a 1.5-mL centrifuge tube in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% 2-hydroxy-1-ethanethiol, 2% SDS, 65 mM DTT and 1 mM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The compound was mixed for 3 h on ice. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. Histone extraction Two-week-old rice seedling leaves (4 g) were first ground under liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was then transferred to a 50-mL centrifuge tube containing Extraction buffer A (0.4 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl2, 1% Triton-100, 5 mM 2-hydroxy-1-ethanethiol, 100 mM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was collected by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm 16627g at 4 °C for 10 min. The solid was mixed in nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EGTA, 1% SDS, 10 mM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) for 30 min on ice, and then mixed with Extraction buffer B (0.2 M HCl) for 30 min on ice. The protein was precipitated with cold 100% TCA for 10 min at -20°C. After centrifugation at 13,000g at 4°C for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in milli-Q water.  Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses WB was performed based on a previously described method (43). For Western blot analysis, the whole proteins and histone proteins were extracted from 2-week-old rice seedling leaves and separated by gradient (5%–12%) sodium dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and then detected with rabbit pan anti-Kcr antibody (1:3,000; PTM BioLabs, HangZhou China, PTM-501), rabbit anti-H3 antibody (1:3,000; PTM BioLabs, PTM-1001) and rabbit anti-H3K14cr antibody (1:3,000; PTM BioLabs, PTM-535). Antigen-antibody complexes were detected by Fluor Chem E and AlphaView SA. Immunofluorescence analysis of mitotic chromosomes was performed using a procedure described by Gong et al. (44). Histone modifications were identified with rabbit pan anti-Kcr antibodies (PTM BioLabs, PTM-501) and rabbit anti-H3K14cr antibody (1:3,000; PTM BioLabs, HangZhou China, PTM-535), and the goat secondary antibody (Alexa 488-conjugated anti-rabbit; Invitrogen, A11008). Chromosomes were counterstained with DAPI using Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, H-1200).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis Analysis of sequences around crotonylated site The analysis of sequences around the Kcr site was performed based on Shen et al (41). All the crotonylation substrate categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P-values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P-value <0.05. This filtered P-value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P-value). The results were visualized by a heatmap using “heatmap.2”. Functional annotation of proteins Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) using a procedure described by Xue et al (36). Proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Functional enrichment analysis Proteins were classified into three categories by GO annotation: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. The Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways using the Functional Annotation Tool of DAVID against the background of Nipponbare, following a detailed procedure described by Xue et al (36). GO annotation and enriched pathways with a corrected P-value <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.  Protein-protein interaction analysis We analyzed PPIs for identified crotonylated proteins using Cytoscape software (Version 3.3.0). PPI networks were obtained using the STRING database, which uses a metric known as the “confidence score” to define interaction confidence. We fetched all interactions with a confidence score ≥0.7 (high confidence) (42). The post-translational protein was analyzed for densely connected regions with a graph theoretical cluster using molecular complex detection (MCODE) algorithm, which is part of the plug-in tool kit of the network analysis and visualization software, Cytoscape. The highest-ranking modules containing modification sites were selected for further analysis and rendering.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered posttranslational modification (PTM) existing in mammals. A global crotonylome analysis was undertaken in rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i> L. <i>japonica</i>) using high accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with crotonylated peptide enrichment. A total of 1,265 lysine crotonylation sites were identified on 690 proteins in rice seedlings. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that 51% of the crotonylated proteins identified were localized in chloroplasts. The photosynthesis-associated proteins were also mostly enriched in total crotonylated proteins. In addition, a genomic localization analysis of histone Kcr by ChIP-seq was performed to assess the relevance between histone Kcr and the genome. Of the 10,923 identified peak regions, the majority (86.7%) of the enriched peaks were located in gene body, especially exons. Furthermore, the degree of histone Kcr modification was positively correlated with gene expression in genic regions. Compared with other published histone modification data, the Kcr was co-located with the active histone modifications. Interestingly, histone Kcr-facilitated expression of genes with existing active histone modifications. In addition, 77% of histone Kcr modifications overlapped with DNase hypersensitive sites (DHSs) in intergenic regions of the rice genome and might mark other cis-regulatory DNA elements that are different from IPA1, a transcription activator in rice seedlings. Overall, our results provide a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the crotonylome and new active histone modification in transcriptional regulation in plants.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Oryza sativa, Histone lysine, Crotonyl lysine

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Chenyu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyun Gong
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


