### Accession
PXD024983

### Title
Bifunctional dehalogenases in Dehalococcoides mediate complete debromination of penta- and tetra-brominated diphenyl ethers

### Description
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are persistent, highly toxic, and widely distributed environmental pollutants. The microbial populations and functional reductive dehalogenases (RDases) responsible for PBDEs debromination in anoxic systems remain poorly understood, which confounds bioremediation of PBDE-contaminated sites. Here we report a PBDE-debrominating enrichment culture dominated by a previously undescribed Dehalococcoides mccartyi population. A D. mccartyi strain, designated TZ50, whose genome contains 25 putative RDase encoding genes was isolated from the debrominating enrichment culture. Strain TZ50 dehalogenated a mixture of penta- and tetra-BDE congeners (total BDEs 1.48 uM) to diphenyl ether within two weeks (0.58 uM Br- /d) via ortho- and meta- bromine elimination; strain TZ50 also dechlorinated tetrachloroethene (PCE) to vinyl chloride and ethene (260.2 M  Cl- /d). Native-PAGE, proteomic profiling, and in vitro enzymatic activity assays implicated the involvement of three RDases in PBDEs and PCE dehalogenation. Two RDases, TZ50_0172 (PteATZ50) and TZ50_1083 (TceATZ50), were responsible for debromination of penta- and tetra-BDEs to di-BDE. TZ50_0172 and TZ50_1083 were also implicated in dechlorination of PCE to TCE and of TCE to vinyl chloride/ethene, respectively. The other expressed dehalogenase, TZ50_0090, was associated with debromination of di-BDE to diphenyl ether, but its role in PCE dechlorination was unclear. Comparatively few RDases are known to be involved in PBDE debromination and the identification of PteATZ50, TceATZ50, and TZ50_0090 provides additional information for evaluating debromination potential at contaminated sites. Moreover, the bifunctionality of the PteATZ50 and TceATZ50 in both PBDEs and PCE dehalogenation makes strain TZ50 a suitable candidate for remediation of co-contaminated sites.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, cells from the TZ50 enrichment culture amended with either the penta- and tetra-BDE mixture (1.5 M; 500 ml culture volume), PCE (0.6 mM; 300 ml culture volume), or TCE (0.6 mM; 300 ml culture volume) were harvested and concentrated by centrifugation at 13,000 ×g for 10 min. Proteins were extracted on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with a nanoLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described. Briefly, proteins were digested with trypsin and desalted using ZipTip-uC18 material (MilliporeSigma).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest HT search algorithm against a translated protein database derived from the metagenome bin containing reads corresponding to the D. mccartyi population. Protein and peptide abundance were calculated by label-free quantification based on area counts using the Minora node implemented in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers, Brominated flame retardants, Dehalococcoides, Reductive debromination, Reductive dehalogenase (rdase)

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Siyan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Jianzhong He
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore


