### Accession
PXD019438

### Title
TET2 is a component of the ER complex and controls 5mC to 5hmC conversion at ER cis-regulatory regions

### Description
Estrogen receptor-alpha (ER) drives tumour development and metastasis in ER positive (ER+) breast cancer. GATA3 is a transcription factor that has been closely linked to ER function, but the role of GATA3 in ER-transcriptional activity is not clear. We sought to identify the contribution of GATA3 to the ER complex, by conducting quantitative multiplexed rapid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous proteins (qPLEX-RIME), to assess changes to the ER complex in response to GATA3 depletion. Unexpectedly, very few proteins were dissociated from the ER complex in the absence of GATA3, with the only major change being loss of TET2 in the ER complex. In breast cancer cells and Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) tissue, TET2 binding events were shown to constitute a near-total subset of ER binding events, and loss of TET2 was functionally associated with reduced activation of proliferative pathways. To investigate the TET2-ER relationship, the role of TET2 in regulating DNA modifications in ER+ breast cancer cells was examined. TET2 knockdown did not appear to result in changes to global DNA methylation, however, oxidation of methylated DNA to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) was significantly reduced after TET2 depletion and these events occurred at ER enhancers. These findings implicate TET2 in the production and maintenance of 5hmC at ER sites, providing a potential mechanism for TET2-mediated regulation of ER target genes.

### Sample Protocol
For the full proteome analysis cells were washed twice in cold PBS and harvested in PBS containing protease inhibitors (Roche). Cells were sonicated in 200 μl of 0.1 M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB), 0.1% SDS (sodium dodecyl suphate) buffer followed by probe sonication and boiling at 95 °C. Protein concentration was estimated using a Bradford assay (BIO-RAD-Quick start) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For each sample, 90 μg of total protein was reduced for 1 hour at 60°C by the addition of 2 μl 50 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma). Cysteines were blocked for 10 minutes at room temperature with the addition of 1 μl 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in trypsin (Pierce) solution, added at a ratio of ~30:1 protein:trypsin. The following day peptides were labelled using the TMT (tandem mass tag) 11plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) with a randomised design. Peptides were fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system at high pH using the X-Bridge C18 column (Waters) with 1% gradient. UV signal was recorded at 280 and 215 nm and fractions were collected in a peak-dependent manner. Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with a nanoESI Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).  RIME sample preparation and analysis was performed  as described in Glont et al. (2019) and Papachristou et al. (2018). Briefly, tryptic digestion of bead-bound protein was performed by addition of 10 μl trypsin solution (15 ng/μl) (Pierce) in 100 mM AMBIC followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. A second digestion step was performed the next day for 4 h. After tryptic digestion tubes were placed on a magnetic stand to allow removal of the supernatant after acidification by the addition of 2 μl 5% formic acid. Digested peptide mixes were cleaned using Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For non-quantitative RIME, digested peptide mixtures were diluted 1/10 with loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), water) and analysed on an LTQ Velos-Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano-LC system (Dionex). For quantitative RIME (qPLEX-RIME), digested, cleaned peptide samples were dried using a speedvac, reconstituted in 100 μl 0.1 M TEAB and labelled using TMT 10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) with a randomised design. The peptide mixture was fractionated with Reversed-Phase cartridges at high pH (Pierce). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5–50% ACN. Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with a nano-ESI Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Any proteins that appeared in any one of the three IgG control RIME experiments were excluded. Raw MS files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 or 2.1 software for peptide and protein identifications. Pre-processed quantitative datasets (peptide or protein-level TMT intensities) generated by Proteome Discoverer were imported into R and data analysed using the qPLEXanalyzer tool

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tet2, Breast cancer, Estrogen receptor alpha, Qplex-rime

### Affiliations
Senior group Leader
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Carroll
Senior group Leader


