### Accession
PXD015471

### Title
The mRNA-binding proteome of proliferating and differentiated muscle cells

### Description
Muscle formation is a coordinated process driven by extensive gene expression changes where single cells fuse together to form multinucleated muscle fibers. Newly synthesized mRNAs are then regulated by RNA binding proteins(RBPs)affecting post-transcriptional transcripts metabolism. We determined how large gene expression changes affect the catalog of RBPs by studying proliferating and differentiated muscle cells in healthy and dystrophic conditions. Transcriptomic analysis showed that the expression of more than 7000 genes was affected during myogenesis. We identified 769 RBPs, of which 294 were muscle specific and 49 were uniquely shared with cardiomyocytes. A subset of 32 RBPs (half of which was muscle specific) showed preferential loading on target mRNAs in either myoblasts or myotubes. A large proportion of catalytic proteins was bound to mRNAs even though they lack classical RNA binding domains. Finally we show how the identification of cell specific RBPs enabled the identification biomarkers that can separate healthy individuals from dystrophic patients. Our data show how interactome data can shed light on new basic RNA biology as well as provide cell specific data that can be used for diagnostic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein analysis Samples were incubated at 90°C with LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies). Proteins were run for 1cm on a 4-12% PAGE (NuPAGE Bis-Tris Precast Gel, Life Technologies) and stained with silver(SilverQuest Silver Stain, Life Technologies). The lane was cut into three parts, and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion using Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices,lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitril/formic acid and subsequently analyzed by on‐line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system(Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch,Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 50% solvent B (100/0.1 water/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 20 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS (top-10 mode)with collision energy at 32 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400-1500, at an AGC target of 400,000 @maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion after n=1 with exclusion duration of 10 s. Charge states 2-5 were-included. For MS2 precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da. HCD collision energy was set to 32 V. First mass was set to 110 Da. The MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 with an AGC target of 50,000 @maximum fill time of 60 ms. In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (67911 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2(www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed, and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification; carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification. Protein with at least 2 peptides with a threshold of ≥95%), were sorted and compared using Scaffold software version 4.7.5 (www.proteomesoftware.com).

### Data Protocol
Differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data was performed on 23126 genes that showed more than 10 counts across the 4 samples. We tested for differences in cell type (MB vs MT) and diagnosis(HC vs DMD). A Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple testing was applied. We considered P values below 0.05 significant. Comparison of cross-linked (CL) and uncrosslinked(noCL) samples was performed using 8 test paired samples (4 noCL and 4 CL samples),representing both MB and MT (4 MB and 4 MT) as well as healthy and disease. Proteins with less than 5 spectral counts across all 8 samples were filtered out, allowing to perform the test on 655 variables. For the comparison we corrected for cell type (MB and MT) and diagnosis (healthy controls (HC) and DMD). Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction for multiple testing was applied. Analysis of protein data was performed on 12 CL samples. We filtered out proteins with less than 5 spectral counts across all samples, resulting in the exclusion of 366 proteins. We tested whether differences exist in the remaining 769 proteins between the two cell types (6 MB vs 6 MT) and between healthy and disease(6 HC and 6 DMD). Correction for multiple testing (FDR) was applied and P values below 0.05 were considered significant. Confirmation of quantitative differences was performed on the identified RBPs using MaxQuant iBAQ quantitation data analysed using the kruskal.test function in R. Analysis of data was performed in R with packages DeSeq2[30], ggplot2[31] and UpSet[32].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna binding proteins; interactome; duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Head Proteomics group LUMC

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr P.A.van Veelen
Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics Head Proteomics group LUMC


