### Accession
PXD036392

### Title
Shotgun proteomics of Sparus aurata hepatic stress response

### Description
This study characterizes the liver stress proteome of fish submitted to overcrowding (OC), repeated net-handling (NET) and hypoxia (HYP). Fish trials were conducted in triplicate tanks and two fish per tank were randomly sampled for MS analysis. This work aims to disclose most significant changes in signaling and metabolic pathways involved in the stress response. This data-driven knowledge may ultimately contribute for the improvement of species-specific welfare management protocols, towards a sustainable aquaculture.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction of the liver samples, 50 mg of tissue (n = 6, 2 fish per triplicate tanks, randomly selected) were mixed with 500 μL of extraction buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris pH 8.5), 5 μL of protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck KGaA) and 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA. Sample homogenization was done with a tissue lyser (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) with 5 mm metal beads for 2 cycles of 30 s, at frequency 25/s. Homogenates were incubated at 4°C for 30 min, in constant rotation, and centrifuged at 13,000 g, 4 °C for 15 min to remove insoluble material. Liver protein extracts were diluted in the corresponding initial buffer and the protein content measured with Bradford assay using BioRad Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent 1X (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, USA) and the BSA Standard Set (Bio-Rad). Extracts were then depleted of non-protein contaminants using the ReadyPrep™ 2D Clean-up kit (Bio-Rad), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cleaned protein pellet was further resuspended in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitors for 10 min at 95ºC at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Samples were then prepared following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol, as described elsewhere (1). Enzymatic digestion was performed with 2 µg Trypsin/LysC overnight at 37 ºC at 1000 rpm. nanoLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides (500 ng) were analyzed by online nanoLC using an UltiMate TM 3000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL min-1. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL min-1. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA, with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) positive mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV and capillary temperature was 275 °C. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chrom. peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. DDA settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45 s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass and spectrum data type profile. MS analyses were performed at the Proteomics Scientific Platform of i3S, Porto, Portugal. (1)Hughes, C.S.; Moggridge, S.; Müller, T.; Sorensen, P.H.; Morin, G.B.; Krijgsveld, J. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments, Nat. Protocols 2019, 14(1), 68-85.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw MS data were processed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) on Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 and searched against the UniProtKB Eupercaria database (taxon ID 1489922; Release 2020_05; 651,914 sequences) for protein identification. The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids and 144 as maximum. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification (TOP3) was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on t-test (background based). Afterwards, the processing workflow results i.e., .msf files (magellan storage files) were imported into Scaffold (v.4.11.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and a second search engine i.e., X! Tandem algorithm (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Alanine 2017.2.1.4) was applied to all MS/MS samples, using a reverse concatenated subset of the UniProtKB Eupercaria database (Release 2020_05; 651,914 entries), also assuming Trypsin digestion and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and Glu->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, ammonia-loss of the N-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the N-terminus as variable modifications. Protein identification The Scaffold software v.4.11.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 92% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (2) with Scaffold delta-mass correction, whereas protein identifications were accepted at a minimum 99% probability (protein Decoy FDR of 1%) by the Protein Prophet algorithm (3), containing at least three identified peptides. The liver MS/MS data from the three trials (OC, NET and HYP) were merged into one single Scaffold file for further comparisons, comprising two fish per triplicate tanks (n=6) for control and stress experimental groups (n=2) per trial (n=3), in a total of 36 MS/MS runs/tissue. Proteins containing similar peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein abundance was estimated based on TOP3 Precursor Intensity and normalized values (against the sum of all ion intensities in each sample replicate) were log10 transformed prior to statistical analysis to ensure a Gaussian distribution of the residuals. The residuals’ normality and homoscedasticity were confirmed using the IBM SPSS Statistics software v.25.0. Statistical analyses of proteomics data were performed in the Perseus software (4), including only proteins quantified in at least 4 out 6 replicates per challenging condition. (2)Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. Empirical Statistical Model To Estimate the Accuracy of Peptide Identifications Made by MS/MS and Database Search. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74 (20), 5383–5392. (3) Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Keller, A.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. A Statistical Model for Identifying Proteins by Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75 (17), 4646–4658. (4) Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M.Y.; Geiger, T., Mann, M.; Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 731–740.

### Publication Abstract
The study of the molecular mechanisms of stress appraisal on farmed fish is paramount to ensuring a sustainable aquaculture. Stress exposure can either culminate in the organism's adaptation or aggravate into a metabolic shutdown, characterized by irreversible cellular damage and deleterious effects on fish performance, welfare, and survival. Multiomics can improve our understanding of the complex stressed phenotype in fish and the molecular mediators that regulate the underlying processes of the molecular stress response. We profiled the stress proteome and metabolome of <i>Sparus aurata</i> responding to different challenges common to aquaculture production, characterizing the disturbed pathways in the fish liver, i.e., the central organ in mounting the stress response. Label-free shotgun proteomics and untargeted metabolomics analyses identified 1738 proteins and 120 metabolites, separately. Mass spectrometry data have been made fully accessible via ProteomeXchange, with the identifier PXD036392, and via MetaboLights, with the identifier MTBLS5940. Integrative multivariate statistical analysis, performed with data integration analysis for biomarker discovery using latent components (DIABLO), depicted the 10 most-relevant features. Functional analysis of these selected features revealed an intricate network of regulatory components, modulating different signaling pathways related to cellular stress, e.g., the mTORC1 pathway, the unfolded protein response, endocytosis, and autophagy to different extents according to the stress nature. These results shed light on the dynamics and extent of this species' metabolic reprogramming under chronic stress, supporting future studies on stress markers' discovery and fish welfare research.

### Keywords
Fish, Gilthead seabream, Stress, Aquaculture

### Affiliations
Universidade Algarve
Center of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal

### Submitter
Ana Paula Farinha

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Miguel L. Rodrigues
Center of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal


