### Accession
PXD022424

### Title
Proteomics profiling of arginine methylation mediated by PRMT family reveals a critical role of arginine methylation in RNA splicing and cancer cell growth

### Description
Protein arginine methylation, catalyzed by the protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT) family, is recognized as a widespread post-translational modification (PTM) with implications in a plethora of biological processes in eukaryotes. PRMT proteins were classified into three types, type I, II and III, according to the final methyl-arginine products generated. Despite that thousands of substrates have been identified for Type I and II PRMTs, a full scope of arginine methylation catalyzed by the only type III PRMT, PRMT7, as well as its connection with that of type I and II PRMTs remain unknown, limiting our understanding of the network of arginine methylation and its functions in cells. In this study, global profiling of PRMT4 (type I), PRMT5 (type II) and PRMT7 (type III) substrates (also referred as methylome) revealed that PRMT7 methylated a GAR (glycine and arginine) motif similar as PRMT5, while PRMT4 uniquely methylated a motif in which proline was highly enriched. PRMT4, 5 and 7-methylome were all enriched with proteins functioning in mRNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation（ FASP）method and off-line fractionated by bRP (basic Reverse Phase) using a Waters XBridge BEH C18 5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column (Waters) or XBridge BEH C18 10 μm 10 × 250 mm column (Waters) on an Ultimate 3000 high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system.The lyophilized peptides were dissolved by 600 μl 1 × PTMScan IAP Buffer (CST). PTMScanmono-methyl arginine motif immunoaffinity beads (CST) were incubated with the 10 dissolved fractions for 4 hrs at 4°C. After enrichment with mono-methylated antibodies, the supernatant from the 10 fractions were concatenated to 5. PTMScan asymmetric di- or symmetrical di-methyl arginine motif immunoaffinity beads (CST) were incubated with the 5 fractions for 4 hrs at 4°C. All the immunoprecipitates were washed three times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 × 50 μl of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in Milli-Q water. Peptide eluates were desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips and dried by speed vacuum at 45°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.2), and MS/MS spectra were searched against the reviewed SwissProt human proteome database. All searches were carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, oxidation (Met)(+15.9949 Da), methylation (Arg, Lys) (+14.0266 Da), dimethylation (Arg, Lys) (+28.0532 Da),trimethylation (Lys) (+42.0470 Da) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) (+42.0106 Da) as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (Cys) (+57.0215 Da) as fixed modification and three trypsin missed cleavages allowed. Only peptides with at least six amino acids in length were considered. The peptide and protein identifications were filtered by PD to control the false discovery rate (FDR) <1%. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous substrates have been identified for Type I and II arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs). However, the full substrate spectrum of the only type III PRMT, PRMT7, and its connection to type I and II PRMT substrates remains unknown. Here, we use mass spectrometry to reveal features of PRMT7-regulated methylation. We find that PRMT7 predominantly methylates a glycine and arginine motif; multiple PRMT7-regulated arginine methylation sites are close to phosphorylations sites; methylation sites and proximal sequences are vulnerable to cancer mutations; and methylation is enriched in proteins associated with spliceosome and RNA-related pathways. We show that PRMT4/5/7-mediated arginine methylation regulates hnRNPA1 binding to RNA and several alternative splicing events. In breast, colorectal and prostate cancer cells, PRMT4/5/7 are upregulated and associated with high levels of hnRNPA1 arginine methylation and aberrant alternative splicing. Pharmacological inhibition of PRMT4/5/7 suppresses cancer cell growth and their co-inhibition shows synergistic effects, suggesting them as targets for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Rna splicing, Prmts, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Xiamen University
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,Xiamen University

### Submitter
Wen Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Liu
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,Xiamen University


