### Accession
PXD037190

### Title
Microbiome differences related to infant outgrowth of cow’s milk allergy.

### Description
This study was conducted in order to gain insight into microbial and functional differences related to outgrowth of cow’s milk allergy (CMA) and a nutritional intervention with synbiotics.

### Sample Protocol
10-30 mg faeces was mixed with 125 µl 100 mM Tris pH 8 and sonicated for 15 seconds. Proteins were reduced (15 mM DTT), unfolded (6M urea) and alkylated (20 mM acrylamide) and aggregated using acetonitrile on magnetic carboxylate modified particles (SpeedBeads™). After washing with 1 ml 70% ethanol and with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile, the beads with protein were subjected to digestion by adding 100 µl 5 ng/µl sequencing grade trypsin in ammonium bicarbonate. After peptide cleanup, the resulting peptides were measured by nLC-MS/MS, using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Previous studies provide evidence for an association between modifications of the gut microbiota in early life and the development of food allergies. We studied the faecal microbiota composition (16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) and faecal microbiome functionality (metaproteomics) in a cohort of 40 infants diagnosed with cow's milk allergy (CMA) when entering the study. Some of the infants showed outgrowth of CMA after 12&#xa0;months, while others did not. Faecal microbiota composition of infants was analysed directly after CMA diagnosis (baseline) as well as 6 and 12&#xa0;months after entering the study. The aim was to gain insight on gut microbiome parameters in relation to outgrowth of CMA. The results of this study show that microbiome differences related to outgrowth of CMA can be mainly identified at the taxonomic level of the 16S rRNA gene, and to a lesser extent at the protein-based microbial taxonomy and functional protein level. At the 16S rRNA gene level outgrowth of CMA is characterized by lower relative abundance of Lachnospiraceae at baseline and lower Bacteroidaceae at visit 12&#xa0;months.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Cow’s milk allergy, Early life, Synbiotics

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


