### Accession
PXD002523

### Title
Human lung adenocarcinoma tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
This project is a report of a chromosome-based human proteome project focused on chromosome 9 (Chr 9). To reveal missing proteins and undiscovered features in proteomes, LC-MS/MS analysis based identification and characterization were conducted on 5 pairs of lung adenocarcinoma tumors and adjacent non-tumor tissues.

### Sample Protocol
For liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, proteins were extracted from homogenized tissue samples using a NucleoSpin TriPrep kit (Macherey-Nagel GMH & Co KG, Duren, Germany) according to the manufacturer¡¯s instructions. The protein concentration of diluted tissues was measured using Quick Start¢â Bradford 1x Dye Reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Then, 80 ¥ìg of protein was prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and linearized by treatment with dithiothreitol (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to digest samples at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w), and the solution was incubated at 37 ¡ÆC for 16 hours. Digested samples were separated into 10-12 fractions using high pH reverse phase methods using C18 column.

### Data Protocol
We analyzed these datasets using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Scaffold (version 4.4.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) Platform and performed searches against the UniProt human protein database (release 2015_02) using SEQUEST and X!tandem. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at a greater probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by a Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at a greater than 96.0% probability and if they contained at least 2 identified unique peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
This is a report of a human proteome project (HPP) related to chromosome 9 (Chr 9). To reveal missing proteins and undiscovered features in proteogenomes, both LC-MS/MS analysis and next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-based identification and characterization were conducted on five pairs of lung adenocarcinoma tumors and adjacent nontumor tissues. Before our previous Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) special issue, there were 170 remaining missing proteins on Chr 9 (neXtProt 2013.09.26 rel.); 133 remain at present (neXtProt 2015.04.28 rel.). In the proteomics study, we found two missing protein candidates that require follow-up work and one unrevealed protein across all chromosomes. RNA-seq analysis detected RNA expression for four nonsynonymous (NS) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (in CDH17, HIST1H1T, SAPCD2, and ZNF695) and three synonymous SNPs (in CDH17, CST1, and HNF1A) in all five tumor tissues but not in any of the adjacent normal tissues. By constructing a cancer patient sample-specific protein database based on individual RNA-seq data and by searching the proteomics data from the same sample, we identified four missense mutations in four genes (LTF, HDLBP, TF, and HBD). Two of these mutations were found in tumor samples but not in paired normal tissues. In summary, our proteogenomic study of human primary lung tumor tissues detected additional and revealed novel missense mutations and synonymous SNP signatures, some of which are specific to lung cancers. Data from mass spectrometry have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD002523.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Lung, Adjacent normal, Adenocrcinoma

### Affiliations
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Je-Yoel Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Je-Yoel Cho
Seoul National University


