### Accession
PXD038482

### Title
Heart tissue extracellular vesicles reprogram smooth muscle cell proteome

### Description
Dysregulation of ERalpha has been linked with increased metabolic and cardiovascular disease risk. Uncovering the impact of ERα deficiency in specific tissues has implications for understanding the role of ERα in normal physiology and disease, the increased disease risk in postmenopausal women, and the design of tissue-specific ERα-based therapies for a range of pathologies including cardiac disease and cancer. Cardiac myocyte-specific ER knockout mice (ERalphaHKO) were generated to assess the role of ERα in the heart. Female ERHKO mice displayed a mild cardiac phenotype, but unexpectedly, the most striking phenotype was obesity in female ERHKO but not male ERHKO mice. We identified mild cardiac dysfunction, metabolic and lipid dysregulation in hearts of female ERHKO mice. We also show that extracellular vesicles (EVs) collected from the perfusate from Langendorff-isolated hearts from female ERHKO mice have a distinct proteome compared to male ERHKO; enriched for functions associated with muscle, metabolic and fatty acid dysregulation.

### Sample Protocol
sample preparation, samples were lysed in 6M Urea, 50mM HEPES pH 8.0 with benzonase nuclease (E1014, Sigma-Aldrich) and quantified by microBCA (23235, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples normalised (10 µg) and reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hr at 25°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark at 25 °C. Samples are quenched with additional 10 mM DTT and mixed with Sera‐Mag Speed Beads mixture (Cytiva, #45152105050250 and #65152105050250) at a 10:1 beads-to-protein ratio. Ethanol was added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 50% (v/v). Proteins were bound to beads with 10 min 1000rpm shaking at 25 °C and washed three times with 80% ethanol (v/v). Protein-bound-beads were reconstituted in 50mM TEAB pH 8 with sequence-grade trypsin (V5113, Promega) and Lys-C (121-05063, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) at 1:50 and 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio and digested overnight at 37 °C with shaking. Peptide digests were collected from the supernatant and acidified with formic acid to a final 2% (v/v) concentration. Peptide digests were dried under vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.07% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in MS-grade water. Subsequently, peptides were quantified by fluorometric peptide assay (23290, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and normalised to 0.35 µg/uL.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data was processed in the MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0), searching against the mus musculus UniProt Reference database (Jan 2021 release) with a contaminants database employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P and LysC as the proteolytic enzyme with a minimum length of 7 amino acid and up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. FDR against a reverse sequence database was set as 0.01 for both protein and peptide identifications. Match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant and label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was enabled. Contaminants, and reverse identification were excluded from further data analysis. Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software package and R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell reprogramming, Systems biology, Cardiac, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.


