### Accession
PXD017517

### Title
Inhibitor of Differentiation 4 (ID4) represses myoepithelial differentiation of mammary stem cells through its interaction with HEB

### Description
Differentiation of stem cells embedded within the mammary epithelium is orchestrated by lineage-specifying transcription factors. Unlike the well-defined luminal hierarchy, dissection of the basal lineage has been hindered by a lack of specific markers. Inhibitor of Differentiation 4 (ID4) is a basally-restricted helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor essential for mammary development. Here we show that ID4 is highly expressed in basal stem cells and decreases during myoepithelial differentiation. By integrating transcriptomic, proteomic and chromatin-association data we reveal that ID4 is required to suppress myoepithelial gene expression and cell fate.

### Sample Protocol
Murine Comma-Dβ breast epithelial cells were lysed, cross-linked to DNA and immunoprecipitation for ID4, E2A, HEB or IgG control were performed. Samples were reduced (DTT) and alkylated (IAA) and digested on the beads with trypsin overnight. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA/SWATH) mass spectrometry was performed on a on a SCIEX 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data (.wiff and .wiff.scan) were searched with the paragon algorithm integrated in the ProteinPilot software version 5.0 (SCIEX). Decoy database search was enabled to allow false discovery rate (FDR) calculation. Proteins accepted to be present in a sample had a FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia/swath-ms, Transcription, Mouse, Mammary gland development, Rime

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Swarbrick
The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia


