### Accession
PXD003842

### Title
Influence of mutations in PPE38 on the secretome composition of M. tuberculosis

### Description
What is the influence of mutations in PPE38 on the secretome composition of M. tuberculosis? Certain clinical isolates of M. tuberculosis belonging to the Beijing lineage have mutations in ppe38 and this leads to a loss of secretion of the PE_PGRS substrates and hypervirulence in a mouse model of M. tuberculosis. Culture filtrates (secretomes) of 3 strains have been collected of which strain SAWC_2088 has intact PPE38 and Strains SAWC_2135 and SAWC_2701 have mutated PPE38. The strains with mutated PPE38 were also complemented by reintroducing the corresponding genes on an integrative plasmid. Label-free single-shot proteomics was used to profile protein expression in M. tuberculosis secretomes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing culture filtrates were concentrated and soluble protein was precipitated using TCA. Protein pellets were solubilized in SDS buffer, heated at 94°C and loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was run until each sample was just in the running gel, stained in CBB and the (non-resolved) protein band corresponding to the entire secretome was excised and processed for in-gel digestion.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 20 ms. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a max IT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mycobacterium tuberculosis CDC1551 FASTA file (4200 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings).   Protein quantitation Proteins were (label-free) quantified by spectral counting i.e. the sum of all MS/MS spectra for each identified protein. For quantitative analysis across samples, spectral counts for identified proteins in a sample were normalized to the sum of spectral counts for that sample. This gives the relative spectral count contribution of a protein to all spectral counts in the sample. When comparing different biological samples, these normalized spectral counts were used to calculate ratios. Differential analysis of samples was performed using the beta-binominal test, which takes into account within- and between-sample variations, giving fold-change values and associated p-values for all identified proteins. Protein cluster analysis was performed using hierarchical clustering in R. The protein abundances were normalized to zero mean and unit variance for each individual protein. Subsequently, the Euclidean distance measure was used for protein clustering.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis requires a large number of secreted and exported proteins for its virulence, immune modulation and nutrient uptake. Most of these proteins are transported by the different type&#x2009;VII secretion systems<sup>1,2</sup>. The most recently evolved type&#x2009;VII secretion system, ESX-5, secretes dozens of substrates belonging to the PE and PPE families, which are named for conserved proline and glutamic acid residues close to the amino&#x2009;terminus<sup>3,4</sup>. However, the role of these proteins remains largely elusive <sup>1</sup> . Here, we show that mutations of ppe38 completely block the secretion of two large subsets of ESX-5 substrates, that is, PPE-MPTR and PE_PGRS, together comprising &gt;80 proteins. Importantly, hypervirulent clinical M.&#x2009;tuberculosis strains of the Beijing lineage have such a mutation and a concomitant loss of secretion <sup>5</sup> . Restoration of PPE38-dependent secretion partially reverted the hypervirulence phenotype of a Beijing strain, and deletion of ppe38 in moderately virulent M.&#x2009;tuberculosis increased virulence. This indicates that these ESX-5 substrates have an important role in virulence attenuation. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that deletion of ppe38 occurred at the branching point of&#xa0;the 'modern' Beijing sublineage and is shared by Beijing outbreak strains worldwide, suggesting that this deletion may have contributed to their success and global distribution<sup>6,7</sup>.

### Keywords
Ppe38, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Secretome, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


