### Accession
PXD009005

### Title
Mouse spleen LC-MSMS: effects of age and immune challenge

### Description
Ageing is characterized by the progressive lowering of the acute innate immune response and the progressive up-regulation of low-grade inflammation (i.e. inflammaging). At the cellular level, telomeres are considered as a mark of ageing as their length is progressively shortened. However, the links between telomeres and innate immune ageing remain undefined. Using a proteomic approach conducted on laboratory mice, we tested whether the experimental triggering of an acute innate response is deleterious for telomere maintenance, and whether this is dependent of age. To do so, we challenged young and old mice using bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and measured individuals’ end-points of telomere length and proteomic profiles in spleen tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen spleen samples were grinded under liquid nitrogen for 1 minute at 25Hz using a Mixer Mill MM400 (Retsch, Eragny sur Oise, France), and proteins were extracted from the resulting powder using 4 µl of extraction buffer per mg of tissue. Extraction buffer was composed of 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% Chaps, and protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France). After sonication on ice (3 x 10 seconds, 135 watts), 7 volumes of cold acetone were added to samples that were kept at -20°C overnight. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (20 minutes, 4°C, 13500 x g), and dissolved in Laemmli buffer (10 mM Tris pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, 5% beta-mercaptoethanol, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol) after discarding supernatants. Total protein concentrations were determined using the RCDC Protein Assay kit from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA, USA). At this stage, a sample pool comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts was made, to be injected regularly during the whole experiment and thus allow QC-related measurements. 20 µg of proteins of each sample were electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE gels (12% polyacrylamide) for 75 minutes at 50 V. After protein fixation (50% ethanol, 3% phosphoric acid), gels were stained overnight using colloidal Coomassie Blue. For each lane, six 2 mm bands were excised, and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; 67 ng/band) at 37°C overnight after de-staining, reduction (10 mM DTT), alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide), and dehydration using a MassPrep station (Micromass, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were extracted using 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. Organic solvent was then eliminated using a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac, Savant, Thermoscientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and peptides were re-suspended in 90 µL of 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. A set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was finally added to each sample prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Samples were analysed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to an Impact HD Q-TOF mass spectrometer equipped with Captive Spray source and nanobooster (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). Both instruments were controlled by Hystar (v 3.2) and OtofControl (Rev 3.4, Bruker Daltonics). One µl of each sample was first loaded on a Symmetry C18 pre-column (0.18 x 20 mm, 5 µm particle size; Waters) using a mobile phase composed of 99% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 minutes, and peptides were then eluted at a flow rate of 450 nL/min using a UPLC separation column (BEH130 C18, 200 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm particle size; Waters) maintained at 60 °C with the following gradient: from 1% to 5% of B in 1 minute, then from 5% to 35% of B in 59 minutes. Samples were injected using a randomized sequence within block injections, each of them consisting of one biological replicate of each group plus sample pool. To reduce carry-over, both a column wash program (50% ACN during 20 min) and a solvent blank were included in between each sample. Peak intensities and retention times of reference peptides were monitored in a daily fashion.  The Impact HD was operated in positive ion mode using the following settings: source temperature was set to 150°C while dry gas flow was 3 L/min and spray voltage was optimized to -1300 V. Acetonitrile was used as dopant in the nanobooster and nebulizer pressure was set to 0.2 bar. Spectra were acquired by automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes in the mass range of 150-2200 m/z with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds. MS acquisition rate was set to 2 Hz and MS/MS acquisition rate ranged from 3 to 25 Hz depending on the precursor intensity. Preferably, ions with a charge of 2 to 5 were selected for CID fragmentation using nitrogen as collision gas. Ions were excluded from fragmentation after the acquisition of 1 MS/MS spectrum and exclusion was released after 1 minute, except when precursor intensity exceeded the value during the first selection by a factor of at least 3. Online correction of TOF calibration was performed using hexakis(2,2,3,3,-tetrafluoropropoxy)phosphazine ([M+H]+ 922.0098 m/z) as lock-mass.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8). Peak lists were searched against a Swiss-Prot-derived protein database created using the MSDA software suite (Carapito et al., 2014). The database contained Mus Musculus (TaxID 10090) protein sequences (November 2014; 16688 sequences) to which sequences of common contaminants (247 entries) were added using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant. Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins, a maximum number of one missed cleavage was tolerated, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were considered as variable modifications. The search window was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 40 ppm for fragment ions. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014) using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a one minute time window after retention time alignment. Only unmodified peptides were considered for quantification (except those for which a modified counterpart was detected) while shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Only proteins quantified with a minimum of two unique peptides and with at least four valid values per group as well as the ones “absent” (i.e. 0 valid values) in samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ageing is characterized by the impairment of the acute innate immune response and the upregulation of low-grade inflammation, i.e. inflammaging. At the cellular level, telomeres are considered as a marker of biological ageing as their length is progressively eroded in the absence of repair mechanisms. However, the link between telomeres and inflammaging remains underexplored. We aimed to identify proteins that are differentially expressed between age classes in response to an acute inflammatory challenge. We challenged young (two months) and old (12 months) C57BL/6 mice using bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and measured telomere length and proteomic profiles in splenocytes. In total, 233 out of the 1966 proteins we quantified differed among experimental groups. A hierarchical clustering analysis revealed that nine of those 233 proteins were differently expressed among the experimental groups. Young mice responded to LPS by increasing the expression of proteins involved in the innate immune response, and interestingly, in telomere length maintenance. However, this regulation was impaired at older ages. These results are in agreement with the assumption that the strength of selection declines with age, potentially explaining the maintenance of costly, dysregulated, immune responses at old age. We suggest that the immune response is competing with the telomere maintenance process, highlighting how telomeres reflect the ageing trade-off even in a species where telomere length is not related to lifespan.

### Keywords
Spleen, Lc-msms, Mouse, Ageing, Lps

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


