### Accession
PXD000746

### Title
Proteomics of Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystrophy support that the extracellular matrix of Descemet¹s membrane is Disordered

### Description
Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy is major corneal disorder in the western world affecting the innermost part of the cornea, which leads to visual impairment. The morphological changes observed in Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy is well described, however, much less in known of the pathology at the molecular level. As the morphological changes observed in the cornea is profound in the extracellular matrix we sought to determine in protein profiles and changes herein in the Descement’s membrane and endothelium layer of Fuchs’ endothelial conrneal dystrophy patients when compared to healthy control tissue. Using the extracted ion chromatogram label-free MS based quantification method we quantified approximately the 50 most abundant proteins of the Descemet’s membrane and endothelial layer in in patient and control tissue. In addition, using the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification MS method resulted in a total of 22 regulated proteins of which the majority were extracellular proteins known to be involved in proper assembly and modulation of the basement membrane in other tissues. Many of the regulated proteins were furthermore among the most abundant proteins quantified. The two MS methods performed here suggest altered arrangement of the extracellular matrix in Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy and provide new candidate proteins that may be involved in molecular mechanism of this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS – in-solution digest – Patient and control tissues were lyophilized for 10 h using a speedvac concentrator before subjection to 0.66 M CNBr in 70% trifluoroacetic acid overnight at 23°C. Then, tissues were lyophilized and re-suspended in 8 M Urea in 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, reduced in 15 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h, and alkylated in 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h. The samples were then diluted 5 times with 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, and digested overnight with 1:50 w/w sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C for 16 h in a final volume of 0.5 mL. The samples were desalted using POROS 50 R2 RP column material (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) packed in GELoader Tips (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  iTRAQ labeling and strong cation-exchange fractionation – Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) analysis was performed using 10 µg of in-solution digested sample from each patient and control. Samples were labeled with iTRAQ 4plex (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 1 hour and mixed according to figure 1, resulting in a total of five sets of 4plex experiments. A mixed sample containing 5 µg sample from each of the patients and controls was labeled with the iTRAQ 114-tag in all five experiments and used to normalize between experiments. Each 4plex experiment was diluted 10 times in buffer A (0.5% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile) and separated by strong cation exchange (SCX) using a PL-SCX 1000 Å 5 μm 20 × 2.1 mm column (Higgins Analytical, Rengstorff, CA, USA) equilibrated in buffer A and connected to an Ettan LC system (GE Healthcare, Wauwatosa, WI, USA) at a flow rate of 100 μL/min. The peptides were eluted using a 1% B/min linear gradient from buffer A to buffer B (0.5% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile containing 1 M NaCl) into 15 fractions. The samples were lyophilized and desalted using POROS 50 R2 material packed in GELoader tips. The desalted samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 12 μL 0.1% formic acid and stored at −20 °C.  LC-MS/MS analysis – LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with a NanoSpray III source (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6.0 control. The CNBr and trypsin cleaved samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, injected and trapped on a Biosphere C18 column (5 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm I.D; Nano Separations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands). Next, the peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm i.d.) packed in-house in a fritted silica tip (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA) with RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Marisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) connected in-line to the mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient from 5% to 35% phase B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile). The acquisition method used for the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) quantification was set up as a information-dependent acquisition (IDA) with 25 MS/MS spectra per cycle and a 1.6 sec cycle times using an exclusion window of 6 sec. For iTRAQ experiments the IDA settings were changed to 50 MS/MS per cycle using a 2.8 sec cycle time. Two iTRAQ experiments were performed on each 4plex set either with iTRAQ collision energy adjustment enabled or disabled.

### Data Protocol
XIC quantitation – All MS files were processed using Skyline v. 2.1.0.4936 (MacCoss Lab, University of Washington). The MS files were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX) and the "proteinpilot MGF" parameters. The peak lists were used to interrogate the Swiss-Prot (v. 2013_11, 541,762 sequences) Homo sapiens (20,279 sequences) database using Mascot 2.3.02. Trypsin was employed as enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and hydrozylation of proline were entered as variable modifications. The mass accuracy of the precursor and product ions were 10 ppm and 0.2 da, and the instrument setting was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF. The significance threshold (p) was set at 0.01 and the ion score expect cut-off at 0.005. Mascot dat result files were used to generate a spectral library in Skyline using the human sequences from Swiss-Prot as background proteome. Employing the same parameters as for the Mascot search, the three most abundant peptides for each protein were manually chosen from all peptides available in the spectral library. Proteins identified with less than 3 peptides were not included in the XIC assay. In addition, only peptides quantified with an idotp value≥ 90 were included for XIC quantification. This label-free quantification protocol relies on the average MS signal response for the three most intense tryptic peptides for each protein. The relative abundance and standard deviation of proteins quantified in a minimum of three of the technical replicates was calculated as the average MS intensity for the three peptides for each protein divided by the sum of the average signal for all quantified proteins in the sample. A student’s t-test (p=0.05) was applied to test the XIC data for significant regulated proteins between the FECD and control group. The student’s t-test and average protein amounts shown in table 1 was only calculated on proteins quantified in a minimum of six patients in the FECD group and a minimum of three individuals in the control group.  iTRAQ quantification – The collected iTRAQ MS files were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) and the "proteinpilot MGF" parameters. For each 4plex set the peak lists for the two iTRAQ experiments with different collision energy settings were merged and used to interrogate the Swiss-Prot (version 2013_11) Homo sapiens (20,279 sequences) database using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA). Trypsin was employed as enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification, hydroxylation of proline was entered as a variable modification and all methionine-containing peptides were neglected. The mass accuracy of the precursor and product ions were 10 ppm and 0.2 dalton, the instrument setting was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF, and the iTRAQ 4plex protocol was selected as quantitation method. The significance threshold (p) was set at 0.01, the ion score expect cut-off at 0.005, and all iTRAQ rations were normalized based on summed intensities. Mascot iTRAQ results were parsed using MS Data Miner v. 1.2.2 and only proteins quantified with a minimum of 3 unique peptides were included for further analysis. To find significantly regulated proteins, a student’s t-test with a significant threshold of 0.05 was performed for all proteins quantified in more than half of the biological replicates from each group (FECD and Controls) (Supplementary Table 2).

### Publication Abstract
Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a major corneal disorder affecting the innermost part of the cornea, leading to visual impairment. As the morphological changes in FECD are mainly observed in the extracellular matrix of the Descemet's membrane/endothelial layer, we determined the protein profiles of diseased and control tissues using two relative quantitation MS methods. The first quantitation method, based on the areas of the extracted ion chromatograms, quantified the 51 and 48 most abundant proteins of the Descemet's membrane/endothelial layer in patient and control tissues, respectively, of which 10 were significantly regulated. The results indicated that the level of type VIII collagen was unaltered even though the protein previously has been shown to be implicated in familial early-onset forms of the disease. Using the second relative quantitation method, iTRAQ, we identified 22 differentially regulated proteins, many of which are extracellular proteins known to be involved in proper assembly of the basement membrane in other tissues. In total, 26 differentially regulated proteins were identified, of which 6 proteins were regulated in both methods. These results support that the morphological changes observed in FECD are caused in part by an aberrant assembly of the extracellular matrix within the Descemet's membrane/endothelial layer.

### Keywords
Itraq quantification, Xic quantification, Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Johannes Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


