### Accession
PXD020556

### Title
Autophagy-mediated metabolic effects of aspirin

### Description
Aspirin caused a transient reduction of general protein acetylation in blood leukocytes, accompanied by the induction of autophagy. These effects on global protein acetylation could not be attributed to the mere inhibition of EP300, but most likely through the inhibition of other acetyltransferases. To investigate this possibility, we performed a quantitative label-free enriched acetylome analysis, search-ing for proteins that are deacetylated upon EP300 knockout and/or salicylate treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture sample preparation. Two million of HCT116 WT and EP300 KO cells were seeded in Petri dish (15 cm of diameter), grown for 4 days before treatment with 5 mM sodium salicylate for 6 hours, and then collected by scrape in PBS, obtained between 15 and 20 mg of protein per sample. The cell pellet was resuspended in 5 ml of urea 8 M, and sonicated 3x15 sec, power 30 % and centri-fuged at 80,000 g for 20 minutes at room temperature. Protein Digestion. Cell lysates (20 mg) were diluted in 8 M urea in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by protein reduction with 5 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37 °C. Reduced lysates were al-kylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted in 200 mM ABC to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin (CAT#: LS003750, Worthington) at a ratio of 1/50. Digested peptide lysates were acidi-fied with FA 50 % to a final concentration of 5 % FA. Samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm and desalted on a SEP PAK C18 cartridge (CAT#: WAT051910, Waters). Peptides were eluted with 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA, dried under vacuum (10 % was dried apart for proteomes analyses), and stored at -20 °C. Immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation was performed by the Cell Signaling kit (#13416S, PTM scan acetyl lysine motif), as indicated by the manufacturer's instructions, adjusting the pH at 6 with Tris 1.5 M. Peptides were eluted from beads with 0.15 % TFA, desalted over tips packed with Empo-re™ C18 Extraction Disks (3M™ Discs 2215) and eluted with 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA. Eluted peptides were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in injection buffer (2 % acetonitrile in 0.3 % TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. For proteome and acetylome analyses, LC was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) Uni-Prot database using Sequest-HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full) and a maximum of two miss cleavage sites were allowed for proteomes and three for acety-lomes. Oxidized methionine, Carbamidomethyl cysteines and N-terminal acetylation were set as varia-ble modifications and acetyl on lysine was added for the acetylome analyses. For both experiments, maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions, and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9 (Poullet, 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator (The, 2016) and was set to 1 % at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (Valot, 2011). For proteomes and acetylomes quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides between compared conditions (TopN matching for proteomes) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=3). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on a two-tailed T-test was performed and p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure. Proteins with at least three total peptides in all replicates, a 2-fold enrichment and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched in sample comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
Salicylate, the active derivative of aspirin (acetylsalicylate), recapitulates the mode of action of caloric restriction inasmuch as it stimulates autophagy through the inhibition of the acetyltransferase activity of EP300. Here, we directly compared the metabolic effects of aspirin medication with those elicited by 48&#x2009;h fasting in mice, revealing convergent alterations in the plasma and the heart metabolome. Aspirin caused a transient reduction of general protein acetylation in blood leukocytes, accompanied by the induction of autophagy. However, these effects on global protein acetylation could not be attributed to the mere inhibition of EP300, as determined by epistatic experiments and exploration of the acetyl-proteome from salicylate-treated EP300-deficient cells. Aspirin reduced high-fat diet-induced obesity, diabetes, and hepatosteatosis. These aspirin effects were observed in autophagy-competent mice but not in two different models of genetic (Atg4b<sup>-/-</sup> or Bcln1<sup>+/-</sup>) autophagy-deficiency. Aspirin also improved tumor control by immunogenic chemotherapeutics, and this effect was lost in T cell-deficient mice, as well as upon knockdown of an essential autophagy gene (Atg5) in cancer cells. Hence, the health-improving effects of aspirin depend on autophagy.

### Keywords
Aspirin, Cells hct wt and ep300 ko

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


