### Accession
PXD036821

### Title
The accessory protein ORF6 contributes to SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis by regulating host and viral gene expression

### Description
We generated a SARS-CoV-2 virus in the Wuhan background with a deletion of the Orf6 gene. We then performed mass spectrometry abundance proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Following the infection time course, cells in 6-well plates were washed quickly three times in ice cold 1x PBS. Next, cells were lysed in 500uL/well of 6M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma) in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and scraped with a cell spatula for complete collection of the sample. Samples were then boiled for 5 minutes at 95C to inactivate proteases, phosphatases, and virus. Samples were frozen at -80C and shipped from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai to UCSF on dry ice. Upon arrival, samples were thawed and samples were sonicated for 3x for 10 seconds at 20% amplitude. Insoluble material was pelleted by spinning samples at 13,000rpm for 10 minutes. Supernatant was transferred to a new protein lo-bind tube and protein was quantified using a Bradford assay. The entire sample (approximately 800ug of total protein) was subsequently processed for reduction and alkylation using a 1:10 sample volume of tris-(2-carboxyethyl) (TCEP) (10mM final) and 2-chloroacetamide (4.4mM final) for 5 minutes at 45°C with shaking. Prior to protein digestion, the 6M guanidine hydrochloride was diluted 1:6 with 100mM Tris-HCl pH8 to enable the activity of trypsin and LysC proteolytic enzymes, which were subsequently added at a 1:75 (wt/wt) enzyme-substrate ratio and placed in a 37°C water bath for 16-20 hours. Following digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample to a final pH ∼2. Samples were desalted under vacuum using 50mg Sep Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was activated with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated with 3 × 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Following sample loading, cartridges were washed with 4 × 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, and samples were eluted with 2 × 0.4 mL 50% ACN/0.25% formic acid (FA). Approximately 60μg of each sample was kept for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Thus, the same original sample was used for abundance proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis.   Phosphopeptide enrichment for phosphoproteomics IMAC beads (Ni-NTA from Qiagen) were prepared by washing 3x with HPLC water, incubating for 30 minutes with 50mM EDTA pH 8.0 to strip the Ni, washing 3x with HPLC water, incubating with 50mM FeCl3 dissolved in 10% TFA for 30 minutes at room temperature with shaking, washing 3x with and resuspending in 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using a King Flisher Flex. For a detailed protocol, please contact the authors. Phosphorylated peptides were found to make up between 89-97% of every sample, indicating high quality enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data from each run was analyzed using the directDIA Analysis function in Spectronaut version 15.6.211220.50606 (Rubin) by Biognosys (no spectral library used). Data was searched against proteomics for Homo sapiens and SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences. Data were searched using the default BGS settings, variable modification of methionine oxidation, static modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and filtering to a final 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide, peptide spectrum match (PSM), and protein level. Between run normalization was disabled and performed later using artMS.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) encodes several proteins that inhibit host interferon responses. Among these, ORF6 antagonizes interferon signaling by disrupting nucleocytoplasmic trafficking through interactions with the nuclear pore complex components Nup98-Rae1. However, the roles and contributions of ORF6 during physiological infection remain unexplored. We assessed the role of ORF6 during infection using recombinant viruses carrying a deletion or loss-of-function (LoF) mutation in ORF6. ORF6 plays key roles in interferon antagonism and viral pathogenesis by interfering with nuclear import and specifically the translocation of IRF and STAT transcription factors. Additionally, ORF6 inhibits cellular mRNA export, resulting in the remodeling of the host cell proteome, and regulates viral protein expression. Interestingly, the ORF6:D61L mutation that emerged in the Omicron BA.2 and BA.4 variants exhibits reduced interactions with Nup98-Rae1 and consequently impairs immune evasion. Our findings highlight the role of ORF6 in antagonizing innate immunity and emphasize the importance of studying the immune evasion strategies of SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Infection, Covid, Coronavirus, Phosphoproteomics, Covid-19, Orf6

### Affiliations
UCSF
Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology

### Submitter
Mehdi Bouhaddou

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology


