### Accession
PXD019725

### Title
Metabolic Changes Contribute to Melphalan Resistance in Multiple Myeloma

### Description
Multiple myeloma is an incurable hematological malignancy that impacts tens of thousands of people every year in the U.S. Treatment for eligible patients includes three stages: induction, consolidation with stem cell rescue, and maintenance. High dose therapy with the DNA alkylating agent, melphalan, remains the primary drug for consolidation therapy in conjunction with autologous stem cell transplant.  As a result, melphalan resistance remains a clinical challenge. Here, we use proteometabolomics to examine mechanisms of melphalan resistance in two cell line models. Drug metabolism, steady-state metabolomics, activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), acute treatment metabolomics, and immunoblotting analyses have allowed us to further elucidate metabolic processes contributing to melphalan resistance. Proteometabolomics data indicate that both drug resistant cells have higher levels of pentose phosphate pathway metabolites than their naïve counterparts. Interestingly, we also observed cell line specific changes in purine, pyrimidine and glutathione metabolism that are linked to the differences in steady state metabolism of naïve cells and highlight the heterogeneity of melphalan resistance in these models. Because of the diversity of metabolic changes, our data suggest that omics approaches will be needed to fully examine melphalan resistance in patient specimens and define personalized strategies to optimize the delivery of this therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Activity based protein profiling (ABPP) using desthiobiotinylating adenosine triphosphate (ATP) probes characterizes ATP-utilizing proteins (88310, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reactive probes are added to the cell lysates after depletion of endogenous ATP, which then bind to lysine residues near the ATP binding pocket of their target enzymes. Three biological replicates of each cell line were used, and each replicate was analyzed in duplicate with LC-MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS method consists of a 95-minute gradient mobile phase of A) aqueous 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid and B) 90% ACN/10% water with 0.1% formic acid on a C18 PepMap100 reversed phase column using a RSLCnano Ultra High-Performance Liquid Chromatograph and Q Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was achieved using MaxQuant 42 to search against human entries in the UniProt database (downloaded 12/2015 containing 20,150 entries) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and lysine desthiobiotinylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was initially set at 20 ppm with peptide FDR set to 0.05 to accommodate poorer tandem mass spectra of desthiobiotinylated peptides.  Tandem mass spectra for proteins of interest were visually inspected for manual confirmation of sequence assignments.  For upload to PRIDE/ProteomeXchange, the data were searched again with Mascot, using the same parameters described above.  Log2 transformation was used prior to statistical analysis. Iterative rank order normalization (IRON) is used to normalize metabolite and peptide signals of untargeted steady-state metabolomics, ABPP and acute treatment metabolomics data sets. Consistent differences in metabolites and labeled peptides selected by log2 ratio and p values were mapped and integrated to pathways manually. Pathway maps were adapted from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melphalan, Proteomics, Multiple myeloma, Lc-ms/ms, Abpp

### Affiliations
Malignant Hematology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Ken Shain, MD/PhD
Malignant Hematology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


