### Accession
PXD013332

### Title
Interactome of the autoimmune risk gene product ANKRD55

### Description
The ankyrin repeat domain-55 (ANKRD55) gene contains intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with risk to contract multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis or other autoimmune disorders. Risk alleles of these SNPs are associated with higher levels of ANKRD55 in CD4+ T cells. The biological function of ANKRD55 is unknown, but given that ankyrin repeat domains constitute one of the most common protein-protein interaction platforms in nature, it is likely to function in complex with other proteins. Thus, identification of its protein interactomes may provide clues. We identified ANKRD55 interactomes via recombinant overexpression in HEK293 or HeLa cells and mass spectrometry of individual co-purified bands or entire gel slabs with subtraction of mock interactomes.  148 specifically interacting proteins were found in total protein extracts and 22 in extracts of sucrose gradient-purified nuclei. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that the ANKRD55‐protein partners from total protein extracts were related to nucleotide and ATP binding, enriched in nuclear transport terms and associated with cell cycle and RNA, lipid and amino acid metabolism. The enrichment analysis of the ANKRD55‐protein partners from nuclear extracts is related to sumoylation, RNA binding, processes associated with cell cycle, RNA transport, nucleotide and ATP binding, among others. The interaction between overexpressed ANKRD55 isoform 001 and endogenous RPS3, the cohesins SMC1A and SMC3, CLTC, PRKDC, VIM, β-tubulin isoforms, and 14-3-3 isoforms were validated by western blot or confocal microscopy. We also identified three phosphorylation sites in ANKRD55, with S436 exhibiting the highest score as likely 14-3-3 binding phosphosite. Our study suggests that ANKRD55 may exert function(s) in the formation or architecture of multiple protein complexes, and is regulated by (de)phosphorylation reactions. Based on interactome and subcellular localization analysis, ANKRD55 is likely transported into the nucleus by the classical nuclear import pathway and is involved in mitosis, probably via effects associated with mitotic spindle dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel Tryptic Digestion – Immunoprecipitated samples were separated by SDS-PAGE on 6% or 10% gels and stained with Pierce Silver Staining kit or SYPRO Ruby Protein Gel Stain (both from Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Either selected protein bands from silver stained gels were excised, or entire lanes from SYPRO Ruby-stained gels were cut into ten contiguous pieces (done for both the ANKRD55 001 and control lanes). These gel slabs were then cut into small pieces and washed in Milli-Q water. Reduction and alkylation was achieved by incubation with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56ºC for 20 min, followed by incubation in iodoacetamide (IA, 50 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 min, in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 µg/mL, in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded; gel bands were covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight at 37ºC. After digestion, supernatant with digested peptides is recovered. aAcidic peptides were further extracted from the gel with TFA 0.1% and pooled first supernatant. Digested peptides were and ddried in a RVC2 25 SpeedVac concentrator (Christ). The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and sonicated for 5 min prior to their nano LC MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures obtained from trypsin digestion were separated by online nanoLC and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Peptide separation was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Approximately 40% of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm (Waters). The precolumn was connected to a BEH130 C18 column, 75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm (Waters) equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA, and peptides were eluted at 300 nl/min using a 60 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile directly onto the nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The 6 most intense ions were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Collision-energy applied to each peptide was automatically normalized as a function of the m/z and charge state. Analyzed peptides were excluded for further analysis during 30 s using dynamic exclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed using Mascot Search engine (Matrix Science) on Proteome Discoverer 1.2. software (Thermo Electron). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as variable modification, 10 ppm of peptide mass tolerance, and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance were adopted as search parameters. 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Spectra were searched against a UNIPROT/Swissprot database restricted to Homo sapiens. A false discovery rate estimation procedure was applied for peptide identification (FDR <1%). Proteins identified with at least two peptides passing that cutoff were considered for further discussion. For interactome analysis, three replicates were run for each sample type, and a spectral counting approach was carried out in order to select specifically enriched proteins. This approach relies on the counting of the MS/MS spectra matching to a certain protein (31). The comparison of this value for a certain protein in two different samples provides an idea of its putative differential abundance. In our case, proteins with an ANKRD55 IP/Negative Ctrl IP spectral count ratio >5 in 3/3 replicates were selected for further analysis and discussion. In order to determine the relative abundance of each protein in each of the samples, a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) approach was carried out (32). The spectral counts for a protein were normalized to its length and further expressed as a % of the total of normalized spectral counts present in that particular sample.

### Publication Abstract
The ankyrin repeat domain-55 (<i>ANKRD55</i>) gene contains intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with risk to contract multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis or other autoimmune disorders. Risk alleles of these SNPs are associated with higher levels of ANKRD55 in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. The biological function of ANKRD55 is unknown, but given that ankyrin repeat domains constitute one of the most common protein-protein interaction platforms in nature, it is likely to function in complex with other proteins. Thus, identification of its protein interactomes may provide clues. We identified ANKRD55 interactomes via recombinant overexpression in HEK293 or HeLa cells and mass spectrometry. One hundred forty-eight specifically interacting proteins were found in total protein extracts and 22 in extracts of sucrose gradient-purified nuclei. Bioinformatic analysis suggested that the ANKRD55-protein partners from total protein extracts were related to nucleotide and ATP binding, enriched in nuclear transport terms and associated with cell cycle and RNA, lipid and amino acid metabolism. The enrichment analysis of the ANKRD55-protein partners from nuclear extracts is related to sumoylation, RNA binding, processes associated with cell cycle, RNA transport, nucleotide and ATP binding. The interaction between overexpressed ANKRD55 isoform 001 and endogenous RPS3, the cohesins SMC1A and SMC3, CLTC, PRKDC, VIM, &#x3b2;-tubulin isoforms, and 14-3-3 isoforms were validated by western blot, reverse immunoprecipitaton and/or confocal microscopy. We also identified three phosphorylation sites in ANKRD55, with S436 exhibiting the highest score as likely 14-3-3 binding phosphosite. Our study suggests that ANKRD55 may exert function(s) in the formation or architecture of multiple protein complexes, and is regulated by (de)phosphorylation reactions. Based on interactome and subcellular localization analysis, ANKRD55 is likely transported into the nucleus by the classical nuclear import pathway and is involved in mitosis, probably via effects associated with mitotic spindle dynamics.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Ankrd55, Rheumatoid arthritis, Autoimmune, Ankyrin repeat

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform
Protemics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Zamudio, Spain

### Submitter
Felix Elortza

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Protemics Service, CIC bioGUNE, Zamudio, Spain


