### Accession
PXD016358

### Title
MiR-29 coordinates age-dependent plasticity brakes in the adult visual cortex

### Description
Visual cortical circuits show profound plasticity during early life and are later stabilized by molecular "brakes" limiting excessive circuit rewiring beyond a critical period. How the appearance of these factors is coordinated during the transition from development to adulthood remains unknown. We analyzed the role of miR-29a, a miRNA targeting factors involved in several important pathways for plasticity such as extracellular matrix and chromatin regulation. We found that visual cortical miR-29a expression in the visual cortex dramatically increases with age, but it is not experience-dependent. Precocious high levels of miR-29a induced by targeted intracortical injections of a miR-29a mimic blocked ocular dominance plasticity and caused an early appearance of perineuronal nets. Conversely, inhibition of miR-29a in adult mice using LNA antagomirs activated ocular dominance plasticity, reduced perineuronal net intensity and number, and changed their chemical composition restoring permissive low chondroitin 4-O-sulfation levels characteristic of juvenile mice. Activated adult plasticity had the typical functional and proteomic signature of juvenile plasticity. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies indicated that miR-29a manipulation regulates the expression of plasticity factors acting at different cellular levels, from chromatin regulation to synaptic organization and extracellular matrix remodeling. Intriguingly, the projection of miR-29a regulated gene dataset onto cell-specific transcriptomes revealed that parvalbumin-positive interneurons and oligodendrocytes were the most affected cells. Overall, miR29a is a master regulator of the age-dependent plasticity brakes promoting stability of visual cortical circuits.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, tissues were lysed (4% SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH8, 1mM EDTA, 100 mM DTT) by sonication using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) with 10 cycles 60 sec ON/ 30 sec OFF at the highest setting at 20 °C. Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested with LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using a Waters Oasis HLB µElution Plate. Peptides were spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo). Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping and an analytical column. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to the MS using the Proxeon nanospray source. Data acquisition was performed as follows: one full scan MS spectrum was followed by DIA scans that were acquired with variable mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. For sample specific spectral library generation, pools of samples of the different conditions were analyzed additionally by Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA), using the same gradients as for the DIA analyses.

### Data Protocol
Both types of data (DIA and DDA) were included in the library generation (DpD). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01, 16,747 entries) using the Pulsar search engine (Biognosys AG) inside Spectronaut 12.0.20491.0.21234 (Bruderer et al., 2017). Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification were performed in Spectronaut using default settings. Peptide and protein level FDR for DIA data were controlled to 1% (Rosenberger et al., 2017). Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level.

### Publication Abstract
Visual cortical circuits show profound plasticity during early life and are later stabilized by molecular "brakes" limiting excessive rewiring beyond a critical period. The mechanisms coordinating the expression of these factors during the transition from development to adulthood remain unknown. We found that miR-29a expression in the visual cortex dramatically increases with age, but it is not experience-dependent. Precocious high levels of miR-29a blocked ocular dominance plasticity and caused an early appearance of perineuronal nets. Conversely, inhibition of miR-29a in adult mice using LNA antagomirs activated ocular dominance plasticity, reduced perineuronal nets, and restored their juvenile chemical composition. Activated adult plasticity had the typical functional and proteomic signature of critical period plasticity. Transcriptomic and proteomic studies indicated that miR-29a manipulation regulates the expression of plasticity brakes in specific cortical circuits. These data indicate that miR-29a is a regulator of the plasticity brakes promoting age-dependent stabilization of visual cortical connections.

### Keywords
Visual cortex, Age-dependent plasticity, Mir-29

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.  Bio@SNS, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute 

### Submitter
Erika Kelmer Sacramento

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Cellerino
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany.  Bio@SNS, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy.


