### Accession
PXD033243

### Title
Deep proteogenomics of a unicellular cyanobacterium

### Description
Cyanobacteria are photoautotrophs that profoundly impact the biogeochemical cycles on Earth. Due to their photosynthetic lifestyle that includes the fixation of atmospheric CO2, they are of increasing interest for a sustainable economy. Knowledge of protein expression and regulation is key for understanding of the cyanobacterial metabolism; however, proteome studies in cyanobacteria are still limited and cover only a fraction of the theoretical proteome. Here, we performed a proteogenomic analysis of 628 LC-MS/MS measurements for the unicellular model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 to characterize the expressed (phospho)proteome, re-annotate known and discover potential novel open reading frames (ORFs). By mapping extensive shotgun MS proteomics data generated by the SCyCode consortium onto a six-frame translation of the Synechocystis genome, we re-annotated 96 start sites and discovered 103 novel open reading frames (ORFs). Through re-analysis of previously published multi-omics datasets, we confirmed 48 re-annotated or novel ORFs with high confidence. Our study resulted in the largest reported proteome and phosphoproteome dataset for Synechocystis, covering expression of about 80% of the theoretical proteome and 642 O-phosphorylation events under various cultivation conditions, such as nitrogen or carbon limitation. This dataset will serve as a resource providing dedicated information on condition-dependent protein expression and phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For our proteogenomics analysis of Synechocystis, we used the extensive MS-proteomics data generated by the SCyCode consortium. The respective samples originated from a range of cultivation conditions, from vegetative growth to nutrient starvation, and from various experimental backgrounds, such as validation or pilot measurements and global (phospho)proteome or protein-interactome studies. Protein were extracted and prepared through different proteolytic digestions and peptide labelling strategies. Peptide samples were subsequently measured on nano-HPLCs coupled to high-resolution and high mass accuracy Orbitrap mass spectrometers (LC-MS/MS). For each dataset, the detailed information on the experimental background and analysis parameters are available in Table S1.

### Data Protocol
Data processing strategy for the SCyCode dataset consisted of two separate processings. For the proteogenomic processing (novel ORFs identification), acquired MS spectra (628 LC-MS/MS runs) were processed with MaxQuant and Andromeda software suite (30,31). Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 obtained from NCBI RefSeq (3,669 protein sequences), ORFs translated from all six frames of Synechocystis genome (339,533 ORF sequences) and commonly observed laboratory contaminants (245 entries). For the state-of-the-art quantitative processing (proteome and phosphorylome), all 628 LC-MS/MS runs were re-processed identically with MaxQuant software, with the exception that the six-frame ORFs database was reduced to 280 entries, which were identified in the proteogenomic processing.  Parameters that were common to both processings are detailed below. Trypsin or chymotrypsin were chosen as endoproteases. When appropriate, dimethyl-labelling of lysine (Lys0, Lys4, Lys8) and N-terminal (N-term0, N-term4, N-term8) were defined as label in group-specific parameters. Oxidation of methionine residue, protein N-terminal acetylation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were specified as a variable modification (when appropriate). Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was defined as a fixed modification. A minimum of one peptide was required for quantification (to allow identification of novel ORFs). A false discovery rate of 1 % was applied at the peptide, protein and phosphorylated site levels individually.

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria, the evolutionary ancestors of plant chloroplasts, contribute substantially to the Earth's biogeochemical cycles and are of great interest for a sustainable economy. Knowledge of protein expression is the key to understanding cyanobacterial metabolism; however, proteome studies in cyanobacteria are limited and cover only a fraction of the theoretical proteome. Here, we performed a comprehensive proteogenomic analysis of the model cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 to characterize the expressed (phospho)proteome, re-annotate known and discover novel open reading frames (ORFs). By mapping extensive shotgun mass spectrometry proteomics data onto a six-frame translation of the <i>Synechocystis</i> genome, we refined the genomic annotation of 64 ORFs, including eight completely novel ORFs. Our study presents the largest reported (phospho)proteome dataset for a unicellular cyanobacterium, covering the expression of about 80% of the theoretical proteome under various cultivation conditions, such as nitrogen or carbon limitation. We report 568 phosphorylated S/T/Y sites that are present on numerous regulatory proteins, including the transcriptional regulators cyAbrB1 and cyAbrB2. We also catalogue the proteins that have never been detected under laboratory conditions and found that a large portion of them is plasmid-encoded. This dataset will serve as a resource, providing dedicated information on growth condition-dependent protein expression and phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Small proteins, Stress acclimation, Cyanobacteria, Primary metabolism, Photosynthesis, Protein phosphorylation, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Quantitative proteomics University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Quantitative proteomics University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


