### Accession
PXD003737

### Title
An optimised fragmentation regime for cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Description
In this study we compared three different fragmentation techniques and two combined fragmentation schemes available on a novel tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Themro Fisher Scientific) CID, HCD, ETD, ETD with supplemental CID (ETciD) and ETD with supplemental HCD (EThcD) on cross-linked peptides obtained by tryptic cleavage of SDA-cross-linked Human Serum Albumin (HSA). The three-dimensional structure of HSA has been resolved by X-ray crystallography [35] and is used as ground-truth to evaluate the identification results. Right choice of the fragmentation method allows increasing the number of identified linkage sites, increasing the sequence coverage of both linked peptides thereby reducing the second peptide problem, and increasing the precision of cross-link site calling.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 8 µm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems) (Ishihama, Y. et al. 2002, J. Chrom. A). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% water. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 2% B at 500 nl/min flow rate and eluted at 200 nl/min flow rate with a linear gradient of 2%-40% B over 139 min. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were analyzed using a “high/high” acquisition strategy, detecting at high resolution in the Orbitrap and analyzing the subsequent fragments also in the Orbitrap. Survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution. Spectra for all fragmentation methods were acquired using a scan range of 300-1700 m/z. Precursor ion isolation was performed with the quadrupole and an m/z window of 1.6 Th. The precursor automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 4e5, maximum injection time 50 ms. For CID only, CID collision energy was set to 30%. For HCD only, HCD collision energy was set to 35%. For ETD only, the option to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was selected (anion AGC 5e4, 60 ms maximum injection time). Supplemental activation (SA) collision energy was set to 10% for ETciD, and 25% for EThcD.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were pre-processed with MaxQuant (v. 1.5.2.8) to benefit from the implemented precursor correction and perform noise filtering on the MS2 level (“Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” set to 100) [36]. Resulting peak files (APL format) were subjected to Xi (ERI Edinburgh, v. 1.5.584) and searched with the following settings: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; max. missed cleavages, 4; max. number of modifications, 3; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation on methionine; cross-linker: SDA (mass modification: 109.0396 Da). In addition, variable modifications by the hydrolysed cross-linker (“SDA-hyd”, mass modification: 82.0413 Da) and loop-links (“SDA-loop”, mass modification: 83.0491 Da) were allowed. SDA cross-link reactions were assumed to connect Lysine, Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine or the protein N-terminus on the one end of the spacer with any other amino acid on the other end. The target-database consisted of the single protein sequence of HSA (Uniprot: P02768). False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using XiFDR (v. 1.0.6.14) (submitted) on a 5% peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and 5% link-level only including unique PSMs. The reference database consisted of a single entry with the protein sequence of HSA (Uniprot: P02768). For further analysis, PSM information (precursor m/z, annotated fragments, score, peptide sequences, etc.) were extracted from a local PostgreSQL database.  To derive a decision tree for an optimized fragmentation schema for cross-linked peptides we divided the acquisition range into a grid of m/z bins of size 200 for each charge state from 3 to 7. After sorting all CLPSMs into this theoretical grid we assigned each cell the best performing and second best performing fragmentation method. The performance was assessed through the median achieved sequence coverage of the complete cross-linked peptide. Note, sequence coverage does not depend on the possible fragment ions but rather on the actual presence of a specific n-terminal or c-terminal sequence. To decide whether or not a fragmentation method is favourable over another we conducted a simple, one-sided permutation test [37] with label swaps and 10.000 iterations. P-values lower than 0.05 were regarded as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry has evolved into a robust technology that reveals structural insights into proteins and protein complexes. We leverage a new tribrid instrument with improved fragmentation capacities in a systematic comparison to identify which fragmentation method would be best for the identification of cross-linked peptides. Specifically, we explored three fragmentation methods and two combinations: collision-induced dissociation (CID), beam-type CID (HCD), electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), ETciD, and EThcD. Trypsin-digested, SDA-cross-linked human serum albumin (HSA) served as a test sample, yielding over all methods and in triplicate analysis in total 2602 matched PSMs and 1390 linked residue pairs at 5% false discovery rate, as confirmed by the crystal structure. HCD wins in number of matched peptide-spectrum-matches (958 PSMs) and identified links (446). CID is most complementary, increasing the number of identified links by 13% (58 links). HCD wins together with EThcD in cross-link site calling precision, with approximately 62% of sites having adjacent backbone cleavages that unambiguously locate the link in both peptides, without assuming any cross-linker preference for amino acids. Overall quality of spectra, as judged by sequence coverage of both peptides, is best for EThcD for the majority of peptides. Sequence coverage might be of particular importance for complex samples, for which we propose a data dependent decision tree, else HCD is the method of choice. The mass spectrometric raw data has been deposited in PRIDE (PXD003737).

### Keywords
Etd, Cross-linking, Ethcd, Hcd, Etcid, Cid

### Affiliations
Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany,  2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom; ( lab head )

### Submitter
Sven Giese

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany,  2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom; ( lab head )


