### Accession
PXD031921

### Title
Multi-Omics Analysis to Characterize Molecular Adaptation of Entamoeba histolytica during Serum Stress

### Description
Entamoeba histolytica is a human pathogen, responsible for amoebic dysentery and invasive extraintestinal disease. The parasite faces several types of stress within the host, and to establish a successful infection it must generate a robust adaptive response against host defense mechanisms. In order to obtain comprehensive information of gene expression changes in E. histolytica under growth stress, we have (1) optimized the proteomics protocol to increase the protein coverage in E. histolytica, and (2) integrated proteomic data with transcriptomic analysis under the same conditions. We have applied this approach to better understand the cellular response during serum-starvation. Label-free quantitative proteomics was performed, and compared with mRNA levels based on RNA-seq data to decipher regulation at translational and transcriptional levels. Across all samples, 2344 proteins were identified, which is an improvement over the maximum recorded number in E. histolytica proteomic studies so far. A total of 127 proteins were found to be differentially expressed and associated with functions including antioxidant activity, cytoskeleton, translation, catalysis, and transport, which revealed proteomic signatures to distinguish serum-starved from normal trophozoites. Gal/GalNAc-inhibitable lectin, Lgls, Hgl3 and Igl were repeatedly identified as significantly altered in serum-stress condition. Further, integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed instances of post-transcriptional regulation. Six highly expressed transcripts had low corresponding protein expression, indicating translational repression. Conversely, eleven transcripts showed much greater downregulation compared with their corresponding proteins, indicating translational induction, or increased stability of these proteins during serum stress in E. histolytica. This multi-omics approach enables more refined gene expression analysis that would not be possible at the mRNA or protein levels alone. Our study provides important data to further understand the adaptive response of E. histolytica to growth stress.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite culture and maintenance: E. histolytica trophozoites of HM1: IMSS strain (cl-6) and all transformed strains were grown and maintained axenically in TYI-S-33 medium supplemented with 15% adult bovine serum, 1X Diamond’s vitamin mix and antibiotic (125 μl of 250 U/ml Benzyl Penicillin and 0.25 mg/ml Streptomycin per 100 ml of medium) at 35.5°C [16]. For serum starvation, mid log phase trophozoites were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in medium containing 0.5% serum. Replenishment was achieved by decanting total media after indicated time period and filled with complete TYI-S-33 medium for indicated time periods.  Cell harvest and preparation of cell lysates:  Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 500 x g at room temperature for 5 min. and washed twice with PBS (phosphate buffered saline, pH 7.4) to remove residual serum components then quickly resuspended in lysis buffer-[6M Guanidium hydrochloride in 100mM Tris buffer (pH 8.5) and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (2mM AEBSF, 20M leupeptin, 25mM N-Ethylmaleimide, 5mM PHMB, 100M E-64, 1x PhosSTOP, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor with 2mM EDTA, 2mM Na3VO4, 100mM NaF, 10mM iodoacetamide, 5mM EGTA)] at 95°C for 10 min, then centrifuge at 13000g for 5 min to pellet down the debris. The supernatant was aliquoted and store at -80C and quantification done by BCA. 100g of the all-conditions sample was first reduced with 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and further alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide. The treated samples were digested with trypsin (1:50, trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16h at 37C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge (Nest Group, USA) according to manufacturer protocol and dried using a speed vac. The dried peptide pellet was resuspended in 100l buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and stored at -20 degree till further analysis Mass Spectrometry and Chromatography  Chromatographic separation and mass spectrometric analysis were performed with a nano-UHPLC chromatography system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer Thermo Scientific) through a Nano-Flex nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid/5% acetonitrile in water (Buffer-A) and 0.1% formic acid/95%acetonitrile (Buffer-B). 1 μg of peptide was injected onto a C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm ID, self packed picofrit column, New Objective, USA and peptides were eluted using gradient as follows: Buffer B, 5% for 5 min, 5% to 15% for 80 min, 15% to 35% for 70 min, 35% to 60% for 10 min, 60% to 95% for 6 min, 95% for 6min, 95% to 5% for 3min, 5% for 5min for total run time of 180 min, All of the LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur, version 2.7 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scans (m/z 350–1700) (MS) were acquired in the positive mode of Orbitrap at 70,000 resolutions in profile mode, followed by top ten higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation centroid MS/MS spectra, acquired at 17500 resolution in data-dependent analyses (DDA) mode. The automatic gain control targets for the Orbitrap were 3 × 106 for the MS scans and 2 × 105 for MS/MS scans. The maximum injection times for the MS1 and MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap were 50 and 80 ms respectively. For MS/MS acquisition, the following settings were used: scan range (m/z 200–2000), Intensity threshold = 6 × 103; isolation width = 1.6 Da; normalized collision energy = 27%. Monoisotopic precursor selection, charge-state screening, and charge-state rejection were enabled, with the rejection of singly charged and unassigned charge states. Dynamic exclusion was used to remove selected precursor ions for 20sec after MS/MS acquisition. The following ion source parameters were used: capillary temperature 275 °C, source voltage 2.3 kV, max. spray current 50 μA, and S-lens RF level 50%.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant version 1.4.1.2 was used to process raw files. Default settings were used unless otherwise specified. The E.histolytica Uniprot reference proteome containing 8404 protein entries was used for database search. All the biological replicates were defined in different groups and the searches were performed at precursor mass accuracy of 20 ppm and MS/MS accuracy of 0.5 Da. The PSMs and peptides were filtered at 1% PSM FDR, and proteins were filtered at 1% protein FDR. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethyl for cysteine, and variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation and N- terminal acetylation. Matches between runs were enabled with a default match time window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min. The detailed txt files generated as Maxquant result output was used for downstream analysis.  Bioinformatic analysis All the protein and peptides identified with 1% FDR stringency in various biological replicates were analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0), BioVenn software for Venn diagram construction. Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment of candidate DEPs were analyzed using up-regulated DEPs and down-regulated DEPs, respectively, using multiple online databases and software: DAVID v6.7 (https://david-d.ncifcrf.gov/)[17], PANTHER v13.1 (www.pantherdb.org)[18], and STRING 10.0 (http://string-db.org)[19], for obtaining direct and indirect protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, PPI constructed by STRING 10.0 was visualized by Cytoscape v 3.8.2, software used for biological network visualization, data integration and interactive network generation.   Statistical Analysis Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus software as per preferred procedure. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed to render the data normally distributed. All the proteins identified by site, reverse, and potential contaminants were filtered prior to further analysis. Proteins with missing values present more than one biological replicates in each group were filtered. Before applying z-score normalization, missing values were imputed by normal distribution at width 0.3, down shift 1.8, and mode separately for each column. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a moderated t test statistic with the 5% FDR and the s0 parameter was set to 0.1. Multiple test correction was done using a permutation-based randomization procedure where values are randomly shuffled to generate a “null” distribution to estimate the random type one error, or false detection rate, with 250 randomizations.

### Publication Abstract
Entamoeba histolytica is responsible for dysentery and extraintestinal disease in humans. To establish successful infection, it must generate adaptive response against stress due to host defense mechanisms. We have developed a robust proteomics workflow by combining miniaturized sample preparation, low flow-rate chromatography, and ultra-high sensitivity mass spectrometry, achieving increased proteome coverage, and further integrated proteomics and RNA-seq data to decipher regulation at translational and transcriptional levels. Label-free quantitative proteomics led to identification of 2344 proteins, an improvement over the maximum number identified in E. histolytica proteomic studies. In serum-starved cells, 127 proteins were differentially abundant and were associated with functions including antioxidant activity, cytoskeleton, translation, catalysis, and transport. The virulence factor, Gal/GalNAc-inhibitable lectin subunits, was significantly altered. Integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data revealed that only 30% genes were coordinately regulated at both transcriptional and translational levels. Some highly expressed transcripts did not change in protein abundance. Conversely, genes with no transcriptional change showed enhanced protein abundance, indicating post-transcriptional regulation. This multi-omics approach enables more refined gene expression analysis to understand the adaptive response of E. histolytica during growth stress.

### Keywords
Adaptive response, E.histolytica, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Ashoka University, Rajiv Gandhi Education City  Sonipat, Haryana, India – 131029
VProteomics

### Submitter
gagan jhingan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sudha Bhattacharya, Ph.D.
Ashoka University, Rajiv Gandhi Education City  Sonipat, Haryana, India – 131029


