### Accession
PXD026898

### Title
Nuclear condensates of p300 formed though the structured catalytic core can act as a storage pool of p300 with reduced HAT activity

### Description
The transcriptional co-activator and acetyltransferase p300 is required for fundamental cellular processes, including differentiation and growth. Here, we report that p300 forms phase separated condensates in the cell nucleus. The phase separation ability of p300 is regulated by autoacetylation and relies on its catalytic core components, including the HAT domain, the autoinhibition loop, and bromodomain. p300 condensates sequester chromatin components, such as histone H3 tail and DNA, and are amplified through binding of p300 to the nucleosome. The catalytic HAT activity of p300 is decreased due to occlusion of the active site in the phase separated droplets, a large portion of which co-localizes with chromatin regions enriched in H3K27me3. Our findings suggest a model in which p300 condensates can act as a storage pool of the protein with reduced HAT activity, allowing p300 to be compartmentalized and concentrated at poised or repressed chromatin regions.

### Sample Protocol
Auto-acetylated purified P300 was deacetylated with a sirtuin, P300 was digested with LysC/Trypsin and analyzed via LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles were searched with MaxQuant allowing for 7 missed cleavages and acetyl-lysine as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional co-activator and acetyltransferase p300 is required for fundamental cellular processes, including differentiation and growth. Here, we report that p300 forms phase separated condensates in the cell nucleus. The phase separation ability of p300 is regulated by autoacetylation and relies on its catalytic core components, including the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, the autoinhibition loop, and bromodomain. p300 condensates sequester chromatin components, such as histone H3 tail and DNA, and are amplified through binding of p300 to the nucleosome. The catalytic HAT activity of p300 is decreased due to occlusion of the active site in the phase separated droplets, a large portion of which co-localizes with chromatin regions enriched in H3K27me3. Our findings suggest a model in which p300 condensates can act as a storage pool of the protein with reduced HAT activity, allowing p300 to be compartmentalized and concentrated at poised or repressed chromatin regions.

### Keywords
P300 nuclear condensates hat activity

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Boulder
Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

### Submitter
Christopher Ebmeier

### Lab Head
Dr Tatiana Kutateladze
Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA


