### Accession
PXD019577

### Title
Confirmation of recombinant Calcium-activated potassium channel from Leishmania donovani

### Description
Calcium-activated potassium channels are important membrane proteins that help in maintaining the cellular physiology and cell signalling. Till date no Calcium-activated potassium channels have been identified in Leishmania donovani. It’s gene was cloned into pET vector and expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3). The recombinant protein was purified using nickel affinity chromatography.

### Sample Protocol
The elutions containing the purified protein was run on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel and stained using Coomassie blue dye. Upon de-staining  and through washing with ultrapure water, the desired band was cut out using a clean scalpel. The gel sample was then digested with trypsin using the Trypsin In-Gel Digestion Kit (Sigma). The obtained solution was concentrated using C18 Zip-Tips and subjected to MALDI TOF MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
A list of tentative peptides that might be obtained upon digestion with Trypsin was obtained by analysis the protein sequence with PeptideMass Tool. The peak list data obtained from the MALDI MS/MS experiment was compared to the list of tentative peptides. The raw file was analysed using MS/MS ion search in MASCOT server and it matched with a mouse membrane protein, Tetraspanin-17.

### Publication Abstract
Visceral Leishmaniasis is a major neglected tropical disease with increasing incidences of drug resistance. This has led to the search for a suitable drug target for chemotherapeutic intervention. Potassium channels are a family of membrane proteins which play a vital role in homeostasis and any perturbation in them alters cell survival which makes them an attractive target. To characterize a calcium-activated potassium channel from Leishmania donovani (LdK<sub>Ca</sub>), a putative ion-channel like protein which showed sequence similarity with other Trypanosoma cruzi putative potassium channels was selected. It was cloned and expressed with a histidine tag. MALDI confirmed that it is a potassium channel. Homology model of LdK<sub>Ca</sub> was generated by I-TASSER. It is a transmembrane protein localized in the plasma membrane as predicted by DeepLoc tool. In silico analyses of the protein showed that it is a small conductance calcium activated potassium channel. Point mutation in conserved signature domain 'TXGYGD' affects the protein function as predicted by heat map analysis. The LdK<sub>Ca</sub> model predicted amino acids S207, T208 and M236 as ligand-binding sites. The sequence HSLRGRSARVIQLAWRLRKARKVGPHAPSLKQKVYTLVLSWLLT was the highest scoring B-cell epitope. The highest scoring T-cell epitope was RLYSVIVYL. This study may provide new insights into antigenicity features of leishmanial calcium-activated potassium channels.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Calcium-activated potassium channel, Ion-channel

### Affiliations
Asst. Professor (Department of Biotechnology), National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali-160062, Punjab. (India)
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, S.A.S. Nagar

### Submitter
ANINDITA PAUL

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sushma Singh
Asst. Professor (Department of Biotechnology), National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali-160062, Punjab. (India)


