### Accession
PXD018843

### Title
Prm2 deficiency triggers a Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)-mediated destruction cascade during epididymal sperm maturation in mice

### Description
MTD project_description Protamines are testis-specific proteins, which replace the majority of histones during spermiogenesis. This results in a hypercondensation of the sperm DNA, finally causing a conformational change from a nucleosomal chromatin structure into a mainly toroid like structure. This is assumed to protect the paternal genome and to contribute to the formation of a hydrodynamic sperm head shape. In mice and humans, two protamines, Protamine 1 (Prm1) and Protamine 2 (Prm2), are expressed. Impaired sperm protamination has been repeatedly correlated with male subfertility in mice and humans. Apart from defects in DNA condensation and impaired DNA integrity, protamine-deficient human and murine sperm show multiple secondary defects, which cannot be explained by the chromosomal function of protamines. These include impaired sperm motility, decreased viability as well as acrsosomal malformations. In this study, we utilized a Prm2-deficient mouse model to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms of these defects. Since trancription is silenced upon incorporation of protamines, we used LC-MS in combination with label-free quantification to compare the sperm proteome of Prm2-deficient (Prm2-/-) males with the proteome of wildtype (Prm2+/+) and Prm2 heterozygous (Prm2+/-) males. We show that Prm2 deficient mice display a strongly altered proteomic profile compared to controls. Of note, a significant downregulation of proteins SOD1 and PRDX5, which have a well-known function for the detoxification of reactive oxygen species was observed. Thus, together with a series of additional experiments, we could for the first time show that Prm2-deficiency triggers a reactive oxygen species (ROS) mediated sperm destruction cascade during epididymal sperm maturation, finally causing described secondary sperm defects.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation from tissue Fresh tissue samples were taken up in RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Cambridge, UK) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™ ULTRA, Roche, Basel, Suisse) and minced in a glass dounce homogenizer. Samples were sonicated (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 5 min at 30 sec intervals after incubation on ice for 15 min. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14.000 rpm, 30 min, 4°C). Protein concentrations were quantified using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).   Protein isolation from sperm Isolated sperm were washed once with PBS containing protease inhibitors and pelleted by centrifugation (800 g, 7 min, RT). Next, sperm were dissolved in H2O supplemented with protease inhibitors to induce lysis of contaminating non-sperm cells (e.g. blood cells) by hypotonic shock. Sperm pellets were dissolved in RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling Technology) (10 µl per 1x106 sperm) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail and 100 mM DTT. Following incubation on ice for 30 min, samples were sonified for 5 min in 30 sec intervals using the Bioruptor sonication device. Samples were diluted in Roti®-Load 1 and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (14.000 rpm, 4°C). Protein concentrations were quantified using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Reagent supplemented with Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent according to the 96-well microplate procedure of the manufacturer’s protocol assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass Spectrometry Following separation of protein extracts by SDS-PAGE, protein gels were shortly washed with ddH2O and stained with colloidal Coomassie overnight at RT. Gels were washed twice with 1% (v/v) acetate in ddH2O and protein lanes were cut into 12 fractions according to their molecular weight. Each fraction was further chopped into squares of around 1 mm2, transferred to protein low-binding tubes and fixed with 150 µl 50% (v/v) MeOH. The fixation solution was replaced by 150 µl destaining solution, followed by incubation for 20 min at 37°C under vigorous shaking. The destaining step was repeated 2-3x until gel pieces appeared clear and gel slices were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. In-gel digestion of proteins was performed with trypsin solution followed by separation of peptides by liquid chromatography (LC) in a gradient using HSS-T3 analytical columns (1.8 µm particle, 75 µm x 150 mm) in combination with the nanoAcquity LC pump system. Peptides were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described (Ren et al. 2019, doi 10.1186/s13068-019-1522-8).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS data were searched against the mouse reference proteome from Uniprot (2019/05) and a contaminants database (cRAP, Mellacheruvu, D et al. 2013). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage were searched. Propionamidylation of cysteines was set as static modification. Oxidation (Met) and acetylation (protein N-termini) were allowed as dynamic modification. Mascot results were evaluated by the percolator algorithm (The, M. et al.2016)  version 3.02.1 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications above q-value 0.01 were sent to a second round of database search with semi-tryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Propionamide and carbamidomethyl were set as additional dynamic cysteine modification. 362,449 peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified with high confidence out of 1,789,702 spectra. 26,084 peptide groups of 7432 proteins were included. These were assigned to 3046 distinguishable protein groups. 2,591,992 features were considered for quantification. Actual FDR values of the whole dataset were 0.4%, 1.0%, and 7.3% for PSMs, peptides, and proteins, respectively. Protein quantification and statistical evaluation were performed in R environment (version 3.5.2 on the PSM level data, exported from Protein Discoverer. First, low quality data, including ambiguous peptides matching to more than one protein and proteins detected by a single peptide only were removed from the dataset. Next, the data were variance-stabilized and transformed using Variance Stabilizing Normalization (VSN, Huber, W. et al., 2002). Protein abundances were calculated for each replicate by summarizing measurements of all peptides linked to the respective protein using Tukey´s median polish procedure. To decipher the overall structure within the dataset, PCA analysis was performed using the R-package FactoMineR (Le, S. et al., 2008). For statistical analyses, comparative analyses between different sample groups were performed using moderated t-test from the R-package Limma (version 3.40.2) (Ritchie, ME. et al. 2015) The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) smaller than 0.05 and an absolute fold-change greater than 1 were considered to be significantly differentially regulated. Plots and heatmaps were generated utilizing the published R-packages ggplot2 and Complex heatmaps (Wickham, H. 2016, Gu, Z. et al. 2016)

### Publication Abstract
Protamines are the safeguards of the paternal sperm genome. They replace most of the histones during spermiogenesis, resulting in DNA hypercondensation, thereby protecting its genome from environmental noxa. Impaired protamination has been linked to male infertility in mice and humans in many studies. Apart from impaired DNA integrity, protamine-deficient human and murine sperm show multiple secondary effects, including decreased motility and aberrant head morphology. In this study, we use a Protamine<i>-2</i> (<i>Prm2</i>)-deficient mouse model in combination with label-free quantitative proteomics to decipher the underlying molecular processes of these effects. We show that loss of the sperm's antioxidant capacity, indicated by downregulation of key proteins like Superoxide dismutase type 1 (SOD1) and Peroxiredoxin 5 (PRDX5), ultimately initiates an oxidative stress-mediated destruction cascade during epididymal sperm maturation. This is confirmed by an increased level of 8-OHdG in epididymal sperm, a biomarker for oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage. <i>Prm2</i>-deficient testicular sperm are not affected and initiate the proper development of blastocyst stage preimplantation embryos in vitro upon intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) into oocytes. Our results provide new insight into the role of <i>Prm2</i> and its downstream molecular effects on sperm function and present an important contribution to the investigation of new treatment regimens for infertile men with impaired protamination.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Protamine2 deficient, Male, Proteome, Epididymal sperm

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Hubert Schorle
Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Germany


