### Accession
PXD028880

### Title
Extending the range of SLIM-labeling applications: from human cell lines in culture to Caenorhabditis elegans whole-organism labeling

### Description
The simple light isotope metabolic-labeling technique relies on the in-vivo biosynthesis of amino acids from U-[12C]-labeled molecules provided as the sole carbon source. The incorporation of the resulting U-[12C]-amino acids into proteins presents several key advantages for mass-spectrometry-based proteomics analysis, as it results in more intense monoisotopic ions, with a better signal-to-noise ratio in bottom-up analysis. In our initial studies, we developed the SLIM-labeling strategy using prototrophic eukaryotic microorganisms, the yeasts Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as well as strains with genetic markers that lead to amino-acid auxotrophy.  To extend the range of SLIM-Labeling applications, we evaluated (i) the incorporation of U-[12C]-glucose into proteins of human cells grown in a complex RPMI-based medium containing the labelled molecule, considering that human cell lines require a large number of essential amino-acids to support their growth, and (ii) an indirect labeling strategy in which the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans grown on plates was fed U-[12C]-labelled bacteria (Eschericha coli) and the worm proteome analyzed for 12C incorporation into proteins. In both cases, we were able to demonstrate efficient incorporation of 12C into the newly synthesized proteins, opening the way for original approaches in quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled either to an Evosep One system (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) or a Proxeon 1200 system from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). The Evosep One system was operated using the 30SPD method developed by the manufacturer. Briefly, the method is based on a 44-min gradient and a total cycle time of 48 min with a C18 analytical column (0.15 x 150 mm, 1.9 µm beads, ref EV-1106) equilibrated at room temperature and operated at a flow rate of 500 nL/min. H2O/0.1% FA was used as solvent A and ACN/ 0.1% formic acid (FA) as solvent B. On the Proxeon 1200, peptides were separated by chromatography using the following settings: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (0.075 x 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (0.075 x 750 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nL/min flow rate, a 120 min gradient from 95% solvent A (H2O/0.1% FA) to 40% solvent B (100% ACN/0.1% FA), followed by column regeneration, giving a total acquisition time of 140 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS/MS mode. Peptide masses were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in full ion scan mode with a resolution of 120,000, a mass range of m/z 350-1550, and an AGC target of 4.105. MS/MS were performed in the top speed 3s mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collisional energy of 27% and a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. Fragment masses were measured in an ion trap in the rapid mode, with an AGC target of 1.104. Monocharged peptides and those with unassigned charge states were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS and 35 ms for MS/MS acquisitions. Certain samples were also analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000, both from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated by chromatography as described above when using the Proxeon 1200 settings. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell in positive mode at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 200-2000 and an AGC target of 3.106. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in the Top20 mode. Peptides were selected for fragmentation by HCD with a normalized collisional energy of 27%, dynamic exclusion of 60 s, a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 Da, and an AGC target of 2.105. Peptides with unassigned charge states or those that were monocharged were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed using the SequestHT (v1.1.0.189) node of Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniprotKB protein database of Caenorhabditis elegans (UniprotKB, release 2020_02, 26956 entries), Homo sapiens (UP000005640, release 2021_02, 20380 entries), or Escherichia coli (UniprotKB, Strain K12 release 2019_01, 4391 entries). A maximum of two missed cleavages were authorized and precursor and fragment mass tolerances were either set to 15 ppm and 0.5 Da for the Orbitrap Fusion or 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the Orbitrap Q-exactive Plus. The following post-translational modifications were included: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed and oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate.  We measured 12C incorporation into the identified peptides using our recently described workflow (3), in which the intensity of every isotopologue in the isotopic clusters is extracted from the .pdresults SQL database containing the data from the Minora node of Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software. The boxplots to visualize the level of 12C incorporation for each experiment were generated using R (version 4.1.2, 2021-11-01) with the following packages: ggplot2 (version 3.3.6), dplyr (version 1.0.9), and tidyverse (version 1.3.2)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human cell line, Essential amino acids, Caenorhabditis elegans, Auxin, Slim metabolic labeling, Mass spectrometry, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Team Mitochondria, metals and oxidative stress, Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, F-75013 Paris France
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Michel Camadro
Team Mitochondria, metals and oxidative stress, Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, F-75013 Paris France


