### Accession
PXD006091

### Title
Characterisation of NBEAL2 interactome in HEK293T cells

### Description
Variants in NBEAL2 are causal of Grey Platelet Syndrome (GPS), a rare bleeding disorder characterized by absence of alpha- and specific- granules in platelets and neutrophils, respectively. The role of the scaffolding multidomain NBEAL2 protein in cell biology and granule homeostasis is unknown. We have performed proteomics to identify NBEAL2’s binding partners followed by different layers of validation including biochemical, cellular and functional analysis in vitro and in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells expressing PH-BEACH-WD40-FTAP were used for affinity purification of NBEAL2 and a HEK293T cell line expressing GFP-FTAP was used as control. Tandem affinity purification and sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis were performed as previously described (PMID: 20362542). Peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analysed with on-line nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an LTQ FT mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described (PMID: 20362542).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the human Uniprot database (September 2012, 86 742 entries) and an in-house contaminant database. The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-formylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). High confidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in <i>NBEAL2</i>, the gene encoding the scaffolding protein Nbeal2, are causal of gray platelet syndrome (GPS), a rare recessive bleeding disorder characterized by platelets lacking &#x3b1;-granules and progressive marrow fibrosis. We present here the interactome of Nbeal2 with additional validation by reverse immunoprecipitation of Dock7, Sec16a, and Vac14 as interactors of Nbeal2. We show that GPS-causing mutations in its BEACH domain have profound and possible effects on the interaction with Dock7 and Vac14, respectively. Proximity ligation assays show that these 2 proteins are physically proximal to Nbeal2 in human megakaryocytes. In addition, we demonstrate that Nbeal2 is primarily localized in the cytoplasm and Dock7 on the membrane of or in &#x3b1;-granules. Interestingly, platelets from GPS cases and <i>Nbeal2</i><sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice are almost devoid of Dock7, resulting in a profound dysregulation of its signaling pathway, leading to defective actin polymerization, platelet activation, and shape change. This study shows for the first time proteins interacting with Nbeal2 and points to the dysregulation of the canonical signaling pathway of Dock7 as a possible cause of the aberrant formation of platelets in GPS cases and <i>Nbeal2-</i>deficient mice.

### Keywords
Tandem affinity purification, Nbeal2, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


