### Accession
PXD020019

### Title
Phosphoproteome, ubiquitinome and full proteome analysis at 6 and 24 hours post SARS-CoV-2 infection in A549-ACE2 cells

### Description
A549-ACE2 cells were mock or SARS-CoV-2 infected (multiplicity of infection: 3) for 6 or 24 h and subjected to full proteome, phosphoproteome and ubiquitinome analysis using data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
A549-ACE2 cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2-MUC-IMB-1 strain (MOI 3) for the subsequent experiments. At each time point, the samples were washed once with 1x TBS buffer, harvested in SDC lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5; 4% SDC), heat-inactivated and frozen at −80°C until further processing. Frozen cell lysates of infected A549-ACE2 harvested at 6 and 24h post infection were thawed on ice and sonicated for 1 min (Branson Sonifierer). Protein concentrations were estimated by tryptophan assay28. To reduce and alkylate proteins, samples were incubated for 5 min at 45°C with CAA and TCEP, final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin (1:100 w/w, Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (1/100 w/w, Wako).  For proteome analysis, 10 μg of peptide material were desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips (Empore) as described previously (Humphrey, S.J., Nat Protoc 13, 1897–1916 (2018)). 500ng peptide was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. For proteome measurements, we used a gradient starting at 5% buffer B and stepwise increasing to 30% in 95 min, 60% in 5 min and 95% in 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top12 data-dependent mode (DDA) with a full scan range of 300-1650 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 20ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (NCE 27%). Fragment scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s.  To generate phosphoproteome data, the EasyPhos protocol was used for the enrichment of phosphopeptides (Humphrey, S.J., Nat Protoc 13, 1897–1916 (2018)). Enriched phosphopeptide samples were transferred into SDB-RPS StageTips and washed, eluted and dried as described above. Dried peptides were resuspended in 6 μl buffer A* and 5 μl was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. For phosphopeptide samples 5μl were loaded and eluted with a gradient starting at 3% buffer B and stepwise increased to 19% in 60 min, 41% in 30 min, 36% in 39 min and 95% in 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top10 DDA with a full scan range of 300-1600 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 120 ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD (NCE 28%). Fragment scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s.  For diGly peptide enrichment, samples were four-fold diluted with 1% TFA in isopropanol and loaded onto SDB-RPS cartridges (Strata™-X-C, 30 mg/ 3 ml, Phenomenex Inc), pre-equilibrated with 4 ml 30% MeOH/1% TFA and washed with 4 ml 0.2% TFA. Samples were washed twice with 4 ml 1% TFA in isopropanol, once with 0.2% TFA/ 2% ACN and eluted twice with 2 ml 1.25% NH4OH/ 80% ACN. Eluted peptides were diluted with ddH2O to a final ACN concentration of 35%, snap frozen and lyophilized. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) and the peptide concentration was estimated by tryptophan assay. K--GG remnant containing peptides were enriched using the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K--GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Crosslinking of antibodies to beads and subsequent immunopurification was performed with slight modifications as previously described. Briefly, two vials of crosslinked beads were combined and equally split into 16 tubes (~31 μg of antibody per tube). Equal peptide amounts (800 μg) were added to crosslinked beads and the volume was adjusted with IAP buffer to 1 ml. After 1h of incubation at 4°C and gentle agitation, beads were washed twice with cold IAP and 5 times with cold ddH2O. Thereafter, peptides were eluted twice with 50 μl 0.15% TFA. Eluted peptides were desalted and dried as described for proteome analysis with the difference that 0.2% TFA instead of 1%TFA in isopropanol was used for the first wash. Eluted peptides were resuspended in 9 μl buffer A* and 4 μl was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. For the analysis of K--GG peptide samples, we use a gradient starting at 3% buffer B and stepwise increased to 7% in 6 min, 20% in 49 min, 36% in 39 min, 45% in 10 min and 95% in 4 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in Top12 DDA with a full scan range of 300-1350 m/z at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum fill time of 20ms. Precursor ions were isolated with a width of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD (NCE 28%). Fragment scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) using the standard settings and label-free quantification enabled. For profiling of post-translational modifications, additional variable modifications for ubiquitination (GlyGly(K)) and phosphorylation (Phospho(STY)) were added. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (UniprotKB, release 10.2019) and SARS-COV-2 proteins by the built-in Andromeda search engine. The output of MaxQuant was analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) and visualized with R (version 3.6.0) and RStudio (version 1.2.1335). For total proteome analysis, detected protein groups within the proteinGroups output table identified as known contaminants, reverse sequence matches, only identified by site or quantified in less than 3 out of 4 replicates in at least one condition were excluded. Following log2 transformation, missing values were imputed for each replicate individually by sampling values from a normal distribution calculated from the original data distribution (width = 0.3×s.d., downshift = −1.8×s.d.). Differentially regulated protein groups between mock and SARS-CoV-2 infection at 6 and 24 h.p.i. were identified via two-sided Student’s T-tests corrected for multiple hypothesis testing applying a permutation-based FDR (S0 = 0.1; FDR < 0.05, 250 randomizations). Protein groups were further removed for statistical testing if not at least one T-test condition contained a minimum of three non-imputed values. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphosites within the Phospho (STY)Sites output table identified as known contaminants, reverse sequence matches or less than 0.75 localization probability were excluded. Following log2 transformation, phosphosite intensities were normalized based on sites that were quantified in at least 90% of all samples to account for technical variations. In detail, the median of phosphosite-specific intensities across samples was subtracted from individual intensities to normalize for different phosphosite abundances (row-wise normalization). Next, the median of normalized phosphosite intensities per sample was used as final normalization factor and subtracted from individual nonnormalized phosphosite intensities (column-wise normalization). Phosphosites were further filtered for quantification in at least 3 replicates and missing values were imputed for each replicate individually by sampling values from a normal distribution calculated from the original data distribution (width = 0.3 × s.d., downshift = −1.8 × s.d.). Differentially regulated phosphosites between mock and SARS-CoV-2 infection at 6 and 24 h.p.i. were identified via two-sided Student’s T-tests corrected for multiple hypothesis testing applying a permutation-based FDR (S0 = 0.5; FDR < 0.05, 250 randomizations). Phosphosites were further removed from statistical testing if not at least one T-test condition contained a minimum of 3 non-imputed values. For ubiquitinome analysis, ubiquitination sites within the GlyGly (K)Sites output table were processed as mention for phosphosites, but normalization for technical variation was based on ubiquitination sites quantified in more than 60% of all samples. Differentially regulated ubiquitination sites between mock and SARS-CoV-2 infection at 6 and 24 h.p.i. were identified via two-sided Student’s T-tests corrected for multiple hypothesis testing applying a permutation-based FDR (S0 = 0.1; FDR < 0.05, 250 randomizations) and removed from statistical testing if not at least one T-test condition contained a minimum of 3 non-imputed values. Annotation of detected protein groups, phosphosites and ubiquitination sites with GOBP, -MF, -CC, KEGG, Pfam, GSEA, Keywords and Corum as well as PhosphoSitePlus kinase-substrate relations and regulatory sites (version May 1st 2020) was performed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; infected proteome; phosphoproteome; ubiquitinome; a549-ace2

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


