### Accession
PXD037185

### Title
: Proteomic analysis of Nicotiana benthamiana upon infection of grapevine fanleaf virus strains

### Description
Nicotiana benthamiana was infected with several strains of grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV). Apical tissue was collected 4, 7, and 12 days after inoculation, with identical samples for shotgun proteomics and transcriptomics analysis. Five leaf discs per leaf were collected a pooled by three plants into a single tube at each time point. Five biological replicates represent each treatment at each time point for a total of 75 samples. Two samples were lost between sample processing and data acquisition. The analysis methods between proteomics and transcriptomics were then cross-analyzed for host genes responsible for phenotypic differences upon infection.

### Sample Protocol
Whole protein extractions were performed on N. benthamiana tissue. Tissue was macerated with steel BBs in 2mL centrifuge tubes and 1mL working solution (10% TCA, 2% ß-mercaptethanol in acetone) was added to each sample. Cells were lysed via probe sonication. Samples were then incubated in an ethanol dry ice bath for at least one hour and centrifuged to isolate proteins. The supernatant was removed and discarded, and the pellet was washed in pure acetone three times by pipette followed by centrifugation. Pellet was allowed to completely dry for 30 minutes and stored at -80˚C until following steps. The protein containing pellet was resuspended in 150 µL 7M urea/100mM ammonium bicarbonate and kept on ice. Fleas (miniature magnetic stir bars) were added, and pellets were left to stir overnight at 4oC. Resuspended proteins were subject to a Bradford assay with a standard curve from bovine serum albumin. Protein concentrations were utilized to standardize protein loading amounts for SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis on Gradient (4%-20%) Mini-PROTEAN© TGX™ (BIO-RAD, #4561096) precast protein gels for visualization and confirmation.  From the Bradford analysis and gel electrophoresis, calculated concentrations allowed for 100 µg of protein to be taken for further processing. Cysteine blocking and reduction of proteins was performed with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and methyl methanethiosulfonate. Protein was then subject to trypsin degradation and followed by Sep-Pak column clean up. Pellets of peptide were then dried under vacuum in a VacuFuge until no liquid remained.  Each sample was reconstituted in 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Then, 4 µL of sample was used for Nano-Liquid Chromatography (LC) analysis with a 90 min LC gradient and data dependent acquisition MS/MS method. Blanks were run in between each sample to prevent any spill-over of peptide reads. Samples were processed twice in a completely random order.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from LC-MS/MS were converted to .dat files with MSConvert. Peptide identification was then performed via Mascot Daemon against the previously defined ‘NibenNepo’ database with Nicotiana benthamiana, grapevine fanleaf virus, related Nepovirus members, and potential contaminants (Osterbaan et al. 2021) to return protein abundance for analysis. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was utilized across all samples. A counts matrix was extracted from Scaffold Q+ Quantification software (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR; v4.11.1) containing gene names, descriptions, and counts for each peptide match to that respective gene per sample. This matrix was then utilized for differential expression analysis through the DEP pipeline v1.16.0 in RStudio v4.1.3. Variance stabilized normalization and bpca imputation was then executed. the A count matrix generated from these methods was used for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses can elicit varying types and severities of symptoms during plant host infection. We investigated changes in the proteome and transcriptome of <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> plants infected by grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV) with an emphasis on vein clearing symptom development. Comparative, time-course liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and 3' ribonucleic acid sequencing analyses of plants infected by two wildtype GFLV strains, one symptomatic and one asymptomatic, and their asymptomatic mutant strains carrying a single amino acid change in the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) were conducted to identify host biochemical pathways involved in viral symptom development. During peak vein clearing symptom display at 7 days post-inoculation (dpi), protein and gene ontologies related to immune response, gene regulation, and secondary metabolite production were overrepresented when contrasting wildtype GFLV strain GHu and mutant GHu-1E<sub>K802G</sub><sup>Pol</sup>. Prior to the onset of symptom development at 4 dpi and when symptoms faded away at 12 dpi, protein and gene ontologies related to chitinase activity, hypersensitive response, and transcriptional regulation were identified. This systems biology approach highlighted how a single amino acid of a plant viral RdRP mediates changes to the host proteome (&#x223c;1%) and transcriptome (&#x223c;8.5%) related to transient vein clearing symptoms and the network of pathways involved in the virus-host arms race.

### Keywords
Virus, Tobacco, Plant, Lc-msms, Grapevine

### Affiliations
Michelle Heck, USDA-ARS, Emerging Pests and Pathogens Research Unit, Holly Center, Ithaca, NY, USA
Cornell University, Section of Plant Pathology

### Submitter
Brandon Roy

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
Michelle Heck, USDA-ARS, Emerging Pests and Pathogens Research Unit, Holly Center, Ithaca, NY, USA


