### Accession
PXD041346

### Title
Cellular Validation of Chemically Improved Inhibitor Identifies Monoubiquitination on OTUB2

### Description
Ubiquitin thioesterase OTUB2, a cysteine protease from the ovarian tumor (OTU) deubiquitinase superfamily, is associated with enhanced expression during tumor progression and metastasis. Development of OTUB2 inhibitors is therefore believed to be therapeutically important, yet potent and selective small-molecule inhibitors targeting OTUB2 are scarce. Here, we describe the development of an improved OTUB2 inhibitor, LN5P45, comprising a chloroacethydrazide moiety that covalently reacts to the active-site cysteine residue. When added to cells, LN5P45 shows outstanding target engagement and proteome-wide selectivity. Importantly, we found that LN5P45 and the other OTUB2 inhibitors strongly induce monoubiquitination of OTUB2 via lysine 31. Thus, our findings provide novel insights for the design of future OTUB2-related therapeutics and open new questions regarding the understanding of OTUB2 regulation at the post-translational modification level.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Mass Spectrometry of Gel Slices. For MS analysis, gel slices were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and in-gel trypsin digestion using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices, lyophilized, dissolved in 95/3/0.1 v/v/v water/acetonitril/formic acid and subsequently analyzed by on‐line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (30 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 10% to 40% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 30 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 32 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400-1500, at an AGC target of 400,000 @maximum fill time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion after n=1 with exclusion duration of 10 s. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Da. First mass was set to 110 Da. The MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 with an AGC target of 50,000 at maximum fill time of 60 ms. Profiling of LN5P45-reactive Cysteines by SLC-ABPP. SLC-ABPP profiling was performed as described before.3 In short: HeLa cells, transfected with GFP or GFP-OTUB2 WT with PEI reagent for 24 hours, were grown to 80% confluence and incubated with either DMSO or 10 μM LN5P45 for 4 h in complete medium. Cells were harvested, lysed by sonication in ice-cold PBS and centrifuged at 15.000 RPM for 2 min to remove cell debris. Protein concentrations were then determined by BCA Gold protein assay. Proteomes were normalized to 1 mg /mL in 100 μL for each sample. Each DMSO- and LN5P45-treated proteome was labeled with 500 μM DBIA probe for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature (RT). Excess DBIA, along with disulfide bonds, were quenched and reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min in the dark at RT. Reduced disulphide bonds were alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at RT. Proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol, and re-solubilized in 40 mM HEPES pH 8.4 and digested using TPCK treated trypsin and endoLysC (1:12.5 enzyme/protein ratio) overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were labeled using TMTpro16-plex reagents in a 1:4 ratio by mass (peptides:TMT reagents) for 1 h at RT. Excess TMT reagent was quenched with 5 µL 6% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. Next, samples were mixed 1:1 across all TMT channels and the pooled sample was dried using a Speedvac.  Dried samples were reconstituted in 1ml PBS, and enriched by Pierce streptavidin magnetic beads (Catalog number: 88816, Thermo Scientific™) by rotating end-over-end overnight at 4 °C. Nonspecific binding peptides were washed using the following procedure: 3 ×1 ml of PBS pH 7.4, 2 × 1 ml of PBS with 0.1% SDS pH 7.4, and 3 × 1 ml of HPLC-grade water. DBIA probe-containing peptides were eluted using 700 μL of 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, dried using a Speedvac and desalted using a mini-SPE column (10% sorbent material of a Waters, OASIS 1cc HLB 30 mg cartridge). Column was washed with 200 µL 90% acetonitrile and 3x 200 µL 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4. Dried sample was dissolved in 200 µL 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4, loaded onto the column, washed 3x with 200 µL 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.4 and eluted into 3 fractions with 150 µL each of 10%, 20% and 50% acetonitrile (in 10 mM NH4HCO3). Sample was re-dried using a Speedvac.

### Data Protocol
Protein Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis. In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens minimal database (20205 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were done with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and the enzyme trypsin was specified, up to two missed cleavages were allowed for gel slices and three missed cleavages for SLC-ABPP. For gel slices, methionine oxidation and ubiquitination (GG) on lysine were set as a variable modification; carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification. For SLC-ABPP, methionine oxidation, Acetyl (protein N-term) and DBIA on Cys were set as a variable modification. Carbamidomethyl on Cys and TMTpro on Lys and N-term were set as a fixed modification. Peptides with an FDR<1% in were accepted. Abundance ratios were calculated by dividing the inhibitor-treated channels with the DMSO-treated channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Monoubiquitination, Small-molecule inhibitor, Otub2

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Head Proteomics Group  Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands


