### Accession
PXD003337

### Title
Longitudinal quantification of the GCF proteome during progression from gingivitis to periodontitis in a canine model

### Description
Inflammatory periodontal disease (periodontitis) is widespread in dogs. This study aimed to evaluate site-specific changes in the canine gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) proteome during the longitudinal progression from very mild gingivitis to mild periodontitis. Periodontitis diagnosis in dogs requires anaesthesia, our ultimate aim was to develop a periodontitis diagnostic that could be applied to samples taken from conscious dogs. The objective of this work was to identify potential biomarkers of periodontal disease progression in the GCF of dogs.

### Sample Protocol
GCF was sampled from a total of ten teeth in eight dogs. Samples were prepared for quantitative mass spectrometry by labelling with isobaric mass tags.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Data from each SCX set were analysed together and each replicate searched independently. Mascot and SEQUEST algorithms were used to search the data with identical settings used. The database was the UniProt Canis lupus familiarus (29,293 entrants downloaded 02/2014). The data were searched with the following settings: trypsin as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass accuracy for the precursor ion, fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ addition to the N-terminus and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was set as a variable modification as was oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ addition to tyrosine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Periodontitis, Gcf, Gingivitis, Canine

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
Periodontal Research Group, School of Dentistry, University of Birmingham

### Submitter
Melissa Grant

### Lab Head
Dr Melissa M Grant
Periodontal Research Group, School of Dentistry, University of Birmingham


