### Accession
PXD028008

### Title
Evaluation of affinity purified RNA-protein complexes related with NMD

### Description
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a conserved RNA degradation pathway that is involved in development, resistance to viral infections and evolution. Upf1, a core NMD factor, is associated with a large variety of cellular RNA in complex ribonucleoprotein particles. We characterized NMD complexes previously by affinity purification of tagged protein followed by mass spectrometry. Here, we extend our observations to proteins that are present in NMD complexes, but for whom the interaction with NMD factors is mediated by RNA. We purified tagged versions of Lsm1, Lsm7, Pat1, Dhh1 and Pab1 and assessed the presence and amount of NMD and RNA-related proteins in each purification. As expected from our previously published results, Upf1 was present in these purifications, suggesting novel hypotheses about the role of Pab1 and the Lsm1-7 complexes in RNA degradation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were treated with Endoprotease Lys-C and Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade; Promega). Peptide samples were desalted by OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies) and then analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw mass spectrometry (MS) data from the LTQ-Orbitrap were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1. Only protein identifications based on a minimum of two peptides were selected for further quantitative studies. The protocol has been previously described in Defenouillere et al., "Cdc48-associated complex bound to 60S particles is required for the clearance of aberrant translation products", PNAS vol 110 no 13, p 5046-5051, 2013.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were done using MaxQuant 2.0.1.0 and processing of the results were done with Perseus 1.6.15 and R. Peptide intensity values, as reported by MaxQuant in the "peptides.txt" file were the basis for the label-free analyses with a minimum of two different peptides for each identification. Only results for which the signal for a protein was present in all, or at least 3 replicates were further used. To compute enrichment values, we compared the purification results with results on a total yeast protein extract.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Rna, Rnp, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Upf1

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Génétique des Interactions Macromoléculaires, Genomes and Genetics Department Institut Pasteur, 25-28 rue du docteur Roux, 75015, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cosmin Saveanu

### Lab Head
Dr Cosmin Saveanu
Génétique des Interactions Macromoléculaires, Genomes and Genetics Department Institut Pasteur, 25-28 rue du docteur Roux, 75015, Paris, France


