### Accession
PXD008803

### Title
Dynamics of the Escherichia coli proteome in response to the deletion of the Tat pathway

### Description
In Escherichia coli, the Twin-arginine (Tat) secretion system is one of the main routes of the protein export to the periplasm. The Tat pathway secretes a set of proteins with important physiological functions. In our study, we investigated the influence of the deactivation of the Tat pathway on the E. coli cells. We applied a comprehensive and comparative proteomic analysis of the E. coli wild type and tat mutant. This dataset provides mass spectrometry based details on the abundances of proteins in cytoplasmic, periplasmic and membrane fractions. We observed that a tat deletion increases abundances of proteins involved in protein folding, degradation, responses to heat, oxidation, osmolarity, and cold. Moreover, the impairment of E. coli outer membrane resulted in the activation of proteins responsible for cell wall biogenesis. The tat deletion negatively affects the synthesis of iron transporters and imbalances its homeostasis in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Each pellet was solubilized in 600 µl lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7, 2% SDS) and the protein concentration was determined by the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Cytoplasmic fraction proteins (100 μg) were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested in-solution using trypsin [1]. Desalting of peptides prior to mass spectrometry analysis using Stage tips, C8 material (ThermoFisher Scientific) was performedaccording to the protocol by Rappsilber et al. (2007) [2]. For absolute quantification,a tryptic digest of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1, Waters, USA) was added into the samples to final concentration of 50 fmol/μL.  Proteins from periplasmic and membrane fractions (30 μg) were separated via 1D SDS-PAGE and the entire gel lanes were cut into ten pieces each and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) overnight. Peptides were purifiedusing ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore). Samples were concentrated to dryness in a vaccum centrifuge and stored at -70 °C. Shortly before MS analysis samples were dissolved in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid.  1. J. Muntel, M. Hecker, D. Becher, An exclusion list based label-free proteome quantification approach using an LTQ Orbitrap. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 26 (2012), 701–709. 2. J. Rappsilber, M. Mann, Y. Ishihama, Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2 (2007), 1896–1906.

### Data Protocol
For the cytoplasmic samples the nanoACQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters) was used to separate and introduce peptides into the Synapt G2 (Waters) mass spectrometer. Parameters for liquid chromatography and IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) were used as described previously in Zühlke et al. (2016) [3]. The peptides eluted from periplasmic and membrane samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Proxeon nLC 1200 coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed with an 80-min nonlinear gradient (1-99%) in 0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile on the in-house self-packed columns (id 100 μm, od 360 μm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.6 µm Aeris XB-C18 reversed-phase material (Phenomenex)). A full MSscan (resolution of 60,000) was acquired using the automatic data-dependent mode of the instrument. After acquisition of the full MS spectra, up to 20 dependent scans (MS/MS) were performed according to precursor intensity by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID) in the linear ion trap. MS/MS spectra of each sample were searched against a E. coli K12 MC4100 UniProt/Swissprot database (Proteome ID: UP000017782, 3985 protein entries) using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) [4]. Peptide search was performed with the Andromeda search algorithms [5]. The search parameters were set as follows: a minimal peptide length of six, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated and protein identifications with FDR< 1% were considered acceptable. A minimum of two unique peptides was used for relative quantification with the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in the MaxQuant.  3. D. Zühlke, K. Dörries, J. Bernhardt, S. Maaß, J. Muntel, V. Liebscher, J. Pané-Farré, K. Riedel, M. Lalk, U. Völker, S. Engelmann, D. Becher, S. Fuchs, M. Hecker, Costs of life - Dynamics of the protein inventory of Staphylococcus aureus during anaerobiosis. Scientific Reports. 6 (2016), 28172. 4. J. Cox, M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized ppb-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein 98 quantification. Nature biotechnology 26 (12) (2006), 1367-1372. 5. J. Cox, N. Neuhauser, A. Michalski, R.A. Scheltema, J.V. Olsen, M. Mann, Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 10(4) (2011), 1794-805.

### Publication Abstract
In Escherichia coli, the Twin-arginine translocation (Tat) pathway secretes a set of folded proteins with important physiological functions to the periplasm and outer membrane. The loss of Tat secretion impairs outer membrane integrity and leads to decreased cell growth. Only recently, the Tat pathway has gained more attention due to its essential role in bacterial virulence and applications in the production of fully folded heterologous proteins. In this study, we investigated the influence of the deletion of all active Tat pathway components on the E. coli cells. The comprehensive proteomic analysis revealed activation of several stress responses and experimentally confirmed the dependence of certain proteins on the Tat system for export. We observed that a tat deletion triggers protein aggregation, membrane vesiculation, synthesis of colanic acid and biofilm formation. Furthermore, the mislocalization of Tat-dependent proteins disturbs iron and molybdenum homeostasis and impairs the cell envelope integrity. The results show that the functional Tat pathway is important for the physiological stability and that its dysfunction leads to a series of severe changes in E. coli cells.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Stress responses, Tat pathway

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8  17489 Greifswald
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Katarzyna Dolata

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Dolata
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8  17489 Greifswald


