### Accession
PXD027257

### Title
Cellular interactome of HSV-1 pUL21

### Description
The herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 protein pUL21 is essential for efficient virus replication and dissemination. While pUL21 has been shown to promote multiple steps of virus assembly and spread, the molecular basis of its function remained unclear. Here we identify that pUL21 is a virus-encoded adaptor of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). pUL21 directs the dephosphorylation of cellular and virus proteins, including components of the viral nuclear egress complex, and we define a conserved non-canonical linear motif in pUL21 that is essential for PP1 recruitment. In vitro evolution experiments reveal that pUL21 directly antagonises the activity of the virus-encoded kinase pUS3, with growth and spread of pUL21 PP1-binding mutant viruses being restored when pUS3 activity is disrupted. This study shows that virus-directed phosphatase activity is essential for efficient herpesvirus assembly and spread, highlighting the fine balance between kinase and phosphatase activity required for optimal virus replication.

### Sample Protocol
Monolayers of HEK293T cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher) or TransIT-LT1 (Mirus) using 7.7 μg of pUL21-GFP or pEGFP-N1 (for GFP alone) per 9 cm dish of cells, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and the relevant labelled medium was used to prepare the transfection reagents. Cells were harvested 24 h post-transfection by scraping into the medium, pelleted (220 g, 5 min, 4°C) and washed three times with cold PBS. Cells were lysed at 4°C in 1 mL lysis buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 1:100 diluted EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)) for 45 min before clarification (20,000×g, 10 min, 4°C). Protein concentration in the lysates was quantified by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) to equalise protein concentrations across the samples before immunoprecipitation with GFP-TRAP beads (ChromoTek) following the manufacturer's protocol, samples being eluted by incubation at 95°C for 5 min in 45 µL 2× SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Input and bound samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblot. For each biological repeat (n=3), 8 µL of light-, medium- and heavy-labelled eluted samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio and frozen at -80°C until mass spectroscopy analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by the proteomics facility of the University of Bristol (UK). Three biological repeats of each triple-labelled SILAC IP experiment were analyzed. Samples were run into precast SDS-PAGE gels for 5 minutes, the entire sample extracted from the gel as a single band, and then in-gel digested, reduced and alkylated using a ProGest automated digestion unit (Digilab). The resulting peptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) FA were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% MeCN in 0.1% FA, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 5 min, 40-90% B over 1 min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1min) with a flow rate of 300 nL per minute. Solvent A was 0.1% FA and solvent B was aqueous 80% MeCN in 0.1% FA. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 µm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 300,000 and a max injection time of 100 ms. Precursors were filtered using an Intensity Range of 1×104 to 1×1020 and according to charge state (to include charge states 2-6) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40 s +/-10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.4 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 20,000, max injection time of 40 ms and CID collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.5.6.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The in-built Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used to search against the human proteome (UniProt UP000005640, canonical and isoform entries, accessed 11/09/2016) and a custom proteome file containing the sequence of HSV-1 strain KOS pUL21. Trypsin/P digestion, standard modifications (oxidation, N-terminal acetylation) were selected as group-specific parameters and SILAC quantification was performed using light (Arg0, Lys0), medium (Arg6, Lys4) and heavy (Arg10, Lys8) labels. Re-quantification, razor protein FDR, and second peptide options were enabled for the processing. The quantified data were analysed with a custom R script using the normalized ratios obtained by MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site or against the reverse database, as well as common experimental contaminants such as keratins (specified in the MaxQuant contaminants file) were removed. Only proteins identified in at least two of the three biological repeats (325/464) were considered for analysis. Significance of abundance changes was determined using a one-sample, two-sided t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pp1, Herpes simplex virus 1, Col4a3bp, Silac, Cert, Protein phosphatase 1, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology
University of Cambridge
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QP

### Submitter
Stephen Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Charles Graham
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QP


