### Accession
PXD005401

### Title
SWATH-MS quantitative analysis of proteins in the rice inferior and superior spikelets during grain filling

### Description
Modern rice cultivars have large panicle, however, yield potential of these cultivars is often not fully achieved due to the poor grain-filling of their late-flowering inferior spikelets (IS). Our earlier work suggests broad transcriptional reprogramming during grain filling and shows a difference in gene expression between IS and the earlier-flowering superior spikelets (SS). However, the links between the abundance of transcripts and their corresponding proteins are unclear. In this study, a SWATH-MS (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry) -based quantitative proteomic analysis has been applied between SS and IS. A total of 304 proteins, ranging from cellular components to biological processes, were observed to be differentially expressed between IS and SS. Detailed gene ontology analysis indicated that several biological processes including photosynthesis, protein metabolism, and energy metabolism are differentially regulated. Further correlation analysis revealed that abundance of most of the differentially expressed proteins is not correlated to the transcript levels, indicating an extra layer of gene regulation which may exist during rice grain filling. These findings raise an intriguing possibility that these candidate proteins may be crucial in determining the poor grain-filling of IS. Therefore, we hypothesize that the regulation of proteome changes not only occurs at the transcriptional, but also at the post-transcriptional level, during grain filling in rice.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were conducted at research farm of South China Agricultural University during the rice growing season. A large-panicle rice cultivar, YD-6 (Yangdao 6, an indica inbred cultivar) was used for the study. The germinated seeds were grown in the paddy field and seedlings were transplanted into the soil containing N-P-K at 100, 40 and 70 mg kg-1, respectively with suitable hill spacing. Approximately two hundred panicles flowered on the same day were tagged and sampled. The flowering date and position of each spikelet on the tagged panicles were recorded. The superior spikeletes (SS) and inferior spikeletes (IS) were distinguished based on the previous report (Ishimaru et al., 2003). A total of 80 tagged panicles were sampled at 9 days after flowering, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80 oC for further analysis.The IS and SS samples (approximately 1g) were ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized with 10× volume of trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/Acetone. The homogenates were centrifuged in a JA-12 rotor (Beckman) at 16000g at 4ºC for 5 min and the supernatant was carefully removed. Protein pellets were suspended in 10× volume of 80% MeOH / 0.1M NH4OAc, followed by the centrifugation at 16000g for 5 min at 4ºC. The pellets were re-suspended in 10× volume of 80% acetone, followed by another centrifugation. Subsequently, the protein pellets were dissolved in 8 mL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M MOPS/HCl, pH 8.0) and the homogenized samples were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 2 min. Then they were incubated at 95ºC for 5-10 min. After centrifugation for two times at 4ºC, the supernatants were collected and added with 4× volume of chilled 80% acetone for overnight participation at -20ºC. Proteins were then centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 15 min and pellets were washed with 10× volume of 80% acetone. After centrifugation, the pellets were air-dried. Finally, the protein pellet was dissolved with 1mL urea buffer (6M urea in 200 mM MOPS-Cl/4 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0) by sonication (10 s on, 6 s off; 20 cycles). Protein concentrations were accurately estimated by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad). Seven biological replicates were prepared from IS and SS. Protein samples (100 µg each) were reduced by 10 mM DTT at 50ºC for 30-40 min with gentle shaking and then alkalated at room temperature for 40 min by iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 40 mM. Samples were digested by trypsin (1 µg trypsin for 50 µg protein) and incubated at 37ºC overnight. Subsequently, peptides from different proteins samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted by SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in speed vacuum concentrator. Peptide samples were either stored at -80C if not analyzed immediately or dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed using the Eksigent NanoLC-2DPlus system coupled with the cHiPLC nanoflex system in Trap-Elute mode by the Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA) as previously described (Zhu et al. 2016). Briefly, peptide samples were first loaded on a cHiPLC trap (3 m, ChromXP C18CL, 120Å, 0.5 mm x 200 m) with 95% water (0.1% formic acid) and 5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) at 500 nL/min for 15-min. Subsequently, the samples were separated on a cHiPLC column (3 m, ChromXP C18CL, 120Å, 15 cm x 75 m) in an elution gradient of 5% - 35% acetonitrile at 300 nL/min for 120-min. Trap and column were maintained at 30ºC for retention time stability.  The eluent from the column was analyzed by the Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer in positive ion mode with a nano-ion spray voltage of 2300 V.  Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was first performed to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library. For the detailed experiment, a survey scan of 250 ms (TOF-MS) in the range 350-1250 m/z was performed to collect the MS1 spectra and the top 40 precursor ions with charge state from +2 to +5 was selected for subsequent fragmentation with an accumulation time of 50 ms per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 2.3 s and MS/MS spectra was acquired in the range 100-1800 m/z.  In the SWATH analysis, the same peptide samples were subjected to cyclic data-independent acquisition (DIA) of mass spectra in a similar manner to above established methods. The mass spectrometer was operated on a 50 ms survey scan and all precursors were subject to fragmentation. All DDA mass spectrometry files were searched to generate a reference spectral library using the ProteinPilot software v4.5 (SCIEX) with the Paragon algorithm. The searching was conducted against the UniProt Swiss-Prot Oryza sativa protein database (July, 2015). The output of this search is a group file, which contains the following information that is required for spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA: protein name, UniProt accession, peptide sequence, precursor charge and fragment ions, relative intensity, and retention time, etc. Subsequently, the acquired targeted data extraction of DIA samples was loaded into the PeakView software v1.2 (SCIEX) under the reference spectral library. All loaded DIA files were exported into .txt format using an extraction window of 10 min with the following parameters: ion library mass tolerance (50 ppm); 8 peptides; 5 transitions; peptide confidence of >99%; exclusion of shared peptides. The quantified proteins and associated peptides were further displayed and exported to MarkerView (SCIEX) format in the generation of three distinct files containing the quantitative output for (1) extracted peak area for individual fragment ion; (2) sum intensity of fragment ion areas for a given peptide; (3) sum intensity of peptide areas for a given protein. With the normalization of the total areas of seven biological replicates, relative quantitation for proteins (fold change) during the grain-filling in the IS and SS was obtained and analyzed by t-test (MarkerView) (Table S2).  Proteins with a fold change of >1.2 or <0.8 (P value <0.05) were considered as differentially expressed proteins in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Modern rice cultivars have large panicle but their yield potential is often not fully achieved due to poor grain-filling of late-flowering inferior spikelets (IS). Our earlier work suggested a broad transcriptional reprogramming during grain filling and showed a difference in gene expression between IS and earlier-flowering superior spikelets (SS). However, the links between the abundances of transcripts and their corresponding proteins are unclear. In this study, a SWATH-MS (sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry) -based quantitative proteomic analysis has been applied to investigate SS and IS proteomes. A total of 304 proteins of widely differing functionality were observed to be differentially expressed between IS and SS. Detailed gene ontology analysis indicated that several biological processes including photosynthesis, protein metabolism, and energy metabolism are differentially regulated. Further correlation analysis revealed that abundances of most of the differentially expressed proteins are not correlated to the respective transcript levels, indicating that an extra layer of gene regulation which may exist during rice grain filling. Our findings raised an intriguing possibility that these candidate proteins may be crucial in determining the poor grain-filling of IS. Therefore, we hypothesize that the regulation of proteome changes not only occurs at the transcriptional, but also at the post-transcriptional level, during grain filling in rice.

### Keywords
Rice., Proteomics, Grain filling, Post-transcriptional regulation, Swath-ms analysis

### Affiliations
The university of HongKong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Fuyuan Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Jianhua
The Chinese University of Hong Kong


