### Accession
PXD031311

### Title
RIF1-ASF1-mediated high-order chromatin structure safeguards genome integrity

### Description
The 53BP1-RIF1 pathway antagonizes resection of DNA broken ends and confers PARP inhibitor sensitivity on BRCA1-mutated tumors. However, it is unclear how this pathway suppresses initiation of resection. Here, we identify ASF1 as a partner of RIF1 via an interacting manner similar to its interactions with histone chaperones CAF-1 and HIRA. ASF1 is recruited to distal chromatin flanking DNA breaks by 53BP1-RIF1 and promotes non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) using its histone chaperone activity. Epistasis analysis shows that ASF1 acts in the same NHEJ pathway as RIF1, but via a parallel pathway with the shieldin complex, which suppresses resection after initiation. Moreover, defects in end resection and homologous recombination (HR) in BRCA1-deficient cells are largely suppressed by ASF1 deficiency. Mechanistically, ASF1 compacts adjacent chromatin by heterochromatinization to protect broken DNA ends from BRCA1-mediated resection. Taken together, our findings identified a RIF1-ASF1 histone chaperone complex that promotes changes in high-order chromatin structure to stimulate the NHEJ pathway for DSB repair.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation (IP), expression plasmids were transfected into HEK293 suspension cells with polyethyleneimine. HEK293 cells were harvested 64 hours after transfection, after which the pellet was lysed with NTEN buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 μg mL-1 leupeptin, and 1 μg mL-1 aprotinin). The lysate was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 440,000 × g for 15 minutes, after which the supernatant incubated with anti-FLAG M2 conjugated agarose beads at 4 °C for 4 hours. The beads were washed four times with IP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT and 1 mM PMSF) and incubated with 400 µg mL-1 3× Flag peptide in IP buffer for 1–2 hours. Subsequently, the eluted complexes were analyzed with sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and quality spectroscopy. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid, loaded onto a 100μm x 2 cm pre-column and separated on a 75μm x 15 cm capillary column with laser-pulled sprayer. Both columns were packed in-house with Luna 3 μm C18(2) bulk packing material (Phenomenex, USA). An Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to deliver the following HPLC gradient: 5-35% B in 75 min, 35-75% B in 4 min, then held at 75% B for 10 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were sprayed into a Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan (375–1600 M/z) in FT mode at a resolution of 120000 followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) MS/MS scans (in Ion Trap) on the 10 most abundant ions in the initial MS scan. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 ions for Orbitrap scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. For dynamic exclusion, the following parameters were used: isolation window, 2 m/z; repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 25 s; and exclusion duration, 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were converted to mascot generic format (“.mgf”) using MSConvert before submitted for database search. Mascot (version 2.3.02) carried out all database search with the following parameters: Data base: Swissprot 57.15; Organism: Human Protease: trypsin; cleavage site: C-terminus of Lys and Arg Max missed cleavages: 2 Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (Cys) Variable modification: Oxidation (Met)  Mass tolerance:  +/- 10 ppm for precursor and +/- 0.6 Da for fragment ions Minimum peptide length: N/A Significance threshold: 0.05 Ions score cut-off: 19

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Hek293t

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 100871.

### Submitter
kejiao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Dongyi. Xu
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 100871.


