### Accession
PXD030798

### Title
Proteome-Wide Analysis of Lysine 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation in Frankliniella occidentalis

### Description
Frankliniella occidentalis is an important insect carrier of virus disease that harms cash crops, and it often causes virus disease to spread widely in cash crops. Post-translational modifications of proteins play an important role in regulating life activities, and the study of newly discovered modifications (PTMs) is of great significance. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyryl (Khib) is an evolutionary conservative form of post-translational modification of a new type of protein discovered in mammals, plants, yeast and pathogenic bacteria in recent years. The study of this modification can increase our understanding of Frankliniella occidentalis, help further study the biological function mechanism of Frankliniella occidentalis and the key to disease transmission, and is of great significance to disease prevention and control.

### Sample Protocol
The thrips were ground into powder by liquid nitrogen, and then was sonicated three times with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 µM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease inhibitor Cocktail) on ice. The remaining cellular debris was centrifuge at 21,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove, the supernatant was discarded. Finally, adding 15% TCA to the solution for 2h at −20℃ to precipitate the protein. The mixed solution were centrifuged at 4 °C 10 minutes to discard the supernatant. The precipitate was separated by centrifugation and washed three times with acetone. Redissolving the protein in buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Beijing, China) to determine the final protein concentration

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was used to process the resultant MS/MS data. Bioinformatics Methods. Tandem MS were searched against the SwissProt Thrips database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was a cleaving enzyme that allowed 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges, and allowed up to 4 deletion cleavage, The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Khib modification and oxidation on Met and crotonylation of lysine and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications (Elias and Gygi, 2007). The threshold for proteins, peptides and modification sites was 1%. The minimum peptide length was 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site selection probability was set to >0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Frankliniella occidentalis; proteome; post-translational modifications; lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyryl; pathogenicity.

### Affiliations
yangjinguang@caas.cn
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jinguang Yang
yangjinguang@caas.cn


