### Accession
PXD025092

### Title
Multimodality Assessment of HFpEF Skeletal Muscle Reveals Differences in the Machinery of Energy Fuel Metabolism

### Description
Aims: Skeletal muscle (SkM) abnormalities may impact exercise capacity in patients with Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction (HFpEF). We sought to quantify differences in SkM oxidative phosphorylation capacity (OxPhos), fiber composition, and the SkM proteome between HFpEF, hypertensive (HTN), and Healthy participants. Methods: 59 subjects (20 Healthy, 19 HTN, 20 HFpEF) performed a maximal-effort cardiopulmonary exercise test to define peak oxygen consumption (VO2, peak), ventilatory threshold (VT), and VO2 efficiency (ratio of total work performed to O2 consumed). SkM OxPhos was assessed using Creatine Chemical-Exchange Saturation Transfer (CrCEST, n=51), which quantifies unphosphorylated Cr, before and after plantar flexion exercise. The half-time of Cr recovery (t1/2, Cr) was taken as a metric of in vivo SkM OxPhos. In a subset of subjects (Healthy=13, HTN=9, HFpEF=12), percutaneous biopsy of the vastus lateralis was performed for myofiber typing, mitochondrial morphology, and proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis.  Results: HFpEF subjects demonstrated lower VO2,peak, VT, and VO2 efficiency than either control group (all p<0.05). The t1/2, Cr was significantly longer in HFpEF (p=0.005), indicative of impaired SkM OxPhos, and correlated with cycle ergometry exercise parameters. HFpEF SkM contained fewer Type-I myofibers (p=0.003). Proteomic analyses demonstrated (a) reduced levels of proteins related to OxPhos that correlated with exercise capacity and (b) reduced ERK signaling in HFpEF.  Conclusions: HFpEF patients demonstrate impaired functional capacity and SkM OxPhos. Reductions in the proportions of type 1 myofibers, proteins required for OxPhos, and altered phosphorylation signaling in the SkM may contribute to exercise intolerance in HFpEF.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle tissues grinding and protein extraction: Each frozen tissue biopsy sample (average wet weight of ~20mg) was cut into ~0.5mm cubes and kept frozen at -80 C. For protein extraction, samples were transferred to 2mL eppendorf tubes, 2 x 5mm stainless steel balls were added to each tube and kept on dry ice throughout the procedure until all samples were transferred. Tubes were placed into a tube holder device, and the entire assembly was chilled in liquid nitrogen immediately prior to placement into a ball mill (MM400 Retsch, Haan, Germany). Samples were dry ground for three cycles of 1/s 20 and 30 second per cycle, then centrifuged at 4 C for 2 minutes at 5000 rcf. Protein extraction was initiated by addition of 0.7 mL lysis buffer (1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma, 30970-100), 0.1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma), 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, VWR, PG82089), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide(CAA, TCI C0056), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, Proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 11836170001), PhosStop (Roche, 04906837001)). Tubes were placed in the ball mill and run for six cycles at 25 Hz and 30 second per cycle. Samples were centrifuged at 4 C for 2 minutes at 5000 rcf, transferred to new tubes, and centrifuged at 20,000 rcf for 8 minutes. Supernatants were decanted and kept at -80 C for further workup.  Generation of LCMS sample and spectra library: Of the total peptides generated, 5% of each sample was dried by vacuum centrifugation and used for whole proteome analysis, 85% was lyophilized and used for immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment of phosphopeptides, and the rest was used to produce spectral libraries. Spectral libraries were generated by pooling peptides from each sample. This mix was lyophilized, solubilized in 2% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate pH 10 (Sigma 17843), and separated by high pH RP-HPLC into 72 fractions that were recombined in a concatenated fashion into 6 sub-fractions.5% of each sub-fraction was dried by vacuum centrifugation and used for generation of whole proteome spectral library. The remaining 95% of each sub fraction was individually subjected to IMAC enrichment, dried, and used to generate the phosphopeptide spectral library. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, all peptides were solubilized in 0.1% TFA containing iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, iRT).Samples were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and an EasySpray source.   Spectral library generation and protein quantification: MS/MS raw files for the DDA were searched against a reference human protein sequence database including reviewed isoforms from the Uniprot database using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were considered variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance FTMS was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate limit of 1% was set for peptide and protein identification. The rest of search parameters were set to the default values. The MaxQuant output was used to generate the project-specific spectral library for DIA analysis. This library was supplemented with additional library generated using dierctDIA approach in Spectronaut. The raw files for DIA analysis were processed with Spectronaut version 13. The default setting in Spectronaut was used forpeptide and protein quantification at MS2 level.

### Data Protocol
Whole proteome data analysis: Perseus (v.1.6.6.0) was used for proteomics data processing and statistical analysis. The MS2 intensity values generated by Spectronaut 13 (Biognosys AG) were used to analyze the proteome data. The data were log2-transformed and normalized by subtracting the median for each sample. We filtered the data to have 4 valid values in at least one cohort. To compare proteomics data between groups, Student’s t-tests were employed to identify differentially expressed proteins, and volcano plots were generated using EnhancedVolcano package in R. Lists of differentially abundant proteins were then sorted, based on the p-value <0.05 and |log2FC| > 1, yielding a prioritized list for downstream bioinformatic analysis using the STRING database (string-db.org; Version 11; String Consortium 2020, last analyses performed in August 2020) and MetaCore (Clarivate Analytics). The default settings (i.e. KNN for clustering and Euclidean for distance measurement) in Perseus were used to generate heat maps for the selected proteins.   Phosphoproteome data analysis: The peptide collapse plugin in Perseus was employed to transform the Spectronaut Peptide Quant report into a modification-specific peptide-like table. Using the reported PTMLocalizationProbablities in Spectronaut, the localization cutoff of 0.75 was used to retain the high-confidence sites. Phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr, acetylation of protein N-terminal, and oxidation of Met were considered as variable modifications. The linear model implemented in the plugin was used to aggregate the data. Subsequently, the phosphopeptide intensities were log2-transformed and normalized to the median for each sample. Student’s t-tests were used for differential expression analysis of phosphopeptides using p-value of 0.05 as cutoff value. The heat maps were generated in Perseus using its default settings as described above. The default settings in MotifeR were employed to identify the enriched motifs, using the human proteome as the background with Ser and Thr as the central amino acids and p-value of 10-6 at each residue. Motifs were manually curated by cross-referencing with known published kinase motifs, as seen in the Human Protein Reference Database (www.hprd.org, accessed April 2020) and other references. Phosphoprotein quantification was performed by calculating the median intensity of all the phosphopeptides of the protein. The selected phosphoproteins were further analyzed in MetaCore and String for pathways and interaction analyses, respectively.   QA/QC and system suitability: For online monitoring of the QExactive HF instrument, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis for the spiked-in iRT peptides was performed though Skyline AutoQC, and the data were uploaded and accessed in Skyline Panorama. Meanwhile, as a measure for QC/QA, we injected standard E. coli protein digest in between samples (one injection after every four injections of samples from this study). The collected DDA data were analyzed in MaxQuant. The MaxQuant output was subsequently visualized using the PTXQC package to track the quality of the instrumentation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exercise, Hfpef, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania 3400 Civic Center Boulevard, South Pavilion, 11-176 Philadelphia, PA 19104

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Payman Zamani
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania 3400 Civic Center Boulevard, South Pavilion, 11-176 Philadelphia, PA 19104


