### Accession
PXD007688

### Title
Allergen detection in commercial foods

### Description
The frequent use of precautionary food allergen labeling statements such as “may contain” poses challenges to allergic individuals relying on such labeling to determine whether a food is safe to consume. To survey the frequency at which these precautionary statements indicate allergen contamination in commercial foods we developed a multiplexed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry assay targeting 14 common allergens. For each allergen, we selected two or more tryptic peptides belonging to two or more clinically-recognized allergenic proteins by following one of two approaches. For certain allergenic proteins, a wealth of existing mass spectrometry literature suggests ideal tryptic peptide targets. In these cases, such for milk proteins Bos d 5 and Bos d 9, as well as peanut protein Ara h 3, we chose peptides using the Allergen Peptide Browser (APB), a freely available online database we developed. To choose peptides for the remaining allergenic proteins, as well as validate our choices, we applied shotgun proteomics to pure allergen protein extracts of the aforementioned allergens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 100 mg of a food sample in a 2mL microcentrifuge tube using the TissueLyser system (Qiagen) with a 5mm stainless steel bead and 1.6 mL of extraction buffer, which consisted of 7 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for cysteine reduction. Centrifugation at 20,000g subsequently separated the lipid (upper), aqueous (middle), and insoluble (lower) layers of the extract. An aqueous aliquot of 500 uL was then moved to a separate tube. Protein concentration of the extracted sample was then determined using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay in microtiter plate format according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Alkylation was accomplished through the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubation in the dark for 30min. Samples were then diluted 1:10 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce urea concentrations to less than 1 molar for tryptic digestion. Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade (Promega) was added at a ratio of 50 ug protein to 1ug trypsin and the samples were shaken overnight for at least 14 hours at 37°C. Digests were quenched and then desalted with C18 spin columns prior to drying via SpeedVac.   Reconstituted samples were run on an Orbitrap Elite where a data dependent acquisition (DDA) schema was used to isolate and fragment the top 15 most intense multiply charged precursor ions in the ion trap. Precursor ions were initially scanned  in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 or 120,000 with a target ion population of 750,000 and a maximum injection time of 120 milliseconds. Chromatographic separation was achieved using either a ThermoFisher EasyNano LC1000 or a Waters NanoAcquity with 20 cm columns pulled and packed in house with Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur 2.4uM C18 matrix. The gradient was linear from 4% mobile phase B to 40% over either 80 min or 120 min at a flow rate of either 300nL/min (EasyNano LC1000) or 450nL/min (Waters nanoAcquity).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using the Byonic (Protein Metrics) bottom-up search engine run with a 1% protein FDR cutoff, maximum of 2 missed cleavages, and carbamidomethyl cysteine (from iodoacetamide alkylation) as the only fixed modification. The fasta files used as database search input were composed of common contaminants as well as all available proteins of the given species available from the NCBI protein database. The small number of available proteins for some species would normally pose a problem for discovery experiments aiming to identify large number of proteins due to a high false discovery rate; however, our use case of screening specific allergenic proteins is less affected. For the large-scale identification the addition of proteins belonging to phylogenetically similar organisms is one potential solution.

### Publication Abstract
The frequent use of precautionary food allergen labeling (PAL) such as "may contain" frustrates allergic individuals who rely on such labeling to determine whether a food is safe to consume. One technique to study whether foods contain allergens is targeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) employing scheduled multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). However, the applicability of a single MRM method to many commercial foods is unknown as complex and heterogeneous interferences derived from the unique composition of each food matrix can hinder quantification of trace amounts of allergen contamination. We developed a freely available, open source software package MAtrix-Dependent Interference Correction (MADIC) to identify interference and applied it with a method targeting 14 allergens. Among 84 unique food products, we found patterns of allergen contamination such as wheat in grains, milk in chocolate-containing products, and soy in breads and corn flours. We also found additional instances of contamination in products with and without PAL as well as highly variable soy content in foods containing only soybean oil and/or soy lecithin. These results demonstrate the feasibility of applying LC-MS/MS to a variety of food products with sensitive detection of multiple allergens in spite of variable matrix interference.

### Keywords
Allergy, Ige, Allergen, Food

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94518, USA

### Submitter
Derek Croote

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Quake
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94518, USA


