### Accession
PXD035128

### Title
Reduced endosomal microautophagy activity in aging associates with enhanced exocyst-mediated protein secretion

### Description
Autophagy is essential for protein quality control and regulation of the functional proteome. Failure of autophagy pathways with age contributes to loss of proteostasis in aged organisms and accelerates progression of age-related diseases. In this work, we show that activity of endosomal microautophagy (eMI), a selective type of autophagy occurring in late endosomes, declines with age and identify the subproteome affected by this loss of function. Proteomics of late endosomes from old mice revealed an aberrant glycation signature for hsc70, the chaperone responsible for substrate targeting to eMI. Age-related hsc70 glycation reduces its stability in late endosomes by favoring its organization into high molecular weight protein complexes and promoting its internalization/degradation inside late endosomes. Reduction of eMI with age associates with an increase in protein secretion, as late endosomes can release protein-loaded exosomes upon plasma membrane fusion. Our search for molecular mediators of the eMI/secretion switch identified the exocyst-RalA complex, known for its role in exocytosis, as a novel physiological eMI inhibitor that interacts with hsc70 and acts directly at the late endosome membrane. This inhibitory function along with the higher exocyst-RalA complex levels detected in late endosomes from old mice could explain, at least in part, reduced eMI activity with age. Interaction of hsc70 with components of the exocyst-RalA complex places this chaperone in the switch from eMI to secretion. Reduced intracellular degradation in favor of extracellular release of undegraded material with age may be relevant to the spreading of proteotoxicity associated with aging and progression of proteinopathies.

### Sample Protocol
isolated LE/MVBs were denatured by the addition of 50uL of LYSE buffer solution from the PreOmics iST sample preparation kit, and further sample preparation was performed according to the iST kit protocol. Peptides were directly eluted into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode over the course of a 80-minute acquisition by gradient elution from 0-22%B in from 0-56min, followed by an increase to 32%B from 56-63min, and then a ramp to 95%B to wash the column. The gradient was delivered by the EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher), and the composition of mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively.  MS parameter settings were set as follows: Fourier transform (FT) MS1 resolution (240,000 @ 200 m/z) with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6, and maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. MS1 scan range was 350-1350 m/z. Advanced peak detection (APD) was enabled with a default charge state of 2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 seconds with a 10 ppm mass tolerance. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to peptide mode, and charge states of 2-6 were selected for MS2 higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 32% in the ion trap using rapid scans. Quadrupole isolation width was set to 0.7 m/z. MS2 scans were acquired over a range of 200-1200 m/z with an AGC target if 3e4 and maximum IT of 20 ms. MS2 cycle time was set at 1 second, where MS2 scans were acquired for a maximum time of 1 second before acquiring an MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched against the Uniprot mouse database (downloaded 7/2/2020). Peptide and protein identification searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). Search parameters included fixed modification settings for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues variable modification settings for methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation, and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages. All peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level using the target-decoy strategy.  Label-free quantification and statistical testing was performed using the MSstats statistical R-package (Choi et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is essential for protein quality control and regulation of the functional proteome. Failure of autophagy pathways with age contributes to loss of proteostasis in aged organisms and accelerates the progression of age-related diseases. In this work, we show that activity of endosomal microautophagy (eMI), a selective type of autophagy occurring in late endosomes, declines with age and identify the sub-proteome affected by this loss of function. Proteomics of late endosomes from old mice revealed an aberrant glycation signature for Hsc70, the chaperone responsible for substrate targeting to eMI. Age-related Hsc70 glycation reduces its stability in late endosomes by favoring its organization into high molecular weight protein complexes and promoting its internalization/degradation inside late endosomes. Reduction of eMI with age associates with an increase in protein secretion, as late endosomes can release protein-loaded exosomes upon plasma membrane fusion. Our search for molecular mediators of the eMI/secretion switch identified the exocyst-RalA complex, known for its role in exocytosis, as a novel physiological eMI inhibitor that interacts with Hsc70 and acts directly at the late endosome membrane. This inhibitory function along with the higher exocyst-RalA complex levels detected in late endosomes from old mice could explain, at least in part, reduced eMI activity with age. Interaction of Hsc70 with components of the exocyst-RalA complex places this chaperone in the switch from eMI to secretion. Reduced intracellular degradation in favor of extracellular release of undegraded material with age may be relevant to the spreading of proteotoxicity associated with aging and progression of proteinopathies.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Aging, Lc-ms/ms, Chaperones, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, 1700 4th Street, San Francisco, CA 94158
Krogan lab

### Submitter
Alicia Richards

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
Department of Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, 1700 4th Street, San Francisco, CA 94158


