### Accession
PXD008081

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals proteins involved in the progression from non-cancerous lesions to gastric cancer

### Description
Gastric cancer (GC) is among the most aggressive malignancy affecting the world population. With almost a million cases remains in fifth position in incidence, while reaching the third position in mortality. The progression of GC is slow with several prolonged and sequential precancerous stages, including chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and finally gastric cancer. Here we used the iTRAQ chemistry in combination with high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis to describe, from the proteomics point of view, the progression of the GC disease. Tissue samples from three stages: chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia and gastric adenocarcinoma, were selected for the quantitative proteomics analysis. From four independent replicates we identified and reported quantitative data for 3,914 different proteins with at least two unique peptides confidently quantified in all replicates. We uncovered pathways and processes dysregulated between the different stages. The initial transformation is characterized by the down-regulation of ribosomes and the protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum, while overexpressing cell survival pathway and proteins such as GSTP1 and EPCAM. The transformation to GC involved the activation of DNA replication and Spliceosome pathways, overexpression of proteins supporting high rates of proliferation such as NPM1. In GC SIRT3 and SIRT5 were down-regulated, which correlated with the impairment of the mitochondrial pathways and overexpression of enzymes supporting the glycolytic phenotype such as HK3 and PCK2. Several proteins found dysregulated between stages of the progression of GC has potential to be used as specific biomarkers and/or targets for therapeutic treatment.

### Sample Protocol
All biopsies were obtained through surgical resection, in the Instituto Nacional de Cancerología. The complete study was approved by ethics committees of the Intituto Nacional de Salud Pública and the Intituto Nacional de Cancerología. For the quantitative proteomics, four samples corresponding to each of the three groups were used. Gastric cancer samples correspond to patients with intestinal adenocarcinoma moderately differentiated; premalignant lesions were acquired from patients with intestinal metaplasia; and non-cancerous lesions were obtained from patients with moderate chronic follicular gastritis. All tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and histologically classified. In addition, tissues embedded in paraffin, from ten patients for each group were used for immunohistochemistry analysis.  Each tissue sample used for protein extraction, was washed with cold PBS and homogenized in the lysis buffer (urea 7 M, thiourea 2 M, CHAPS 4%, SDS 0.1%, DTT 50 mM, PMSF 0.2 mM, Tris 40 mM pH 7.4). After homogenization, samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 ºC. The pellet was discarded and the protein content of the supernatant was estimated with 2D Quant kit (GE healthcare) according to manufacturer´s instructions. Cysteine residues were alkylated with IAA 100 mM during 30 min in the darkness. For this reaction, additional Tris was added to a final concentration of 100 mM pH 8.6.  Proteins were precipitated ethanol overnight at -20 ºC. The precipitate was solubilized with SDS 0.1%, SDC 0.5% and TEAB 0.1 M pH 8.0. Trypsin was added to a ratio of 1:10 (enzyme:substrate) and the sample was incubated for 16 h at 37 ºC. The generated peptides were chemically modified with the iTRAQ reagents. For the first experiment, we included two replicates of the three samples: non-cancerous lesions (NC1 and NC2) were labeled with iTRAQ 113 and 118 respectively, Gastric cancer (GC1 and GC2) were modified with iTRAQ 114 and 119, and premalignant lesions (PL1 and PL2) were tagged with iTRAQ 115 and 121 respectively. For the second experiment, two additional replicates were included and the peptides from the three samples were labeled as follow: NC3 and NC4 with iTRAQ 114 and 117, GC3 and GC4 with iTRAQ 115 and 119, and PL3 and PL4 with iTRAQ 116 and 121 respectively. The reaction was performed following manufacturer´s instructions. Once completed the labeling of peptides, all samples corresponding to each experiment were mixed and subjected to the elimination of the detergent. SDC was removed by ethyl acetate extraction under acidic conditions; one volume of ethyl acetate and it was added to the sample and acidified with TFA 0.5%. After vigorous vortex and centrifugation, the organic phase was discarded. An additional step of ethyl acetate extraction without TFA was achieved. Finally, the mixture of peptides was dried before the peptide fractionation step.  The mixtures of peptides were subjected to reverse phase chromatography at high pH on a RP-column (4.9 X 150mm) from Waters (USA) by means of an UPLC ultimate 3000 from Dionex (USA). The buffer systems were composed of solution A-) ammonium formate 50mM in water pH 10 and B-) ammonium formate 50mM in acetonitrile/water (60/40) pH 10. Samples were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min in buffer A and desalted for ten minutes. The elution gradient was from 0 to 80% of buffer B in 120 minutes, from 80 to 100% in 5 minutes and kept at 100% of buffer B for other 5 minutes. 60 sample fractions were collected every two minutes. Finally, fractions were pooled together in 15 final fractions, each of them composed of fractions separated by 15, as an example, the final fraction 1 was composed by fractions 1, 16, 31, 46. Each final fraction was dried on SPEED-VAC, desalted, dried and stored at -80 ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were resuspended in initial chromatographic conditions and separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system in-line coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples were first trapped on a Pre-Column (Magic AQ C18; 3 um-200 Å; 2 cm x 100 um ID) and then separated following a 250 minutes elution gradient using a capillary column (Nikkyo Technos Co; Magic AQ C18; 3 um-100 Å; 50 cm x 75 um ID) at 250 nL/min. The buffers were: A) 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water and B) 90:10 (v:v) acetonitrile:water, 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode and the full MS range was from 300-2,000 m/z. The ten most intense ions were isolated in the quadrupole and fragmented under HCD with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 33%. Precursor ions were measured at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) and the fragments at 17,500. Only double and higher charged ions were eligible for fragmentation and the isolation window was set at 1.5 Th.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 [15] software. Trypsin/P was set as the digestion enzyme and carbamidomethyl-cysteine as fixed modification. N-terminal protein acetylation and Oxidation (M) were included as variable modifications. The database used for protein identification was the human reference proteome UP000005640 from UniProt repository, downloaded on April 30, 2016. To consider proteins correctly identified we accept those with at least two razor-unique peptides and one unique peptide. An FDR of 1% based on the target-decoy strategy was used as filter to ensure the quality of identifications.  For protein relative quantification we incorporated additional filters. To avoid the use of peptide that clearly suffer from isotopic contamination, in the quantitative report, all peptides were filtered by the precursor isotopic distribution (PIF 0.75). To get more confident results we only used proteins with at least two unique peptides identified/quantified according to the above criteria.   The quantitative data was normalized based on the protein abundance of the sample NC1 from experiment 1 and NC3 from experiment 2. These two samples were in addition used to link both experiments data. Normalized data from the four replicates were used to statistically determine differences in protein expression between experimental conditions. For the statistical analysis, multiple t-test with =0.05 was used for each protein. The functional enrichments of the identified proteins were performed online on the site of DAVID Bioinformatics Resources v6.8.

### Publication Abstract
Gastric cancer is one of the most aggressive malignancies affecting humankind. With almost a million cases globally, it sits in fifth position in terms of incidence, and third in terms of mortality. The progression of this disease is slow, with prolonged and sequential precancerous stages including chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and finally gastric cancer. Here we used the iTRAQ approach combined with high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis to describe the spectrum of the gastric cancer cascade. Biopsies from three stages: chronic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, and gastric adenocarcinoma, were selected for analysis by quantitative proteomics. We identified and reported quantitative data for 3914 different proteins quantified with high confidence, uncovering pathways and processes dysregulated between the different stages. Intestinal metaplasia is characterized by the down-regulation of ribosomal proteins, with overexpression of cell survival proteins such as GSTP1 and EPCAM. The transformation to gastric cancer involves overexpression of the DNA replication and the spliceosome pathways. The impairment of mitochondrial pathways was correlated with down-regulation of SIRT3 and SIRT5, and overexpression of enzymes supporting the glycolytic phenotype, such as HK3 and PCK2. Several proteins found dysregulated during the progression of gastric cancer have potential to be used as specific biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Chronic gastritis, Intestinal metaplasia, Cancer progression, Itraq labelling, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
CCG-UNAM
Departamento de interacción epidemiológica, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública. Universidad No. 655, Col.  Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62100. México.

### Submitter
Jeovanis Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Guadalupe Ayala Aguilar
Departamento de interacción epidemiológica, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública. Universidad No. 655, Col.  Santa María Ahuacatitlán, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62100. México.


