### Accession
PXD018246

### Title
Human Cardiac Fibroblast BioID2 Interactome for SKI and TAZ(WWTR1)

### Description
We used adenoviral-mediated overexpression of MYC-BioID2, MYC-BioID2-SKI, MYC-BioID2-WWTR1 (TAZ) in human primary cardiac fibroblasts to elucidate the interaction between SKI and the Hippo signaling pathway. Original data is also available on the Global Proteome Machine (http://hs2.proteome.ca/tandem/thegpm_tandem.html). Datasets are identified as follows: GPM10000002938 and 2939 are untreated negative control cell lysates; GPM10000002941 and 2942 are "empty" MYC-BioID2 vector; GPM10000002943 and 2944 are MYC-BioID2-SKI; and GPM10000002944 and 2945 are MYC-BioID2-WWTR1(TAZ).

### Sample Protocol
Primary cardiac fibroblasts were isolated from discard tissue acquired from patients undergoing elective cardiac bypass graft surgery. Cells were passaged twice prior to infection with a MOI of 10 of adenovirus overexpressing BioID2 constructs. After 36 hours of infection, samples were harvested and processed exactly as described in J Cell Biol. 2012 Mar 19;196(6):801-10. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201112098 (PMID: 22412018). Samples isolated by BioID2 pulldown were subject to tryptic digestion, and digested peptide solutions for each biological replicate was subject to two technical replicate analyses on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in standard tandem MS/MS with data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification parameters were as follows: minimum fragment M/Z of 100; precursor mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm; fragment mass error of 0.02 Da, and a maximum E-value of 0.01. Fixed modifications for oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine were also included in the analytical parameters. Peptides were compared against the SwissProt human protein database and were identified and quantified using X!tandem (Alanine, 2017.02.01).

### Publication Abstract
We have previously shown that overexpression of SKI, an endogenous TGF-&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> repressor, deactivates the pro-fibrotic myofibroblast phenotype in the heart. We now show that SKI also functions independently of SMAD/TGF-&#x3b2; signaling, by activating the Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway and inhibiting the Transcriptional co-Activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ or WWTR1). The mechanism(s) by which SKI targets TAZ to inhibit cardiac fibroblast activation and fibrogenesis remain undefined. A rat model of post-myocardial infarction was used to examine the expression of TAZ during acute fibrogenesis and chronic heart failure. Results were then corroborated with primary rat cardiac fibroblast cell culture performed both on plastic and on inert elastic substrates, along with the use of siRNA and adenoviral expression vectors for active forms of SKI, YAP, and TAZ. Gene expression was examined by qPCR and luciferase assays, while protein expression was examined by immunoblotting and fluorescence microscopy. Cell phenotype was further assessed by functional assays. Finally, to elucidate SKI's effects on Hippo signaling, the SKI and TAZ interactomes were captured in human cardiac fibroblasts using BioID2 and mass spectrometry. Potential interactors were investigated in vitro to reveal novel mechanisms of action for SKI. In vitro assays on elastic substrates revealed the ability of TAZ to overcome environmental stimuli and induce the activation of hypersynthetic cardiac myofibroblasts. Further cell-based assays demonstrated that SKI causes specific proteasomal degradation of TAZ, but not YAP, and shifts actin cytoskeleton dynamics to inhibit myofibroblast activation. These findings were supported by identifying the bi-phasic expression of TAZ in vivo during post-MI remodeling and fibrosis. BioID2-based interactomics in human cardiac fibroblasts suggest that SKI interacts with actin-modifying proteins and with LIM Domain-containing protein 1 (LIMD1), a negative regulator of Hippo signaling. Furthermore, we found that LATS2 interacts with TAZ, whereas LATS1 does not, and that LATS2 knockdown prevented TAZ downregulation with SKI overexpression. Our findings indicate that SKI's capacity to regulate cardiac fibroblast activation is mediated, in part, by Hippo signaling. We postulate that the interaction between SKI and TAZ in cardiac fibroblasts is arbitrated by LIMD1, an important intermediary in focal adhesion-associated signaling pathways. This study contributes to the understanding of the unique physiology of cardiac fibroblasts, and of the relationship between SKI expression and cell phenotype.

### Keywords
Heart, Ski, Bioid2, Hippo, Cardiac fibroblast, Taz

### Affiliations
University of Manitoba Department of Physiology & Pathophysiology St. Boniface Hospital Albrechtsen Research Centre Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences
University of Manitoba
St. Boniface Hospital Albrechtsen Research Centre
Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences

### Submitter
Natalie Landry

### Lab Head
Dr Ian M. C. Dixon
University of Manitoba Department of Physiology & Pathophysiology St. Boniface Hospital Albrechtsen Research Centre Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences


