### Accession
PXD021512

### Title
Biostimulant impacts of Glutacetine on bread wheat grain proteome

### Description
It is well documented that biostimulants could play an important role in agriculture. Additionally, increased fertilizer use efficiency is essential for maintaining both yield and grain quality, especially for bread wheat, which is a major global crop. In the present study, we explored the effects of mixing urea-ammonium-nitrate fertilizer with Glutacetine® on the physiological responses, agronomic traits and grain quality of winter wheat. Grain proteome analysis revealed that Glutacetine strongly reduced 11 proteins including storage proteins. Indeed, 2 alpha-gliadins and 2 avenin-like proteins decreased after Glutacetine application, which were good for celiac disease patients. Moreover, 2 glutenin HMW subunit were reduced, changing the gliadin/glutenin ratio and the HMW/LMW ratio, thus modifying the wheat flour dough quality. Our investigation reveals the important role of these formulations in achieving significant increases in seed yield and grain quality.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 25 mg of wholemeal flour milled for 5 min at 4°C in cold KCl (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 7.8). The sample was then centrifuged for 15 min (12 000 rpm tr/min, 4°C) and supernatant 1 was collected. 400 µL of SDS sample buffer (2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 50 mM DTT, 40 mM Tris-Cl, pH 6.8) were added to the pellet for 1 h of incubation at ambient temperature. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and 40 µl (10% v/v) of cold TCA 72% was added for 2 h of incubation at 4°C. After centrifugation, the resulting pellet was washed three times in ice-cold acetone then dried at room temperature and finally added to supernatant 1 for Bradford analysis and SDS-PAGE electrophoresis (20 µg protein). For nano-LC fragmentation, protein or peptide samples were first desalted and concentrated onto µC18 Omix pipette tips (Agilent) before analysis. The chromatography step was performed on a NanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) ultra-high pressure nano flow chromatography system. Peptides were concentrated onto a C18 pepmap 100 (5mm x 300µm i.d.) precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated at 50°C onto a reversed phase Reprosil column (25cm x 75μm i.d.) packed with 1.6μm C18 coated porous silica beads (Ionopticks). Mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (v/v) (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 99.9% ACN (v/v) (B). The nanoflow rate was set at 400 nl/min, and the gradient profile was as follows: from 2 to 15% B within 60 min, followed by an increase to 25% B within 30 min and further to 37% within 10 min, followed by a washing step at 95% B and re-equilibration. Mass spectrometry (MS) experiments were carried out on a TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with a modified nano electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). The system was calibrated each week and mass precision was better than 1 ppm. A 1600 spray voltage with a capillary temperature of 180°C was typically employed for ionizing. MS spectra were acquired in the positive mode in the mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z. In the experiments described here, the mass spectrometer was operated in PASEF mode with exclusion of single charged peptides. A number of 10 PASEF MS/MS scans was performed for 1.16 seconds from charge range 2-5. The fragmentation pattern was used to determine the sequence of the peptide.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and label-free quantification (LFQ) were performed using Peaks X software. A Uniprot Triticum aestivum (including 105 061 entries) database was used. The variable modifications allowed were as follows: C-carbamidomethyl, C-propioamide, K-acetylation, methionine oxidation, and deamidation (NQ). “Trypsin” was selected as semispecific. Mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da for MS and MS/MS mode respectively. Data were filtered according to a peptide FDR of 1%, ≥2 unique peptides per protein and the elimination of protein redundancy on the basis of proteins being evidenced by the same set or a subset of peptides. For LFQ, the Peaks Q method was used with TIC as the normalization factor and quality > 5. Peptide detection was required in a least 2 samples per group and modified forms were excluded. A 1.5-fold increase in relative abundance and a significance of ≥ 20 were used to determine enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Biostimulants could play an important role in agriculture particularly for increasing N fertilizer use efficiency that is essential for maintaining both yield and grain quality in bread wheat, which is a major global crop. In the present study, we examined the effects of mixing urea-ammonium-nitrate fertilizer (UAN) or urea with five new biostimulants containing Glutacetine&#xae; or its derivative formulations (VNT1, 2, 3, and 4) on the physiological responses, agronomic traits, and grain quality of winter wheat. A first experiment under greenhouse conditions showed that VNT1, VNT3, and VNT4 significantly increased the seed yield and grain numbers per ear. VNT4 also enhanced total plant nitrogen (N) and total grain N, which induced a higher N Harvest Index (NHI). The higher post-heading N uptake (for VNT1 and VNT4) and the acceleration of senescence speed with all formulations enabled better nutrient remobilization efficiency, especially in terms of N mobilization from roots and straw toward the grain with VNT4. The grain ionome was changed by the formulations with the bioavailability of iron improved with the addition of VNT4, and the phytate concentrations in flour were reduced by VNT1 and VNT4. A second experiment in three contrasting field trials confirmed that VNT4 increased seed yield and N use efficiency. Our investigation reveals the important role of these new formulations in achieving significant increases in seed yield and grain quality.

### Keywords
Plant biostimulant, Flour quality, Nitrogen fertilizer, Wheat

### Affiliations
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INRAE, UMR EVA, SFR Normandie Végétal FED4277, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen, France
University of Caen

### Submitter
VICTOR MAIGNAN

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Christophe AVICE
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INRAE, UMR EVA, SFR Normandie Végétal FED4277, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen, France


