### Accession
PXD020110

### Title
Proteomics Characterization of Mitochondrial-Derived Vesicles Under Oxidative Stress

### Description
Mitochondria share attributes of vesicular transport with their bacterial ancestors given their ability to form mitochondrial-derived vesicles (MDVs). MDV formation enhances with stress and has been explored for its potential role in mitochondrial-directed cellular and extracellular signalling. Although the fate of MDVs as a form of mitochondrial quality control and cellular communication has been suggested, the proteomic cargo has remained mostly undefined. In this study, we strategically used an in vitro MDV budding/reconstitution assay, following graded oxidative stress on cardiac mitochondria, to identify and characterize the MDV proteome. Our results confirmed previously identified cardiac MDV markers while also revealing a complete map of the MDV proteome, paving the way to understanding the likely roles for MDV release. MDV cargo was particularly enriched with mitochondrial matrix and inner membrane proteins. Oxidative stress vulnerability of proteins directed the cargo loading, which was enhanced by antimycin A (Ant-A). Among OXPHOS complexes, complexes III and V were found to be Ant-A-sensitive. Proteins from metabolic pathways such as TCA cycle, amino acid, fatty acid and aldehyde metabolism, Fe-S cluster, antioxidant response proteins, autophagy and vesicular processes were also found to be Ant-A sensitive. Intriguingly, proteins containing hyper-reactive cysteine residues (HRCR), which act as redox switches in regulating metabolic pathways, including professional redox enzymes and those that are involved in iron metabolism were found to be loaded in MDVs with Ant-A sensitivity. Lastly, we estimated a possible significant contribution of MDVs to the formation of extracellular vesicles, which can serve as an indicator of mitochondrial stress. In conclusion, using graded oxidative stress, our study gives a layout of MDV proteomics signature, delineates the cargo selectivity and hints at the potential of MDVs and the novel protein cargo identified to serve as vital biomarkers during mitochondrial stress and its related pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Groups: Triplicates of Baseline or Antimycin-A treated mitochondrial-derived vesicles for the duration of 30, 60 and 120 minutes, with top and bottom adjacent layers of 35-40% sucrose interface. The top and bottom adjacent layers of 35-40% sucrose interface, containing the MDV fraction was mixed with four times the volume of a protein precipitation buffer (50% acetone + 50% ethanol + 0.1% acetic acid), then vortexed and incubated at -20°C overnight. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000 x g in a microfuge. The supernatant was removed carefully and discarded, and the residual precipitation buffer was allowed to evaporate at room temperature for 20 minutes, making sure not to over-dry the pellet. The protein precipitate was then solubilized by adding 200 µL of 8 M urea solution prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0-8.5). Reduction buffer (1 M dithiothreitol in water, prepared fresh) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. Alkylation buffer (1M iodoacetamide in water) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated for 40 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted with five volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) was added to the samples at a ratio of 1:100 of trypsin to protein by weight and incubated overnight at 37°C. Sep-pak columns (Waters) were activated using 1 mL of acetonitrile. Columns were then equilibrated with 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid solution in water. Trypsinized samples were acidified using 5% formic acid in water to reach a final concentration of 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were then loaded onto the sep-pak columns. Columns were washed with 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid. Samples were eluted using 0.5 mL of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) and collected in microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were dried in a speedvac using no heat and stored at -20°C.  Following reconstitution in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid final concentration: 1 µg/µL) peptide fragments were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS. The system used consisted of an Eksignet Nano2D ultra HPLC (Sciex) coupled with an LTQ Velos-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-electrospray interface operated in positive ion mode. The mobile phases consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA in water as buffer A and 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% acetonitrile as buffer B. The pre-column used was 100μm × 20 mm, packed with 5 μm 120-Å pore size Magic C18AQ resins (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The analytical column was 75 μm × 100 mm and packed in-house with reverse phase Magic C18AQ resins (1.9 μm; 120-Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany).   Briefly, the sample was loaded on the column using 98% of buffer A at a flow rate of 1.5 µL/min for 15 min. Then, a gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B was performed over the course of 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS method consisted of one full MS scan from 300 to 1700 m/z followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, with a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, and a repeat duration of 90 s. As well, for the experiments on the Orbitrap MS the full MS was in performed in the Orbitrap analyzer with R = 60,000 defined at m/z 400, while the MS/MS analyses were performed in the iontrap. To improve the mass accuracy, all the measurements in Orbitrap mass analyzer were performed with internal recalibration (“Lock Mass”). On the Orbitrap, the charge state rejection function was enabled, with single and “unassigned” charge states rejected.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the LTQ-Orbitrap were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0). A target-decoy database search was performed against Rattus norvegicus UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL protein sequence databases, with the addition of commonly observed contaminants and their reversed sequences. Database search was performed using precursor ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Trypsin was selected as the protease allowing the identification of semi-tryptic peptides with at most two miscleavages. Variable modifications were set to include the mono-oxidation of methionine and the hydroxylation of leucine, proline, phenylalanine and lysine, while cysteine carboxyamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Resulting protein identifications with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 were deemed of high confidence in a given MS experiment. To maximize stringency, a protein was deemed confidently detected in a given experimental condition when identified in at least two biological replicates. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantitation using the LFQ algorithm. Normalized protein quantification values were then imported in the Perseus software platform for log transformation, data imputation, and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria share attributes of vesicular transport with their bacterial ancestors given their ability to form mitochondrial-derived vesicles (MDVs). MDVs are involved in mitochondrial quality control and their formation is enhanced with stress and may, therefore, play a potential role in mitochondrial-cellular communication. However, MDV proteomic cargo has remained mostly undefined. In this study, we strategically used an in vitro MDV budding/reconstitution assay on cardiac mitochondria, followed by graded oxidative stress, to identify and characterize the MDV proteome. Our results confirmed previously identified cardiac MDV markers, while also revealing a complete map of the MDV proteome, paving the way to a better understanding of the role of MDVs. The oxidative stress vulnerability of proteins directed the cargo loading of MDVs, which was enhanced by antimycin A (Ant-A). Among OXPHOS complexes, complexes III and V were found to be Ant-A-sensitive. Proteins from metabolic pathways such as the TCA cycle and fatty acid metabolism, along with Fe-S cluster, antioxidant response proteins, and autophagy were also found to be Ant-A sensitive. Intriguingly, proteins containing hyper-reactive cysteine residues, metabolic redox switches, including professional redox enzymes and those that mediate iron metabolism, were found to be components of MDV cargo with Ant-A sensitivity. Last, we revealed a possible contribution of MDVs to the formation of extracellular vesicles, which may indicate mitochondrial stress. In conclusion, our study provides an MDV proteomics signature that delineates MDV cargo selectivity and hints at the potential for MDVs and their novel protein cargo to serve as vital biomarkers during mitochondrial stress and related pathologies.

### Keywords
Heart, Oxidative stress, Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Rat, Cardiac mitochondria, Mitochondrial-derived vesicles, Mdv

### Affiliations
Professor University Research Chair in Integrative Mitochondrial Biology Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences University of Ottawa RGN building,  451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON  K1H 8M5 Canada
Postdoctoral Fellow

### Submitter
Goutham Vasam

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Burelle
Professor University Research Chair in Integrative Mitochondrial Biology Interdisciplinary School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences University of Ottawa RGN building,  451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON  K1H 8M5 Canada


