### Accession
PXD024731

### Title
Transcriptional signature in microglia associated with Aβ plaque phagocytosis

### Description
The role of microglia cells in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is well recognized, however their molecular and functional diversity remain unclear. Here we isolated amyloid plaque-containing (using labelling with methoxy–XO4, XO4+) and non-containing (XO4-) microglia from an AD mouse model. Transcriptomics analysis identified different transcriptional trajectories in ageing and AD mice. XO4+ microglial transcriptomes demonstrated dysregulated expression of genes associated with late onset AD. We further showed that the transcriptional program associated with XO4+ microglia from mice is present in a subset of human microglia isolated from brains of individuals with AD. XO4- microglia displayed transcriptional signatures associated with accelerated ageing and contained more intracellular post-synaptic material than XO4+ microglia, despite reduced active synaptosome phagocytosis. We identified HIF1α as potentially regulating synaptosome phagocytosis in vitro using primary human microglia, and BV2 mouse microglial cells. Together these findings provide insight into molecular mechanisms underpinning the functional diversity of microglia in AD.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for proteomics were processed by SDS lysis, reduced, alkylated by chloracetamide and then subjected to tryptic digestion. Samples were analysed on a SCIEX TripleToF 6600 instrument in DIA mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analysed in Skyline against a DDA spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
The role of microglia cells in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is well recognized, however their molecular and functional diversity remain unclear. Here, we isolated amyloid plaque-containing (using labelling with methoxy-XO4, XO4<sup>+</sup>) and non-containing (XO4<sup>-</sup>) microglia from an AD mouse model. Transcriptomics analysis identified different transcriptional trajectories in ageing and AD mice. XO4<sup>+</sup> microglial transcriptomes demonstrated dysregulated expression of genes associated with late onset AD. We further showed that the transcriptional program associated with XO4<sup>+</sup> microglia from mice is present in a subset of human microglia isolated from brains of individuals with AD. XO4<sup>-</sup> microglia displayed transcriptional signatures associated with accelerated ageing and contained more intracellular post-synaptic material than XO4<sup>+</sup> microglia, despite reduced active synaptosome phagocytosis. We identified HIF1&#x3b1; as potentially regulating synaptosome phagocytosis in vitro using primary human microglia, and BV2 mouse microglial cells. Together, these findings provide insight into molecular mechanisms underpinning the functional diversity of microglia in AD.

### Keywords
Alzheizer's disease, Microglia, Tripletof 6600

### Affiliations
Monash University
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Croft

### Lab Head
Dr Nathan Croft
Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia


