### Accession
PXD025751

### Title
Effect of soybean agglutinin on biological function of gut

### Description
This study aims to investigate the effects of SBA on the cell cycle, apoptosis, and to verify the mechanism of SBA anti-nutritional characters based on proteomic-based analysis. The IPEC-J2 cell line was cultured with medium containing 0.0, 0.5 or 2.0 mg/mL SBA. With increasing SBA levels, the percentage of the cells at G0/G1 phase, cell apoptosis rates, expressions of Bax and p21, and the activities of Casp-3 and Casp-9 were increased, while cyclin D1 and Bcl-2 expressions were declined (p<0.05). The proteomic analysis showed that the numbers of differentially expressed proteins, induced by SBA, were mainly enriched in different pathways including DNA replication, base excision repair, nucleus excision repair, mismatch repair, amide and peptide biosynthesis, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, as well as structures and functions of mitochondria and ribosome. In conclusion, the anti-nutritional mechanism of SBA is a complex cellular process. Such process including DNA related activities; protein synthesis and metabolism; signal-conducting relation; as well as subcellular structure and function. This study provides comprehensive information to understand the toxic mechanism of SBA in monogastrics.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Protein Extraction The IPEC-J2 cells were treated with 0.0, 0.5 or 2.0 mg/mL SBA for 24 h, and cell sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 8 M urea). Then the samples were centrifuged at 12000 xg at 4 °C for 10 min to remove the remaining debris. Finally, we collected the supernatant and determined the protein concentration using BCA kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
To identify protein and succinylation, data were processed by the MaxQuant that match Tandem mass search engine (v.1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the transcriptome data, which was downloaded from the published database (UniProt) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were adjusted to < 1 %, while minimum score for peptides was set at > 40.  2.14 Bioinformatics Method 2.14.1 GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was originated from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The identified protein ID was firstly converted to the UniProt ID and then was mapped to GO IDs by protein ID. The InterProScan software (versionv.5.14-53.0, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method, if some identified proteins were not found in UniProt-GOA database. Finally, the proteins were classified by GO annotation, based on biological process, molecular function, and cellular component (Ashburner et al., 2000). 2.14.2 KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway (Kanehisa et al., 2010). Firstly, protein’s KEGG database description was annotated by KEGG online service tools KAAS (KAAS v.2.0, http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_mai). Then, KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper was used for mapping the annotation result of the KEGG pathway database. 2.15 Statistical analysis Each experiment was repeated at least for three times and numerical data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Student’s t-test was used to compare the data between two groups. Data among three groups were analyzed using ANOVA followed by the least significant difference (LSD) tests of SPSS Statistics Base 17.0. Principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out with the RStudio in R v.3.5.3 (R Core Team, 2018). p<0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Soybean agglutinin (SBA) has a toxic effect on most animals. The anti-nutritional mechanisms of SBA are not fully understood, in terms of cell survival activity and metabolism of intestinal cells. This study aims to investigate the effects of SBA on the cell cycle, apoptosis, and to verify the mechanism of SBA anti-nutritional characters based on proteomic-based analysis. The IPEC-J2 cell line was cultured with medium containing 0.0, 0.5, or 2.0 mg/mL SBA. With increasing SBA levels, the percentage of the cells at G0/G1 phase, cell apoptosis rates, expressions of Bax and p21, and the activities of Casp-3 and Casp-9 were increased, while cyclin D1 and Bcl-2 expressions were declined (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). The proteomic analysis showed that the numbers of differentially expressed proteins, induced by SBA, were mainly enriched in different pathways including DNA replication, base excision repair, nucleus excision repair, mismatch repair, amide and peptide biosynthesis, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, as well as structures and functions of mitochondria and ribosome. In conclusion, the anti-nutritional mechanism of SBA is a complex cellular process. Such process including DNA related activities; protein synthesis and metabolism; signal-conducting relation; as well as subcellular structure and function. This study provides comprehensive information to understand the toxic mechanism of SBA in monogastrics.

### Keywords
Sba, Gut

### Affiliations
Animal Production Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Al-Azhar University, Nasr City, Cairo
Key Laboratory of Animal Production, Product Quality and Security, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Jilin Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, P. R. China 130118

### Submitter
Mohammed Hamdy Farouk

### Lab Head
Dr Guixin Qin
Key Laboratory of Animal Production, Product Quality and Security, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Jilin Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, P. R. China 130118


