### Accession
PXD036170

### Title
Redirecting the neo-substrate specificity of Cereblon-targeting PROTACs to Helios

### Description
Immunomodulatory imide drugs (IMiDs), such as thalidomide and its analogues, are some of the most commonly utilized E3 ligase ligands for the development of proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs). While the canonical neo-substrates of IMiDs (i.e., Ikaros and Aiolos) are often considered to be unwanted off-targets of PROTACs, maintaining the degradation of these neo-substrates also provides the opportunity to synergistically degrade multiple proteins with a single compound. Here, we report the development of ALV-07-082-03, a CDK4/CDK6/Helios triple degrader that consists of palbociclib, an FDA-approved CDK4/6 inhibitor, conjugated to DKY709, a novel IMiD-based Helios degrader. Pharmacological co-degradation of CDK4/6 and Helios resulted in potent suppression of downstream signaling and proliferation in cancer cells, as well as enhanced de-repression of IL-2 secretion. Thus, not only do we demonstrate the possibility of rationally re-directing the neo-substrate specificity of PROTACs by incorporating alternative molecular glue molecules as E3 ligase ligands, but our findings also suggest that co-targeting CDK4/6 and Helios may have synergistic effects.

### Sample Protocol
TMT LC-MS3 mass spectrometry MOLT-4 cells were treated with 1 µM of ALV-07-082-03 in biological duplicate and DMSO vehicle control in biological triplicate for 5h. Cell lysis and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelled tryptic peptides were prepared for LC-MS analysis following procedures published in Donovan et al 201830.     Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm 75 μm inner diameter EasySpray ES903 microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each analysis used a MS3-based TMT method as described previously31. The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 × 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 s for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 × 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursors set to 10.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data analysis Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (February 2020) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework32. Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework33.

### Publication Abstract
Immunomodulatory imide drugs (IMiDs), such as thalidomide and its analogues, are some of the most commonly utilized E3 ligase ligands for the development of proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs). While the canonical neo-substrates of IMiDs (i.e., Ikaros and Aiolos) are often considered to be unwanted targets of PROTACs, maintaining the degradation of these neo-substrates also provides the opportunity to synergistically degrade multiple proteins with a single compound. Here, we report the development of ALV-07-082-03, a CDK4/CDK6/Helios triple degrader that consists of palbociclib, an FDA-approved CDK4/6 inhibitor, conjugated to DKY709, a novel IMiD-based Helios degrader. Pharmacological codegradation of CDK4/6 and Helios resulted in potent suppression of downstream signaling and proliferation in cancer cells, as well as enhanced derepression of IL-2 secretion. Thus, not only do we demonstrate the possibility of rationally redirecting the neo-substrate specificity of PROTACs by incorporating alternative molecular glue molecules as E3 ligase ligands but our findings also suggest that cotargeting CDK4/6 and Helios may have synergistic effects.

### Keywords
Degrader, Helios, Cdk6, Cdk4, Targeted protein degradation, Protac

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


