### Accession
PXD002544

### Title
RNAi-mediated downregulation of poplar plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs) changes plasma membrane proteome composition and affects leaf physiology

### Description
Plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs) are one subfamily of aquaporins that mediate the transmembrane transport of water. To reveal their function in poplar, we generated transgenic poplar plants in which the translation of PIP genes was downregulated by RNA interference investigated these plants with a comprehensive leaf plasma membrane proteome and physiome analysis. First, inhibition of PIP synthesis strongly altered the leaf plasma membrane protein composition. Strikingly, several signaling components and transporters involved in the regulation of stomatal movement were differentially regulated in transgenic poplars. Furthermore, hormonal crosstalk related to abscisic acid, auxin and brassinosteroids was altered, in addition to cell wall biosynthesis/cutinization, the organization of cellular structures and membrane trafficking. A physiological analysis confirmed the proteomic results. The leaves had wider opened stomata and higher net CO2 assimilation and transpiration rates as well as greater mesophyll conductance for CO2 (gm) and leaf hydraulic conductance (Kleaf). Based on these results, we conclude that PIP proteins not only play essential roles in whole leaf water and CO2 flux but have important roles in the regulation of stomatal movement.

### Sample Protocol
Populus × canescens transgenic lines with reduced PIP gene expression were generated using RNA interference (RNAi). Plasma membranes from leaves were isolated from the crude membrane fraction using the two phase partitioning system, and proteins were digested by a modified FASP procedure. The samples were analyzed by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry on a OrbitrapXL.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were loaded into Progenesis LC−MS software (version 2.5, Nonlinear Dynamics) and analyzed. After filtering, the raw abundances of the remaining features were normalized to allow correction for factors resulting from experimental variation. All of the MS/MS spectra were exported as a Mascot generic file and used for the peptide identification with MASCOT (version 2.3.02) in the P. trichocarpa protein database (version 3, 30195906 residues, 73013 sequences). The search parameters included a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a MSMS tolerance of 0.6 Da, one missed cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethylation as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation as variable modifications. Using a MASCOT percolator score cutoff of 15 and a significance threshold of P < 0.05, the MASCOT-integrated decoy database search calculated a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1%. The peptide assignments were reimported into Progenesis LC−MS software. Finally, the protein abundances were calculated after summing the abundances of all of the peptides allocated to each protein. Additionally, for the identification of PIPs, a small database comprising the 15 P. x canescens sequences was used.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs) are one subfamily of aquaporins that mediate the transmembrane transport of water. To reveal their function in poplar, we generated transgenic poplar plants in which the translation of PIP genes was downregulated by RNA interference investigated these plants with a comprehensive leaf plasma membrane proteome and physiome analysis. First, inhibition of PIP synthesis strongly altered the leaf plasma membrane protein composition. Strikingly, several signaling components and transporters involved in the regulation of stomatal movement were differentially regulated in transgenic poplars. Furthermore, hormonal crosstalk related to abscisic acid, auxin and brassinosteroids was altered, in addition to cell wall biosynthesis/cutinization, the organization of cellular structures and membrane trafficking. A physiological analysis confirmed the proteomic results. The leaves had wider opened stomata and higher net CO2 assimilation and transpiration rates as well as greater mesophyll conductance for CO2 (gm) and leaf hydraulic conductance (Kleaf). Based on these results, we conclude that PIP proteins not only play essential roles in whole leaf water and CO2 flux but have important roles in the regulation of stomatal movement.

### Keywords
Aquaporin; pip, Plasma membrane intrinsic protein; populus × canescens; plasma membrane proteomics; photosynthesis; stomatal movement

### Affiliations
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr.1 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg-Peter Schnitzler
Research Unit Environmental Simulation, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr.1 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


