### Accession
PXD014697

### Title
HUNTER N-termini profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana leaves using different proteases

### Description
Comparison of protein N-termini in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves by the HUNTER method; the corresponding digestion was performed with legumain, GluC and trypsin.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana columbia (Col-8) proteome extract were harvested from 10 week old plant leaves. The proteome was split and labeled in a 1:1 ratio with different dimethyl-labels (CH2O/13CD2O formaldehyde) on protein level as described in detail in Weng, Demir et al 2019. Subsequently the samples were pooled and digested with the three different proteases legumain, GluC and trypsin. Protease-generated peptide termini were modified with a hydrophobic undecanal tag and depleted by C18 solid-phase extraction, leaving enriched N-terminal peptides in the flow-through. Peptides were analyzed using a two-column nano-HPLC setup (ThermoFisher, Dreieich, Germany) with a binary gradient from 5-35% B (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) for 80 minutes coupled online to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) as described (Rinschen et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification from the acquired tandem mass spectra as described (Rinschen et al., 2017). Significantly altered protein N-terminal peptides were determined by the R limma package as previously published (Gomez-Auli et al., 2016) with a significance cut-off of p < 0.05 and log2FC >1 or <-1. Subsequent peptide evaluation and annotation was performed using an in-house Perl script (MANTI.pl , https://MANTI.sourceforge.io).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomics utilizes proteolytic enzymes with well characterized specificities to generate peptides amenable for identification by high-throughput tandem mass spectrometry. Trypsin, which cuts specifically after the basic residues lysine and arginine, is the predominant enzyme used for proteome digestion, although proteases with alternative specificities are required to detect sequences that are not accessible after tryptic digest. Here, we show that the human cysteine protease legumain exhibits a strict substrate specificity for cleavage after asparagine and aspartic acid residues during in-solution digestions of proteomes extracted from <i>Escherichia coli</i>, mouse embryonic fibroblast cell cultures, and <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> leaves. Generating peptides highly complementary in sequence, yet similar in their biophysical properties, legumain (as compared to trypsin or GluC) enabled complementary proteome and protein sequence coverage. Importantly, legumain further enabled the identification and enrichment of protein N-termini not accessible in GluC- or trypsin-digested samples. Legumain cannot cleave after glycosylated Asn residues, which enabled the robust identification and orthogonal validation of N-glycosylation sites based on alternating sequential sample treatments with legumain and PNGaseF and vice versa. Taken together, we demonstrate that legumain is a practical, efficient protease for extending the proteome and sequence coverage achieved with trypsin, with unique possibilities for the characterization of post-translational modification sites.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis hunter n-termini profiling

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str D-52425 Juelich Germany


