### Accession
PXD021784

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Tasmanian devil facial tumour disease

### Description
The Tasmanian devil is the only mammalian species harbouring two lineages of contagious cancer within its population. This dataset represents the proteomics analysis of DFT1, DFT2 and SALEM lines.

### Sample Protocol
DFT1_4906, DFT2_RV and Fibs_Salem cells (n=3) were lysed in buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 7.5 mM TCEP, and 50mM TEAB. The lysate was subjected to probe sonication to sheer DNA and clarified by centrifugation. The disulphide bonds of proteins in the lysates were reduced by incubating with 10 mM TCEP at 60 °C for 15 min followed by alkylation by 40 mM chloracetamide for 15 min at RT. The proteins were then digested using trypsin overnight at 37 °C. SDC was removed by acid precipitation using trifluoroacetic acid followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 16060xg. The resultant peptides were fractionated using a 10 cm x 4.6 mm Chromolith C18 column running a mobile phase consisting of buffer A (aqueous 0.1% TFA) and buffer B (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). The peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5 to 40 % buffer B over 30 min collecting 38 fractions which were concatenated into 7 pools before centrifugal evaporation. Samples were reconstituted using 0.1% formic acid and analysed using Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained was searched against the Tasmanian devil protein database obtained from NCBI (20170301) using MaxQuant software with a false discovery rate set to 1% with following parameters: enzyme: trypsin, variable modifications: oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-Term), fixed modifications: Carbidomethyl (C). Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) was performed in Perseus, and only proteins present in all three replicates of any one sample were considered for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Transmissible cancers are malignant cells that can spread between individuals of a population, akin to both a parasite and a mobile graft. The survival of the Tasmanian devil, the largest remaining marsupial carnivore, is threatened by the remarkable emergence of two independent lineages of transmissible cancer, devil facial tumour (DFT) 1 and devil facial tumour 2 (DFT2). To aid the development of a vaccine and to interrogate how histocompatibility barriers can be overcome, we analysed the peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) molecules from Tasmanian devil cells and representative cell lines of each transmissible cancer. Here, we show that DFT1&#xa0;+&#xa0;IFN-&#x3b3; and DFT2 cell lines express a restricted repertoire of MHC-I allotypes compared with fibroblast cells, potentially reducing the breadth of peptide presentation. Comparison of the peptidomes from DFT1&#xa0;+&#xa0;IFN&#x3b3;, DFT2 and host fibroblast cells demonstrates a dominant motif, despite differences in MHC-I allotypes between the cell lines, with preference for a hydrophobic leucine residue at position 3 and position &#x3a9; of peptides. DFT1 and DFT2 both present peptides derived from neural proteins, which reflects a shared cellular origin that could be exploited for vaccine design. These results suggest that polymorphisms in MHC-I molecules between tumours and host can be 'hidden' by a common peptide motif, providing the potential for permissive passage of infectious cells and demonstrating complexity in mammalian histocompatibility barriers.

### Keywords
Dft2, Tasmanian devil, Sarcophilus harrisii, Contagious cancer, Devil facial tumour 2, Devil facial tumour 1, Dft1

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Sri Ramarathinam

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


