### Accession
PXD008910

### Title
Tetraploid wheat (Triticum turgidum L.),LC-MSMS

### Description
We used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) to perform a quantitative proteomic analysis of immature spikes harvested from tetraploid near-isogenic lines of wheat with normal spikelete (NSs), FRSs, and RSs and investigated the molecular mechanisms of lateral meristem differentiation and development. This work provides valuable insight into the underlying functions of the lateral meristem and how it can produce differences in the branching of tetraploid wheat spikes.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, excess labeling reagent was removed by strong cation exchange chromatography. Peptides were separated using an Agilent 1200 HPLC System (Poly-SEA 5 μL 300 Å 2.0 × 150 mm with 215 nm and 280 nm UV detection; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) at 0.3 ml/min using a nonlinear binary gradient starting with buffer A and transitioning to buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3.0, 500 mM KCl, 25% acetonitrile). The first fraction was collected at 0–5 min. Thereafter, fractions were collected at 4 min intervals from 6 to 44 min, and the final fraction was collected at 45–50 min, to generate a total of 12 fractions. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum freeze dryer for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were resuspended in Nano-RPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile). Online Nano-RPLC was performed using an Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 2D system (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Proteins were identified using two technical replicates for each biological replicate. Samples were loaded onto a C18 nanoLC trap column (100 × 3 cm, C18, 150 Å) and washed with buffer A at 2 μL/min for 10 min. An elution gradient of 5%–3.5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over 70 min was used on an analytical ChromXP C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm, C18, 3 μm 120 Å) with a spray tip. Data were acquired using a Triple TOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX) fitted with a Nanospray III source and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter. For information-dependent acquisition, survey scans were acquired over 250 ms and as many as 35 product ion scans were collected if these exceeded a threshold of 150 counts per second with a charge of 2+ to 5+.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed with Protein Pilot software (Protein Pilot 4.0; AB SCIEX) against the Triticum aestivum database using the Paragon algorithm [21]. An automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) using the PSPEP (Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software, integrated in the Protein Pilot Software), which was calculated as the false positive matches divided by the total matches. Proteins were identified using the following parameters: sample type = iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide-labeled), Cys; alkylation = iodoacetamide; digestion = trypsin; instrument = TripleTOF5600 (AB SCIEX); database = Triticum aestivum.fasta. The iTRAQ 8-plex was chosen for protein quantification and unique peptides/proteins with a global FDR of < 1% were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tetraploid wheat (triticum turgidum l.), Lc-msms, Spikelete

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Zhengzhou 450002, China
Henan Agriculture university

### Submitter
Shulin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Shulin Chen
College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Zhengzhou 450002, China


