### Accession
PXD020178

### Title
NanoToxClass: Investigation of dose-dependent nanomaterial effects after short-term inhalation studies (STIS) with rats

### Description
In this study, rats were exposed to three different doses of nanomaterials (SiO2_7, TiO2_NM105) using short-term inhalations. Effects on exposure and recovery groups were compared using untargeted proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the rat lungs, and TMT labeling was used for protein quantification. The LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and the UniprotKB reference proteome of Rattus norvegicus (27th February 2019). For this purpose, an iterative workflow was applied. Obtained fold changes were Log2-transformed and median-normalized before calculation of p-values, which were adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg. These steps were conducted with R-3.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
The immense diversity and constant development of nanomaterials (NMs) increase the need for a facilitated risk assessment, which requires knowledge of the modes of action (MoAs) of NMs. This necessitates a comprehensive data basis, which can be obtained using omics. Furthermore, the establishment of suitable in vitro test systems is essential to follow the 3R concept and to cope with the high number of NMs. In the present study, we aimed to compare NM effects in vitro and in vivo using a multi-omics approach. We applied an integrated data analysis strategy based on proteomics and metabolomics to four silica NMs and one titanium dioxide-based NM. For the in vitro investigations, rat alveolar epithelial cells (RLE-6TN) and rat alveolar macrophages (NR8383) were treated with different doses of NMs, and the results were compared with the effects on rat lungs after short-term inhalations and instillations. Since reactive oxygen species (ROS) production has been described as a critical biological effect of NMs, we focused on different levels of oxidative stress. Thus, we found opposite changes in proteins and metabolites related to the production of reduced glutathione in alveolar epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages, demonstrating that the MoAs of NMs depend on the model system used. Interestingly, in vivo, pathways related to inflammation were more affected than oxidative stress responses. Hence, the assignment of the observed effects to levels of oxidative stress was also different in vitro and in vivo. However, the overall classification of "active" and "passive" NMs was consistent in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that both cell lines tested are suitable for the assessment of NM toxicity. In summary, the results presented here highlight the need to carefully review model systems to decipher the extent to which they can replace in vivo assays.

### Keywords
Rat, Nanotoxclass, Nanomaterials, Tmt, Stis

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


