### Accession
PXD033554

### Title
Proteomic analysis of E. coli K-12 MG1655 with the treatment of antidepressants

### Description
Proteomics analyses were conducted to reveal bacterial responses towards antidepressants on translational level.

### Sample Protocol
An exposure time of 8 h was applied based on previous studies. Afterwards, bacterial total protein was digested in S-Trap filters (ProtiFi, Huntington, USA) according to the manufacturer’s procedure and previous study. The digested peptides were analyzed by the Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), which was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-LC system coupled to a Q-ExactiveTM H-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo ScientificTM).

### Data Protocol
Raw sequencing data were processed by applying Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) towards the database of E. coli MG1655 (received from UniProt on 12th of July 2019). Abundance ratios of each protein between antidepressant-dosed samples and the corresponding control sample were calculated. A stringency cut-off of q value less than 0.01 was applied to identify the proteins with significant different expression levels.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance is an urgent threat to global health. Antidepressants are consumed in large quantities, with a similar pharmaceutical market share (4.8%) to antibiotics (5%). While antibiotics are acknowledged as the major driver of increasing antibiotic resistance, little attention is paid to the contribution of antidepressants in this process. Here, we demonstrate that antidepressants at clinically relevant concentrations induce resistance to multiple antibiotics, even following short periods of exposure. Antibiotic persistence was also enhanced. Phenotypic and genotypic analyses revealed the enhanced production of reactive oxygen species following exposure to antidepressants was directly associated with increased resistance. An enhanced stress signature response and stimulation of efflux pump expression were also associated with increased resistance and persistence. Mathematical modeling also predicted that antidepressants would accelerate the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and persister cells would help to maintain the resistance. Overall, our findings highlight the antibiotic resistance risk caused by antidepressants.

### Keywords
Persistence, Fitness cost, Antidepressants, Multidrug resistance, Reactive oxygen species (ros), Antibiotic resistance, Evolution, Toxin-antitoxin system, Efflux pump

### Affiliations
University of Queensland, Australia
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Jianhua Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jianhua Guo
University of Queensland, Australia


