### Accession
PXD035140

### Title
Different SWI/SNF complexes coordinately promote R-loop- and RAD52- dependent transcription-coupled homologous recombination

### Description
The SWI/SNF family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes are implicated in multiple DNA damage response mechanisms and frequently mutated in cancer. The BAF and PBAF complexes are two major types of SWI/SNF complexes that are functionally distinguished by their exclusive subunits. Accumulating evidence suggests that double-strand breaks (DSBs) in transcriptionally active DNA are preferentially repaired by a dedicated homologous recombination pathway. We show that different BAF and PBAF subunits promote homologous recombination and are rapidly recruited to DSBs in a transcription-dependent manner. The PBAF complex promotes RNA polymerase II eviction near DNA damage to rapidly initiate transcriptional silencing, while the BAF complex helps to maintain this transcriptional silencing. Furthermore, ARID1A-containing BAF complexes promote RNaseH1 and RAD52 recruitment to facilitate R-loop resolution and DNA repair. Our results highlight how multiple SWI/SNF complexes perform different functions to enable DNA repair in the context of actively transcribed genes.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-based proteomics of ARID1A-mAID-mClover For stable isotope labeling of amino acids in culture (SILAC), cells were grown in DMEM containing 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco), 10% GlutaMAX (Life Technologies), penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies), unlabeled L-arginine-HCl and L-lysine-HCL or 13C6,15N4L-arginine-HCl and 13C6,15N2L-lysine-2HCL (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), respectively. ARID1A-mAID-mClover complexes were pulled down from total cell extracts with GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek), and extensively washed. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling of the beads in Laemmli-SDS sample buffer, separated in SDS-PAGE gels and visualized with Coomassie (SimplyBlue; Invitrogen). SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide (98%; D4, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega). Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass sepctrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch; 1.5 cm × 100 μm) at a rate of 8 μl/min. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) for 170 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode. Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 2.0.3.0). A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release 2021). A maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. The enzyme specificity was set to ‘trypsin’, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. SILAC protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide ratios assigned to the protein. Before further statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed.

### Data Protocol
For each experiment, mean values and S.E.M. error bars are shown. Multiple t-tests (unpaired, two-tailed) were used to determine statistical significance between groups followed by multiple comparison correction with the Holm-Sidak method without assuming a consistent standard deviation. For the statistical significance analysis of IF data, we applied a One-Way ANOVA using the Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA tests, followed by post-hoc analysis with the Games-Howel method. All analyses were performed using Graph Pad Prism version 8.21 for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla California USA). P values are indicated as number in each figure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swi/snf; transcription-coupled homologous recombination; r-loops; rad52; dna damage response; arid1a; arid1b; brg1; brm

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam - NL
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam - NL


