### Accession
PXD015615

### Title
Pseudomonas aerugionsa PAO1 transcriptome cultured in MOPS Glycerol and MOPS Acetate

### Description
Drastic alterations in transcripts associated with central carbon metabolism and associatedprocesses have been repeatedly observed a common expression program as P. aeruginosa adapts to the cystic fibrosis lung when compared to standard laboratory conditions. However, we have limited knowledge of how well these transcriptomic changes correlate with actual alterations in metabolic flux; the rate of turnover of molecules through metabolic pathways. We have compared the proteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 during growth on the carbon sources acetate and glycerol.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa cells (OD600 = 0.5, 30 ml) were cultured in MOPS acetate or glycerol as sole carbon sources (triplicate), 37 °C with shaking (250 rpm) in baffled flasks (500 ml). . Pellets were resuspended in Lysis Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) Glycerol, 1mM TCEP, pH 7.5) with cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Following three rounds of sonication (3 x 10 sec) on ice, supernatants were clarified by centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 15 min, 4 °C). The Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit was used to determine protein concentration. 100 ug of each sample was reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and labelled with Tandem Mass Tags as described previously. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. TMT labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/90110). 100 µg of each digested protein sample was labelled with 9 of the TMT tags. Post-labelling, samples were combined and cleaned on Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, dried and dissolved in 20mM ammonium formate (pH 10). The solution was then pipetted into a sample vial and placed into the autosampler of a Waters Acquity UPLC pump (Waters Corporation, Milford MA).tomics section described above. Pellets were resuspended in Lysis Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) Glycerol, 1mM TCEP, pH 7.5) with cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Following three rounds of sonication (3 x 10 sec) on ice, supernatants were clarified by centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 15 min, 4 °C). The Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit was used to determine protein concentration. 100 ug of each sample was reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and labelled with Tandem Mass Tags as described previously. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. TMT labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/90110). 100 µg of each digested protein sample was labelled with 9 of the TMT tags. Post-labelling, samples were combined and cleaned on Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, dried and dissolved in 20mM ammonium formate (pH 10). The solution was then pipetted into a sample vial and placed into the autosampler of a Waters Acquity UPLC pump (Waters Corporation, Milford MA).

### Data Protocol
The following LC conditions were used for the fractionation of the TMT samples: desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1 mL 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) + 4% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded onto an Acquity bridged ethyl hybrid C18 UPLC column (Waters; 2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size), and profiled with a linear gradient of 5-60% acetonitrile + 20 mM ammonium formate (pH10.0) over 60 min, at a flow-rate of 0.25 mL/min. Chromatographic performance was monitored by sampling eluate with a diode array detector (Acquity UPLC, Waters) scanning between wavelengths of 200 and 400 nm. Samples were collected in 1 min increments and reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation.  Dried fractions from the high pH reverse-phase separations were resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid and placed into a glass vial. 1 µL of each fraction was injected by the HPLC autosampler and separated by the LC method detailed below. A total of 14 combined fractions were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5mm particle size, 100A pore size, 300 mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 auto-sampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Separation of peptides was performed by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2mm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 mm i.d. x 50cm length). Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 93 min (total LC run time was 120 min including a high organic wash step and column re-equilibration). The eluted peptides from the C18 column LC eluent were sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyser, set at a resolution of 120,000 and were scanned between m/z 380-1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS scans (Top Speed) were employed to automatically isolate and fragment precursor ions by collision-induced dissociation (CID, Normalised Collision Energy (NCE): 35%) which were analysed in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 70 seconds was employed. The top 10 most abundant fragment ions from each MS/MS event were then selected for a further stage of fragmentation by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) MS3 [94] in the HCD high energy collision cell using HCD (High energy Collisional Dissociation, (NCE: 65%). The m/z values and relative abundances of each reporter ion and all fragments (mass range from 100-500 Da) in each MS3 step were measured in the Orbitrap analyser, which was set at a resolution of 60,000. This was performed in cycles of 10 MS3 events before the Lumos instrument reverted to scanning the m/z ratios of the intact peptide ions and the cycle continued.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is an opportunistic human pathogen, particularly noted for causing infections in the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis (CF). Previous studies have shown that the gene expression profile of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> appears to converge toward a common metabolic program as the organism adapts to the CF airway environment. However, we still have only a limited understanding of how these transcriptional changes impact metabolic flux at the systems level. To address this, we analyzed the transcriptome, proteome, and fluxome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> grown on glycerol or acetate. These carbon sources were chosen because they are the primary breakdown products of an airway surfactant, phosphatidylcholine, which is known to be a major carbon source for <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in CF airways. We show that the fluxes of carbon throughout central metabolism are radically different among carbon sources. For example, the newly recognized "EDEMP cycle" (which incorporates elements of the Entner-Doudoroff [ED] pathway, the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas [EMP] pathway, and the pentose phosphate [PP] pathway) plays an important role in supplying NADPH during growth on glycerol. In contrast, the EDEMP cycle is attenuated during growth on acetate, and instead, NADPH is primarily supplied by the reaction catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase(s). Perhaps more importantly, our proteomic and transcriptomic analyses revealed a global remodeling of gene expression during growth on the different carbon sources, with unanticipated impacts on aerobic denitrification, electron transport chain architecture, and the redox economy of the cell. Collectively, these data highlight the remarkable metabolic plasticity of <i>P. aeruginosa</i>; that plasticity allows the organism to seamlessly segue between different carbon sources, maximizing the energetic yield from each.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is an opportunistic human pathogen that is well known for causing infections in the airways of people with cystic fibrosis. Although it is clear that <i>P. aeruginosa</i> is metabolically well adapted to life in the CF lung, little is currently known about how the organism metabolizes the nutrients available in the airways. In this work, we used a combination of gene expression and isotope tracer ("fluxomic") analyses to find out exactly where the input carbon goes during growth on two CF-relevant carbon sources, acetate and glycerol (derived from the breakdown of lung surfactant). We found that carbon is routed ("fluxed") through very different pathways during growth on these substrates and that this is accompanied by an unexpected remodeling of the cell's electron transfer pathways. Having access to this "blueprint" is important because the metabolism of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> is increasingly being recognized as a target for the development of much-needed antimicrobial agents.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aerugionsa pao1 carbon metabolism mops glycerol acetate

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Stephen Dolan

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Kevin Dolan
University of Cambridge


