### Accession
PXD039550

### Title
Identification of Zuo1 interactors upon rapamycin stress

### Description
Proteostasis is tightly regulated by TORC1 to meet cellular requirements. Upon TORC1 inhibition, degradative activity is increased, and protein synthesis is reduced through inhibition of translation initiation, to maintain cell viability. Here, we show that the ribosome-associated complex (RAC)/Ssb chaperone system is required to maintain proteostasis and cell viability under TORC1 inhibition, in yeast. In the absence of the Hsp40 cochaperone Zuo1, translation does not decrease in response to loss of TORC1 activity. The functional interaction between Zuo1 and its Hsp70 partner, Ssb is required for proper translational control and proteostasis maintenance upon TORC1 inhibition.  Further, we have found that the rapid degradation of eIF4G following TORC1 inhibition is prevented in zuo1Δ cells, contributing to decreased survival in these conditions. Our findings suggest a new role for RAC/Ssb in regulating translation in response to changes in TORC1 signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Exponential phase yeasts were adjusted to an OD600 0.2 in 30ml and treated with 200nM rapamycin for 3h. Then, cells were harvested (400rpm, 4˚C, 4 min) and washed in ice-cold water and centrifuged (8000rpm, 4˚C, 1 min). The cell pellet was resuspended in IP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM PMSF, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail) and lysed with glass beads (FastPrep 24, 3x30s on/5min off). The supernatant was then cleared by centrifugation at 17,000g for 10 min at 4˚C. Protein concentration was measured using a NanoDrop (A280nm, Thermo) and samples were equally adjusted to 1 mg/mL in IP lysis buffer. GFP binder beads (25 µl slurry per sample; MRC PPU reagents and services: DU54283) were equilibrated into 500 µl ice-cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.5 mM EDTA) before being centrifuged at 2,500x g for 2 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and equilibration steps repeated twice. Equilibrated beads were incubated with 1 mg of lysates for 1 h at 4 °C under rotation. GFP binder beads were then washed once with lysis buffer, twice with wash buffer. Beads were subjected to tryptic digestion and TMT-based quantitative proteomics (see below). Beads were collected and subsequently resuspended in 50 µl Urea buffer (2 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and 5 mM DTT) and incubated at 45 °C for 30 min with gentle shaking in order to partially denature the proteins. Samples were centrifuged at 2,500g for 1 min and cooled to room temperature. Each sample was then incubated with iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration) in the dark at room temperature. Unreacted iodoacetamide was then quenched with DTT (5 mM final concentration). Each sample was digested using 0.4 µg trypsin at 37 °C for 4 h under agitation. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the final 0.2% TFA concentration (v/v), centrifuged at 10,000g for 2 min at room temperature. The supernatant was de-salted on ultra-microspin column silica C18 (The Nest Group). De-salted peptides were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge concentrator (Thermo Fisher) before TMT labelling. Each vacuum-dried sample was resuspended in 50 μl of 100 mM TEAB buffer. The TMT labelling reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, and 41 μl anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each reagent channel and gently vortexed for 10 min. Then, 4 μl of each TMT reagent was added to the corresponding sample and labelling was performed at room temperature for 1 h with shaking before quenching with 1 μl of 5% hydroxylamine, after which 2 µl of labelled sample from each channel was analysed by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) to ensure complete labelling before mixing. After evaluation, the complete TMT-labelled samples were combined, acidified and dried. The mixture was then de-salted with ultra-microspin column silica C18, and the eluent from C18 column was dried. LC separations were performed with a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC. The dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and then loaded on C18 trap column with 3% ACN/0.1%TFA at a flow rate of 10 μl min−1. Peptide separations were performed using EASY-Spray columns (C18, 2 µm, 75 µm × 50 cm) with an integrated nano electrospray emitter at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Peptides were separated with a 180 min segmented gradient as follows starting from 8–30% buffer B in 135 min, ~30–45% in 20 min and ~45–90% in 5 min. Peptides eluted from the column were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, RF lens level was set at 30%, and ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275 °C. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent top speed mode with 3 s per cycle. The full scan was performed in the range of 350–1,500 m/z at nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and AGC set to 4 × 105 with maximum injection time 50 ms, followed by selection of the most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 5 × 103 for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The isolation width was set to 0.7 m/z with no offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Monoisotopic precursor selection was set to peptide. Charge states between 2 and 7 were included for MS2 fragmentation. The MS2 scan was performed in the ion trap with auto normal range scan and AGC target of 1 × 104. The maximum injection time for MS2 scan was set to 50 ms. For the MS3 scan, SPS was enabled. MS3 was performed in the Orbitrap over 5 notches at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 m/z and AGC set to 5 × 104 with maximum injection time 105 ms, over a mass range of 100-500 m/z, with high collision induced dissociation (HCD) and 65% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC–MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer v.2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine. Maximum missed cleavage for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.2 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-10plex tags on N-termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da). Data were searched against SwissProt database restricted to Saccharomyces cerevisiae taxonomy (reviewed 7905 entries downloaded in June 2019). Peptide spectral match error rates with a 1% false discovery rate were determined using the forward- decoy strategy modelling true and false matches. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Reporter ion abundances were corrected for isotopic impurities on the basis of the manufacturer’s data sheets. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS3 spectra to be used. The summed abundance of quantified peptides was used for protein quantitation. The total peptide amount was used for the normalization. Protein ratios were calculated from medians of summed sample abundances of replicate groups. Standard deviation was calculated from all biological replicate values. The standard deviation of all biological replicates lower than 25% was used for further analyses. Multiple unpaired t-test was used to determine the significant differences between untreated and rapamycin-treated conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Tmt-labelling, Co-chaperones

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr Adrien Rousseau
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland


