### Accession
PXD039021

### Title
Pupylation-independent substrate recruitment to proteasomal degradation in mycobacteria

### Description
Mycobacteria and other Actinobacteria possess proteasomal degradation pathways in addition to the common bacterial compartmentalizing protease systems. Proteasomal degradation supports survival of these bacteria in adverse environments and conditions. The mycobacterial proteasome interacts with multiple ring-shaped activators, including the bacterial proteasome activator (Bpa), which facilitates the energy-independent degradation of heat shock repressor HspR in the successful human pathogen M. tuberculosis. To explore if this observation can be corroborated in the soil bacterium M. smegmatis, we performed an enrichment study in a bpa knockout in M. smegmatis. We grew the wild type M. smegmatis strain and the bpa knockout strain in biological triplicates under standard conditions or under heat shock and analyzed proteins which increased in abundance by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
25 mL bacterial strain cultures were grown in 7H9 medium (Difco). Strains were grown at 37°C for standard conditions or stressed for three hours at 45°C for heat stress. Cells were harvested and lysed by mechanical bead beating in 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, 150 mM KCl, 2mM EDTA pH 7.5. Lysates were cleared by spinning for 5 minutes at 16 000 g. Protein concentration in the lysates was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific) and diluted to 1 mg/ml. 50 ul of diluted lysate was mixed with sodium deoxycholate (DOC) to final 5% (w/v) concentration. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 1,4-Dithiothreitol (final concentration of 12mM) for 30 minutes at 37°C and alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide (final concentration of 40 mM) for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate to a final 1% (w/v) concentration of sodium deoxycholate (DOC). Proteins were digested overnight with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100 at 37°C with constant shaking (800 rpm). The digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) (pH < 3). Precipitated DOC was filtered by centrifugation at 800 x g for 5 minutes with a 0.2 μm PVDF membrane filter (Corning FiltrEX 96-well White Filter Plate). The peptide mixtures were loaded onto 96 wells elution plates (Waters), desalted, and eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. After elution, peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to final 1 mg/ml concentration, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Data were acquired on Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer in Data independent mode (DIA). The samples were separated using easy LC system by a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with increasing buffer B (95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) from 3% to 30% (v/v) on a 40 cm x 0.75 mm i.d. column (New Objective, PF360-75-10-N-5) packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120). The column was heated to 50°C. For DIA, a full MS1 scan was acquired between 350 and 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 100%. Forty-one variable-width windows were used to measure fragmented precursor ions. DIA-MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and an AGC target of 400%. The first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy was set to 28. To maximize parallelization, a duty cycle time was three seconds.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched in Spectronaut version 14.11 (Biognosys) using a direct DIA mode. Spectral library was created based on a Pulsar search using default setting and trypsin digestion rule. The data was searched against the Uniprot fasta database (Mycolicibacterium smegmatis MC2 155, November 2018). The targeted data extraction was performed in Spectronaut version 14.11 with default settings except for the machine learning which was set to “across experiment” and the data filtering which was set to “Qvalue”. The FDR was set to 1% on peptide and protein level. Differential analysis on protein level (PG.Quantity) was performed with Protti package using moderated t-test and correcting for multiple hypothesis testing with Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Post processing and data visualisation was performed in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteasomal degradation, Mycobacteria, Quality control, Heat shock

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
eilika@mol.biol.ethz.ch

### Submitter
Monika Pepelnjak

### Lab Head
Dr Eilika Weber-Ban
eilika@mol.biol.ethz.ch


