### Accession
PXD011274

### Title
Early response of C2C12 myotubes to a sub-cytotoxic dose of hemorrhagic metalloproteinase HF3 from Bothrops jararaca venom

### Description
Manifestations of local tissue damage, such as hemorrhage and myonecrosis, are among the most dramatic effects of envenomation by viperid snakes. Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) of the P-III class are main players of the hemorrhagic effect due to their activities in promoting blood vessel disruption. Hemorrhagic Factor 3 (HF3), a P-III class SVMP from Bothrops jararaca, shows a minimum hemorrhagic dose of 240 fmol on rabbit skin. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of a sub-cytotoxic dose of HF3 (50 nM) on the proteomic profile of C2C12 differentiated cells (myotubes) in culture, and on the peptidomic profile of the culture supernatant. Quantitative proteomic analysis using stable-isotope dimethyl labeling showed differential abundance of various proteins including enzymes involved in oxidative stress and inflammation responses. Identification of peptides in the supernatant of HF3-treated myotubes revealed proteolysis and pointed out potential new substrates of HF3, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and some damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). These experiments demonstrate the subtle effects of HF3 on muscle cells and illustrate for the first time the early proteolytic events triggered by HF3 on myotubes. Moreover, they may contribute to future studies aimed at explaining the inflammation process, hemorrhage and myonecrosis caused by SVMPs.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution trypsin digestion of lysate proteins Briefly, a solution of 8 M guanidine hydrochloride was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each cell lysate (twelve biological replicates of lysate proteins: six from control and six from HF3-treated C1C12 myotubes) to a final concentration of 4 M, followed by addition of 5 mM DTT (final concentration), and the mixture was incubated at 65°C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 60 min at RT in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 30 mM. Samples were cleaned-up by adding ice cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by incubation of samples for 3 h, at -80°C. After centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH (final concentration 10 mM), followed by the addition of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 μL. Trypsin was added at 1:50 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37°C for 16 h.  Dimethyl-labeling of tryptic peptides Tryptic peptides were submitted to differential stable-isotope dimethyl labeling. Briefly, tryptic peptides were submitted to reductive dimethylation with either CH2O (lysates of control cells) or CD2O (lysates of HF3-treated cells). Tryptic peptides from each sample were incubated with sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) to a final concentration of 20 mM followed by the addition of formaldehyde CH2O (light) or CD2O (heavy) to a final concentration of 40 mM, resulting in mass differences of +28.031300 Da and +32.056407 Da for the light and heavy-labeled samples, respectively, for 16 h at 37 °C. Then, 20 mM CH2O (light) or CD2O (heavy) and 10 mM NaBH3CN were added and the mixture was further incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 M Tris (pH 6.8; final concentration 100 mM) to each sample and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 37°C. Samples were then combined at 1:1 ratio as follows: control lysate (light) + HF3-treated lysate (heavy). After desalting using C-18 cartridges the dimethylated-peptide samples were dried by centrifugation under vacuum and redissolved in 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS).  Mass spectrometric analysis of dimethylated tryptic peptides An aliquot (5 μL) of the resulting peptide mixture was injected into a trap column packed with C18 (100 μm i.d. × 4 cm) for desalting with 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then eluted onto an analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 100 mm) packed in house with Aqua® C-18 5 m beads (Phenomenex). Nanoflow liquid chromatography was performed on an Easy nanoLC system (Thermo) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides from each biological replicate (n=6) were loaded onto the column with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 195 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 200 nL/min (5-30% B in 175 min; 30-85% B in 14 min; 85% B for 6 min). Spray voltage was set at 2.1 kV, 200°C, and the mass spectrometer was operated in positive, data dependent mode, in which one full MS scan was acquired in the m/z range of 300-1650 followed by MS/MS acquisition using collisional induced dissociation (CID) of the ten most intense ions from the MS scan using isolation window width of 3 m/z. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 60,000 resolution (at 400 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was defined by a list size of 500 features and exclusion duration of 90 s. For the survey (MS) scan a target value (AGC) of 1,000,000 and maximum injection time of 100 ms were set whereas the target value for the fragment ion (MS/MS) spectra was set to 40,000 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The lower threshold for targeting precursor ions in the MS scans was 500 counts per scan.

### Data Protocol
LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data (RAW) were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.12). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide identifications. Spectra were searched against Mus musculus sequences in UniProt (February ‎10, 2017 release; ‎25,392 sequences). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants. The search parameters were: no enzyme specificity, methionine oxidation, glutamine or asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.025 Da.  Data from all biological replicates were filtered by Posterior Error Probability value  0.01 for each peptide. Data were further filtered to only accept peptides that were detected in at least one technical replicate of two biological replicates and were absent in the control samples. These filtered peptides for each biological replicate were then combined into a master list and duplicates were removed  The amino acid sequences of the peptides corresponding to the prime-side positions P1'-P6', identified in the supernatant of C2C12 myotubes treated with HF3 were used to generate heat maps; the complementary amino acid sequences (P1-P6) adjacent to the cleavage sites of the respective peptides were obtained using the WebPICS tool. STRING website was used to verify the biological interactions of proteins identified as hydrolyzed in the supernatant of C2C12 myotubes treated with HF3. A network analysis of these proteins was also carried out using the MetaCore analytical suite version 6.3.6 (https://portal.genego.com/) which is based on p-values of the probability that a given number of proteins from the input list will match a certain number of gene (protein) nodes in the identified network(s). Only biological networks identified with (p <0.001) were considered.  Data processing protocol for dimethylated tryptic peptides:  LTQ-Orbitrap Velos raw data (RAW) were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.12). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide identifications. Spectra were searched against Mus musculus sequences in UniProt (February ‎10, 2017 release; ‎25,392 sequences). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation, glutamine or asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 to account for the two labeling states that were used (light and heavy dimethyl-labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine side chains). Peptide identification was based on a search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Data from all biological replicates were filtered by peptide number (# ≥ 1) and Posterior Error Probability value  0.01. In the case of proteins identified only by one peptide, which was necessarily unique, in addition to the identification criteria already mentioned, only proteins whose correspondent peptide showed at least eight b- or y-ions in the MS/MS spectra, including the occurrence of at least three sequential ones, were considered as identified. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions were enabled. The proteins identified for each biological replicate meeting these conditions were then further filtered by their ratios (heavy/light normalized by median values), and any protein with a ratio >1.25 or <0.75, which was identified in at least three biological replicates, was considered as differentially abundant between control and HF3-treated C1C12 myotubes. STRING 10.5 (http://string-db.org/) was used to explore the biological interactions of proteins identified as differentially abundant between control and HF3-treated C1C12 myotubes.

### Publication Abstract
Manifestations of local tissue damage, such as hemorrhage and myonecrosis, are among the most dramatic effects of envenomation by viperid snakes. Snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) of the P-III class are main players of the hemorrhagic effect due to their activities in promoting blood vessel disruption. Hemorrhagic Factor 3 (HF3), a P-III class SVMP from Bothrops jararaca, shows a minimum hemorrhagic dose of 240 fmol on rabbit skin. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of a sub-cytotoxic dose of HF3 (50&#x202f;nM) on the proteomic profile of C2C12 differentiated cells (myotubes) in culture, and on the peptidomic profile of the culture supernatant. Quantitative proteomic analysis using stable-isotope dimethyl labeling showed differential abundance of various proteins including enzymes involved in oxidative stress and inflammation responses. Identification of peptides in the supernatant of HF3-treated myotubes revealed proteolysis and pointed out potential new substrates of HF3, including glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and some damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). These experiments demonstrate the subtle effects of HF3 on muscle cells and illustrate for the first time the early proteolytic events triggered by HF3 on myotubes. Moreover, they may contribute to future studies aimed at explaining the inflammation process, hemorrhage and myonecrosis caused by SVMPs. SIGNIFICANCE: One of the main features of viperid snake envenomation is myotoxicity at the bite site, which, in turn is often associated with edema, blistering and hemorrhage, composing a complex pattern of local tissue damage. In this scenario, besides muscle cells, other types of cells, components of the extracellular matrix and blood vessels may also be affected, resulting in an outcome of deficient muscle regeneration. The main venom components participating in this pathology are metalloproteinases and phospholipases A2. Muscle necrosis induced by metalloproteinases is considered as an indirect effect related to ischemia, due to hemorrhage resulted from damage to the microvasculature. The pathogenesis of local effects induced by Bothrops venoms or isolated toxins has been studied by traditional methodologies. More recently, proteomic and peptidomic approaches have been used to study venom-induced pathogenesis. Here, in order to investigate the role of metalloproteinase activity in local tissue damage, we asked whether the hemorrhagic metalloproteinase HF3, at sub-cytotoxic levels, could alter the proteome of C2C12 myotubes in culture, thereby providing an insight into the mechanisms for the development of myonecrosis. Our results from mass spectrometric analyses showed subtle, early changes in the cells, including differential abundance of some proteins and proteolysis in the culture supernatant. The data illustrate the potential ability of metalloproteinases to trigger early systemic responses progressing from local cells and up to tissues.

### Keywords
C2c12 myotubes; hf3; snake venom metalloproteinase; peptidomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
Butantan Institute
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS), Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Solange Serrrano

### Lab Head
Dr Solange Maria de Toledo Serrano
Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS), Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.


