### Accession
PXD008709

### Title
CLIC4 interacting proteins - To identify proteins in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells that interact with CLIC4

### Description
To identify proteins in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells that interact with CLIC4

### Sample Protocol
Purification of HA-tagged protein. HA-tagged protein purification kit (#3320, MBL Company LTD) was used for purification of proteins bound to HA-tagged CLIC4. 24 hours post-infection with AdCLIC4 or AdControl, HPAECs were lysed and the lysates (500µL each) were transferred into two separate micro centrifuge tubes. Anti-HA tag beads suspension (40µL containing 10µL beads) were dispensed into each tube and were incubated with gentle end-over mixing for 1h at 4°C. The tubes were then centrifuged (3000g at 4°C) for 20s and the resultant supernatant containing non-binding proteins was removed. The beads were washed three times with 500µL PBS where the mixture was centrifuged (3000g at 4°C) for 20s and the supernatant removed each time. Finally, elution peptide solution (20µL) was added and incubated with the beads for 5min at 4°C. The tubes were centrifuged again and the supernatant containing interacting proteins was reserved for further analysis. Preparation of samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Fraction containing purified proteins were dissolved in 300µL of 9M urea and reduced by addition of 50mmol/L-dithiothreitol prior to heating at 100°C for 2 min and then carbamidomethylated by addition of mmol/L iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min. SDS-PAGE was performed on 10 µg of each sample using 10% NuPAGE Novex bis-tris gels and reagents (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with InstantBlue® and each sample-containing lane were cut into a series of regions based on the position of molecular weight (MW) markers (SeaBlue Marker®, Invitrogen) and the distribution of proteins observed in the gel. Gel pieces were then washed with 1 mL water and dehydrated in 1 mL acetonitrile  for 30 min. Proteins contained within each gel slice were digested in 0.3 mL 50mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate containing 1 ng/mL trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37C for 18 hrs. On the following day, tryptic peptides were extracted by addition of 0.3 mL 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and mixed for 30 min, 0.42 mL was removed, and dried.  LC-MS/MS analysis method. The dried samples were reconstituted in 30µL of 0.1% TFA and 8µL of the solution was injected onto a C18 trap-column (ProteCol, 0.3 x 10mm, 300Å; SGE Analytical Science) followed by reverse phase separation on a C18 column (PicoFrit, 75μm ID × 10 cm ProteoPrep column, New Objective) using Agilent 1200 LC series (Agilent Technologies UK Ltd.). The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B). A linear gradient of 0-54% buffer B was introduced at a flow rate of 300nL/min for 48 min.  The peptides eluting from the reversed phase column were analysed on-line using a Thermo LTQ linear ion trap MS equipped with a dynamic nano-spray interface. The MS method consisted of a cycle combining one full MS scan (m/z 400-1600) with three data dependent MS/MS events (35% collision energy at each event) for 70 minutes. Dynamic activation time was set at 30 s with scans at every 2 s.  The sample identifier are as follow: AdCLIC4 (Region 1-12): 130424_03, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 &18 and the corresponding samples from AdControl (Region1-12): 130424_23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37 & 38.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. The identity of peptides was determined by exporting the MS/MS output files from the matched analysis into the Turbo SEQUEST search engine (BioWorks Browser 3.3; Thermo Electron Corporation) and interrogating it against the NCBI human RefSeq database release 51. The search parameters were as follows: peptide tolerance was set to 2 atomic mass unit, MS/MS tolerance was set at 1 atomic mass unit, charge states allowed is from +1 to +3 and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Modifications were set to allow for the detection S-carbamidomethylated cysteine (+57 Da). Each MS2 spectra was matched to only a single peptide with the highest scoring SEQUEST peptide hit. Cross-correlating (XCorr) MS data, with values >1.5, >2.0 and >2.5 for singly, doubly and triply charged ions respectively, were used to select peptides of high quality and reduced the possibility of including redundant peptides in subsequent data analysis.   All keratins were removed from the protein identification list. The current status of each protein, its name and molecular weight was updated by batch processing it on the NCBI protein database website. Where protein names contained the word ‘predicted’ or ‘like protein’, the accuracy of the assigned names were examined and corrected, where necessary. The issue of redundancy in identified proteins was addressed by including all possible assignments in the results table to make the data as transparent as possible. In those cases where an identified protein shares its sequence with other entries in the database then all entries are listed. The uniqueness (or otherwise) of the assignment of peptides to the sequence of one or more proteins was used to determine whether assignment could be made to a specific protein or to a group of related proteins (isoforms). Quantification was based on at least 2 peptides that were all uniquely assigned to one protein or to a group of related forms.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Clic4, Interacting proteins, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Centre for Pharmacology & Therapeutics
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Vahitha Abdul Salam

### Lab Head
Dr Vahitha Abdul Salam
Imperial College London


