### Accession
PXD044639

### Title
Different seminal ejaculated fractions in artificial insemination condition the protein cargo of oviductal and uterine extracellular vesicles in pig.

### Description
The seminal plasma (SP) is the liquid component of semen that facilitates sperm transport through the female genital tract. SP modulates the activity of the ovary, oviductal environment and uterine function during the periovulatory and early pregnancy period. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted in the oviduct (oEVs) and uterus (uEVs) have been shown to influence the expression of endometrial genes that regulate fertilization and early embryo development. In some species, semen is composed of well-separated fractions that vary in concentration of spermatozoa and SP composition and volume. This study aimed to investigate the impact of different accumulative fractions of the porcine ejaculate (F1, composed of the sperm-rich fraction (SRF); F2, composed of F1 plus the intermediate fraction; F3, composed of F2 plus the post-SRF) on oEVs and uEVs protein cargo. Six days after the onset of estrus, we determined the oEVs and uEVs size and protein concentration in pregnant sows by artificial insemination (AI-sows) and in non-inseminated sows as control (C-sows). We also identified the main proteins in oEVs and uEVs, in AI-F1, AI-F2, AI-F3, and C-sows. Our results indicated that although the size of EVs is similar between AI- and C-sows, the protein concentration of both oEVs and uEVs was significantly lower in AI-sows (p < 0.05). Proteomic analysis identified 38 unique proteins in oEVs from AI-sows, mainly involved in protein stabilization, glycolytic and carbohydrate processes. The uEVs from AI-sows showed the presence of 43 unique proteins, including already-known fertility-related proteins (EZR, HSPAA901, PDS). We also demonstrated that the protein composition of oEVs and uEVs differed depending on the seminal fraction(s) inseminated (F1, F2, or F3). In conclusion, we have found a specific protein cargo in uterine and oviductal EVs depending on the type of semen fraction the sow was inseminated with, and these insemination with different seminal fractions results in the oviductal and uterine secretion of specific EVs proteins are closely associated with reproductive processes.

### Sample Protocol
The EVs suspensions were thawed at a temperature of 4 ºC and subsequently subjected to digestion. This digestion process took place in a solution containing 100 µL of a buffer consisting of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with a pH of 8.5. To aid in the digestion, a small amount (0.01%, v:v) of ProteaseMax (Promega, WI, USA) was added. In addition, the samples were reduced by introducing 20 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubating the mixture for a period of 20 minutes at a temperature of 56 ºC. Following this, the samples were alkylated by adding 100 mM of iodoacetic acid (IAA) and allowing it to react for 30 minutes at room temperature while keeping the environment dark. Once the alkylation was completed, the digestion process was initiated by adding Trypsin Gold Proteomics Grade (Promega) to the mixture at a ratio of 1:100 (w/w). The digestion was carried out for a duration of 3 hours at a temperature of 37 ºC. To halt the reaction, 0.1% formic acid was added, and the resulting mixture was filtered through a filter with a pore diameter of 0.2 µm. Finally, the samples were dried using an Eppendorf Vacuum Concentrator 5301.To prepare the dry samples resulting from trypsin digestion, they were reconstituted in a 20 µL volume of resuspending buffer. This buffer, known as buffer A, was composed of a mixture of water, acetonitrile, and formic acid in the ratio of 94.9:5:0.1, respectively. The reconstituted samples were injected into an Agilent AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping HPLC column with dimensions of 2.7 µm x 100 x 2.1 mm, which was thermostatted at 50 ºC. The injection of the samples occurred at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min.

### Data Protocol
The data processing and analysis were conducted using the Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench software (Rev B.06.00.201, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The raw data were extracted using default conditions, which included the identification of unmodified or carbamidomethylated cysteines, a range of [MH]+ 50–10000 m/z, a maximum precursor charge of +5, and a minimum signal-to-noise MS (S/N) ratio of 25. The software also utilized specific parameters for peak finding, such as the identification of 12C signals. For the MS/MS search, an appropriate and updated protein database was employed, and the search criteria included variable modifications (carbamidomethylated cysteines, STY phosphorylation, oxidized methionine, and N-terminal glutamine conversion to pyroglutamic acid), a tryptic digestion allowing for up to 5 missed cleavages, the use of an ESI-Q-TOF instrument, a minimum matched peak intensity of 50%, a maximum ambiguous precursor charge of +5, monoisotopic masses, a peptide precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, a product ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm, and the calculation of reversed database scores. The validation of peptide and protein data was performed using auto thresholds.

### Publication Abstract
Ejaculated sperm are exposed to different environments before encountering the oocyte. However, how the sperm proteome changes during this transit remains unsolved. This study aimed to identify proteomic changes in boar sperm after incubation with male (seminal plasma, SP) and/or female (uterine fluid, UF; and oviductal fluid, OF) reproductive fluids. The following experimental groups were analyzed: (1) SP: sperm + 20% SP; 2) UF: sperm + 20% UF; 3) OF: sperm + 20% OF; 4) SP + UF: sperm + 20% SP + 20% UF; and (5) SP+OF: sperm + 20% SP + 20% OF. The proteome analysis, performed by HPLC-MS/MS, allowed the identification of 265 proteins. A total of 69 proteins were detected in the UF, SP, and SP + UF groups, and 102 proteins in the OF, SP, and SP + OF groups. Our results showed a higher number of proteins when sperm were incubated with only one fluid than when they were co-incubated with two fluids. Additionally, the number of sperm-interacting proteins from the UF group was lower than the OF group. In conclusion, the interaction of sperm with reproductive fluids alters its proteome. The description of sperm-interacting proteins in porcine species after co-incubation with male and/or female reproductive fluids may be useful to understand sperm transport, selection, capacitation, or fertilization phenomena.

### Keywords
Insemination, Extracellular vesicles, Oviductal fluid, Uterine fluid., Pregnant sows, Ejaculate fractions

### Affiliations
University of Murcia
1: Physiology of reproduction, Veterinary Faculty, Campus of Excellence Mare Nostrum, University of Murcia. 2: IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.

### Submitter
Santa María Toledo Guardiola

### Lab Head
Dr Carmen Matás
1: Physiology of reproduction, Veterinary Faculty, Campus of Excellence Mare Nostrum, University of Murcia. 2: IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.


