### Accession
PXD040860

### Title
Machine learning reveals limited contribution of trans-only encoded variants to the HLA-DQ immunopeptidome

### Description
HLA-DQ molecules can be formed as both cis and trans variants. So far, the progress for predicting HLA-DQ antigen presentation has been limited. In addition, the contribution of trans-only variants in shaping the HLA-DQ immunopeptidome remains largely unresolved. Here, we address these issues by integrating state-of-the-art immunoinformatics data mining models with large volumes of high-quality HLA-DQ specific immunopeptidomics data. The analysis demonstrated a highly improved predictive power and molecular coverage for models trained with these novel HLA-DQ data and a limited to no contribution for trans-only HLA-DQ variants to the overall HLA-DQ immunopeptidome.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-DQ associated peptides were isolated by affinity purification and fractionated prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Exact methodological details can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were identified using PEAKS Studio 10.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). A database composed of SwissProt Homo sapiens (taxon identifier 9606) and iRT peptide sequences was used as the reference for database search. Variable post-translational modifications (PTM) including acetylation, deamidation, pyroglutamate formation, oxidation, sodium adducts, phosphorylation, and cysteinylation were included in database search. Identified peptides were further filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using PEAKS decoy-fusion algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II antigen presentation is key for controlling and triggering T cell immune responses. HLA-DQ molecules, which are believed to play a major role in autoimmune diseases, are heterodimers that can be formed as both cis and trans variants depending on whether the &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-chains are encoded on the same (cis) or opposite (trans) chromosomes. So far, limited progress has been made for predicting HLA-DQ antigen presentation. In addition, the contribution of trans-only variants (i.e. variants not observed in the population as cis) in shaping the HLA-DQ immunopeptidome remains largely unresolved. Here, we seek to address these issues by integrating state-of-the-art immunoinformatics data mining models with large volumes of high-quality HLA-DQ specific mass spectrometry immunopeptidomics data. The analysis demonstrates highly improved predictive power and molecular coverage for models trained including these novel HLA-DQ data. More importantly, investigating the role of trans-only HLA-DQ variants reveals a limited to no contribution to the overall HLA-DQ immunopeptidome. In conclusion, this study furthers our understanding of HLA-DQ specificities and casts light on the relative role of cis versus trans-only HLA-DQ variants in the HLA class II antigen presentation space. The developed method, NetMHCIIpan-4.2, is available at https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCIIpan-4.2 .

### Keywords
Hla-dq, Machine learning, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center

### Submitter
Hooman Yari

### Lab Head
Dr William Hildebrand
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center


