### Accession
PXD003014

### Title
Human DNA Mismatch Repair pathway LC-MSMS

### Description
The mismatch repair (MMR) family is a highly conserved group of proteins that function in correcting base-base and insertion-deletion mismatches generated during DNA replication. To systematically investigate the mismatch repair pathway, we conducted a proteomic analysis and identified MMR-associated protein complexes using a tandem-affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) method. In total, we identified 262 high-confidence candidate interaction proteins (HCIPs).

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were excised into small pieces, de-stained completely, reduced disulfide bonds with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated cysteines with 10 mM IAA, and then subjected to trypsin digestion at 37oC for overnight. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile (ACN) and vacuum dried. Samples were reconstituted in HPLC solvent A (2.5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), delivered onto a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and eluted with ACN gradient by increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 6% to 30% in 30 mins. The eluates were directly entered LTQ Orbitrap Elite MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), setting in positive ion mode and data-dependent manner with full MS scan from 350-1250 m/z, resolution at 60,000, automatic gain control target at 1x106. The top 10 precursors were then selected for MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST-based in-house software against the database with proteins in Homo sapiens. All the default parameters were used, and automatic decoy database search was performed. Modifications including carboxyamidomethyl for cysteine and oxidation for methionine were applied; Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 1 Da. The identified peptides were filtered by false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% based on the target-decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Mmr, Hek-293t

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

### Submitter
Zhen Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA


