### Accession
PXD013106

### Title
MonoMac6 (MM6) cells proteomics LC-MS/MS

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRs) are small non-coding RNAs, which control the expression of target genes by either translational repression or RNA degradation, known as canonical miR function. MiR-328 has a non-canonical function and can activate gene expression by antagonizing the activity of heterogeneous ribonuclear protein E2 (hnRNP E2). The global importance of such non-canonical miR function is not yet known. In order to achieve a better understanding of the non-canonical miR activity, a compartment specific tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic analysis in differentiated MonoMac6 (MM6) cells was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture MonoMac6 (MM6) cells were obtained from DSMZ (DSMZ no. ACC124) and grown in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS, Biochrom AG), 100 μg/ml streptomycin (PAA), 100 U/ml penicillin (PAA), 1× non essential amino acids (Sigma Aldrich), 10 μg/ml insulin, 1 mM oxaloacetate (AppliChem) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (PAA). Cell culture was carried out in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C. MM6 cells were differentiated with 1 ng/ml TGFβ (PeproTech) and 50 nM calcitriol (Sigma Aldrich) at 37 °C, 6% CO2. HeLa cells were obtained from DSMZ (DSMZ no. ACC57). They were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 100 U/ml penicillin. Cell culture was carried out in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C.  miRNA-328 knockdown in MM6 cells As previously described in (Saul et al., 2016), we used 2 pmol/μl of a 3′-cholesterol-tagged ON TARGET siRNA-miR-328 (GGGAGAAAGUGCAUACAGC-3′-Chl) or control siRNA (5′-UCUCUCACAACGGGCAUUU-3′-Chl), which was directly added to MM6 cell culture medium. Both siRNAs were synthesized by GE Dharmacon. The efficiency of miR-328 knockdown was assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in 4 days differentiated MM6 cells and revealed a knockdown efficiency of around 85 % for both biological replicates, which were used for proteomics study.  Fraction preparation The soluble and microsomal fractionation was performed as previously described in (Ochs et al., 2013; Saul et al., 2016). The protein amount was determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer´s instructions.    Trypsin digestion and TMT labeling 25 μg of protein were taken from microsomal and soluble fraction, respectively, and subjected to disulfide reduction by addition of 5 μl of DTT 200 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Carl Roth) for 30 min at 56 °C. The sulfhydryl alkylation was performed by adding 4 μl of 1 M iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature for 1 h in a dark room. Trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega) was added (1:30, trypsin:protein), and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight. Tandem Mass TagTM 6-plex (TMTsixplex™) Isobaric Label Reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) were used for peptide labeling according to the instruction by the manufacturer. As internal standards we pooled 10 µg of each soluble and microsomal fraction and 25 µg of total pool were labeled with TMTsixplexTM label reagent 130 and 131, respectively. All separately labeled samples were pooled into final two TMT sets, one containing soluble fractions and one containing microsomal fraction. Excess TMTsixplex™ reagent was removed from the pooled samples using an SCX-cartridge (StrataSCX, Phenomenex), and the eluates were dried in SpeedVac. Next, we performed peptide pre-fractionation as described in (Cao, Tang, Wang, Liu, & Speicher, 2012). Briefly, TMT-labeled protein digests were separated over a 45 min gradient (3-55% B) on a 2.1 x 250 mm XBridge BEH300 C18 column (Waters) at the flow rate of 200 µl/min. A- abd b-buffers consisted of 20 mM ammonia in MilliQ-grade water and 20 mM in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), respectively. Fractions were collected per minute and the fractions covering the peptide elution range were combined into 12 final fraction. Obtained fractions were evaporated in SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.   Mass spectrometry Online LC-MS was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 desalting column (ThermoFisher Scientific), and separated on a 50-cm long EASY-spray column (50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, ThermoFisher Scientific) installed on to the EASY-Spray Series ion source. Solvent A was 97% water, 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 2%B up to 48%B in 55 min, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 400-1200 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (17,500 resolution) on the top 10 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 31% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 3e6 for MS1 and 2e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 250ms for MS1 and 200ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 20s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Acquired MS raw files were searched using Sequest-Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against human Uniprot database (release 01.12.2015) and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off. We used a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and product ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS and 0.8 Da for CID-ITMS. The algorithm considered tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6-plex (K, N-term) as fixed modifications and oxidation (M) as dynamic modifications. Quantification of reporter ions was done by Proteome Discoverer on HCD-FTMS tandem mass spectra using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. Only unique peptides in the data set were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRs) are small noncoding RNAs which control the expression of target genes by either translational repression or RNA degradation, known as canonical miR functions. The recent discovery that miR-328 has a noncanonical function and can activate gene expression by antagonizing the activity of heterogeneous ribonuclear protein E2 (hnRNP E2) opens an unexplored and exciting field of gene expression regulation. The global importance of such noncanonical miR function is not yet known. In order to achieve a better understanding of the new miR activity, we performed a compartment specific tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic analysis in differentiated MonoMac6 (MM6) cells, to monitor gene expression variations in response to miR-328 knockdown. We identified a broad spectrum of novel potential miR-328/hnRNP E2 and miR-328 targets involved in regulation of compartment specific cellular processes, such as inflammation or RNA splicing. This study provides first insights of the global significance of noncanonical miR function.

### Keywords
Monomac6 (mm6) cells, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital in Solna, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Elena Ossipova

### Lab Head
Dr Per-Johan Jakobsson
Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital in Solna, Stockholm, Sweden


