### Accession
PXD013171

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteome analyses of human macrophage-like THP-1 cells following infection with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis and avirulent M. bovis BCG, respectively.

### Description
In this project we conducted a comprehensive analysis of expression and global phosphorylation status of the host proteins following infection with virulent and avirulent mycobacteria. Our objective is to identify previously uncharacterized proteins of host macrophages that are specifically expressed and phosphorylated in response to Mtb and BCG, respectively and may play important role in regulating their intracellular survival

### Sample Protocol
PMA-treated human monocyte-derived THP-1 macrophages were infected with Mtb at 1:2 MOI and BCG at 1:10 MOI (macrophages : bacteria) for 60hrs, followed by sample preparation and processing for multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry (MQMS) analysis as described previously

### Data Protocol
MQMS data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating in a MS3 mode using synchronous precursor selection for the MS2 to MS3 fragmentation and data were searched against a Uniprot human database using the Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
Comparative phosphoproteomics of <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb)- and <i>Mycobacterium bovis</i> BCG (BCG)-infected macrophages could be instrumental in understanding the characteristic post-translational modifications of host proteins and their subsequent involvement in determining Mtb pathogenesis. To identify proteins acquiring a distinct phosphorylation status, herein, we compared the phosphorylation profile of macrophages upon exposure to Mtb and BCG. We observed a significant dephosphorylation of proteins following Mtb infection relative to those with uninfected or BCG-infected cells. A comprehensive tandem mass tag mass spectrometry (MS) approach detected &#x223c;10% phosphosites on a variety of host proteins that are modulated in response to infection. Interestingly, the innate immune-enhancing interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes were identified as a class of proteins differentially phosphorylated during infection, including the cytosolic RNA sensor RIG-I, which has been implicated in the immune response to bacterial infection. We show that Mtb infection results in the activation of RIG-I in primary human macrophages. Studies using RIG-I knockout macrophages reveal that the Mtb-mediated activation of RIG-I promotes IFN-&#x3b2;, IL-1&#x3b1;, and IL-1&#x3b2; levels, dampens autophagy, and facilitates intracellular Mtb survival. To our knowledge, this is the first study providing exhaustive information on relative and quantitative changes in the global phosphoproteome profile of host macrophages that can be further explored in designing novel anti-TB drug targets. The peptide identification and MS/MS spectra have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium <i>via</i> the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD013171.

### Keywords
M. bovis bcg, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mass-spectrometer, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone,Gurugram-Faridabad Expressway Faridabad-121001
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Renu Goel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Nisheeth Agarwal
Associate Professor Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone,Gurugram-Faridabad Expressway Faridabad-121001


