### Accession
PXD030581

### Title
HMG20B stabilizes interaction of LSD1 with GFI1 on chromatin to confer 1 transcription repression and leukemia cell differentiation block

### Description
Pharmacologic inhibition of LSD1 induces molecular and morphologic differentiation of blast cells in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients harboring MLL gene translocations. In addition to its demethylase activity, LSD1 has a critical scaffolding function at genomic sites occupied by the SNAG domain transcription repressor GFI1. Importantly, inhibitors block both enzymatic and scaffolding activities, in the latter case by disrupting the protein:protein interaction of GFI1 with LSD1. To explore the wider consequences of LSD1 inhibition on the LSD1 protein complex we made use of mass spectrometry approaches. We discovered that the interaction of the HMG-box protein HMG20B with LSD1 was also disrupted by LSD1 inhibition. Downstream investigations revealed that HMG20B is colocated on chromatin genome-wide with GFI1 and LSD1; the strongest HMG20B binding colocates with the strongest GFI1 and LSD1 binding. Functional assays demonstrated that HMG20B depletion induces leukaemia cell differentiation and further revealed that HMG20B is required for the transcription repressor activity of GFI1 through stabilizing the interaction on chromatin of LSD1 with GFI1. Interaction of HMG20B with LSD1 is through its coiled-coil domain. Thus, HMG20B is a critical component of the GFI1:LSD1 transcription repressor complex which contributes to leukaemia cell differentiation block.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extraction and immunoprecipitation followed by LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the ens_homo_sapiens_86 database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM.

### Publication Abstract
Pharmacologic inhibition of LSD1 induces molecular and morphologic differentiation of blast cells in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients harboring MLL gene translocations. In addition to its demethylase activity, LSD1 has a critical scaffolding function at genomic sites occupied by the SNAG domain transcription repressor GFI1. Importantly, inhibitors block both enzymatic and scaffolding activities, in the latter case by disrupting the protein:protein interaction of GFI1 with LSD1. To explore the wider consequences of LSD1 inhibition on the LSD1 protein complex we applied mass spectrometry technologies. We discovered that the interaction of the HMG-box protein HMG20B with LSD1 was also disrupted by LSD1 inhibition. Downstream investigations revealed that HMG20B is co-located on chromatin with GFI1 and LSD1 genome-wide; the strongest HMG20B binding co-locates with the strongest GFI1 and LSD1 binding. Functional assays demonstrated that HMG20B depletion induces leukemia cell differentiation and further revealed that HMG20B is required for the transcription repressor activity of GFI1 through stabilizing LSD1 on chromatin at GFI1 binding sites. Interaction of HMG20B with LSD1 is through its coiled-coil domain. Thus, HMG20B is a critical component of the GFI1:LSD1 transcription repressor complex which contributes to leukemia cell differentiation block.

### Keywords
Human ltq orbitrap velos

### Affiliations
Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester Cancer Research Centre Building, 555 Wilmslow Road, Manchester, M20 4GJ, United Kingdom
Thermo Fisher Scientific

### Submitter
Andrew Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Somervaille
Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester Cancer Research Centre Building, 555 Wilmslow Road, Manchester, M20 4GJ, United Kingdom


