### Accession
PXD036269

### Title
Generation of a high yield vaccine backbone for influenza B virus in embryonated chicken eggs

### Description
Influenza B virus (IBV) strains are one of the components of seasonal influenza vaccines in both trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. The vast majority of these vaccines are produced in embryonated chickens' eggs. While optimized backbones for vaccine production in eggs exist and are in use for influenza A viruses, no such backbones exist for IBVs, resulting in unpredictable production yields. To generate an optimal vaccine seed virus backbone, we have compiled a panel of 71 IBV strains from 1940 to present day, representing the known temporal and genetic variability of IBV circulating in humans. This panel contains strains from the B/Victoria/2/87-like lineage, B/Yamagata/16/88-like lineage and the ancestral lineage that preceded their split to provide a diverse set that would help to identify a suitable backbone which can be used in combination with hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins from any IBV strain to be incorporated into the seasonal vaccine. We have characterized and ranked the growth profiles of the 71 IBV strains and the best performing strains were used for co-infection of eggs, followed by serial passaging to select for high-growth reassortant viruses. After serial passaging, we selected 10 clonal isolates based on their growth profiles assessed by hemagglutination and plaque-forming units. We then generated reverse genetics systems for the three clones that performed best in growth curves. The selected backbones were then used to generate different reassortant viruses with HA/NA combinations from high and low titer yielding wild type IBV. When the growth profiles of the recombinant reassortant viruses were tested, the low titer yielding HA/NA viruses with the selected backbones yielded higher titers similar to those from high titer yielding HA/NA combinations. The use of these IBV backbones with improved replication in eggs might increase yields for the influenza B virus components of seasonal influenza virus vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
Five purified influenza strains (GL, HI, FL MA, 3GL, 3HI, 367) were first normalized to 50µg of total protein based on a BCA assay (Pierce) in 150µL of PBS then 50uL of buffer consisting of 8M urea (Invitrogen), 200mM ammonium bicarbonate (Invitrogen), and 2mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Invitrogen) was added to achieve a final volume of 200µL. Samples were incubated in a thermomixer at 60°C for 30 minutes at 550 rpm. Iodoacetamide was added to alkylate free cysteines, and samples were incubated for 45 min in the dark. Samples were then digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. Samples were desalted on a C18 column (mini spin, Nest Group) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were eluted from these columns with 100 µL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Digested samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C until analysis.  Two HA peptides (QLPNLLR and NLNSLSELEVK) were synthesized containing a C-terminal 13C6,15N2-lysine or 13C6,15N4-arginine residue and quantified by amino acid analysis (HeavyPeptide AQUA Ultimate, Thermo Scientific) [ref PMID 12771378]. Synthetic peptides were individually diluted from 1mM to 1fM in 0.5 µg/µL trypsin-digested Bovine Serum Albumin (New England Biolabs) in 0.1% FA and analyzed by a 20-minute mass spectrometry method to determine the range of concentrations that yielded to a linear response with mass spectrometry intensity. Trypsin-digested virus samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and the synthetic peptides were spiked into the samples to a final concentration of 2.5 µM each, which was within the linear range. Samples were diluted 1:15 and analyzed by a 70-minute mass spectrometry method described below.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30 cm x 75 μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 60 minutes followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 3μL of mobile phase A. All samples were analyzed with the following Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) settings. An MS1 scan was acquired over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument-controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, with a 10-ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30% and an instrument-controlled ion injection time and mass range.  To quantify peptide concentrations, precursor ion chromatograms were extracted from the MS1 scans for the synthetic (“heavy”) and endogenous (“light”) HA peptides using Skyline (version 21.2) [ref PMID 20147306]. Only the 2+ charge states of each precursor were quantified. The peak areas integrated over time was summed for all isotopic peaks of each precursor distribution of each peptide, and the light:heavy peptide ratios were calculated. The final concentration of HA peptide in each sample was calculated by multiplying the light:heavy peptide ratio by the final concentration of the synthetic peptide in the sample (i.e., 2.5 µM).

### Publication Abstract
Influenza B virus (IBV) strains are one of the components of seasonal influenza vaccines in both trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. The vast majority of these vaccines are produced in embryonated chickens' eggs. While optimized backbones for vaccine production in eggs exist and are in use for influenza A viruses, no such backbones exist for IBVs, resulting in unpredictable production yields. To generate an optimal vaccine seed virus backbone, we have compiled a panel of 71 IBV strains from 1940 to present day, representing the known temporal and genetic variability of IBV circulating in humans. This panel contains strains from the B/Victoria/2/87-like lineage, B/Yamagata/16/88-like lineage and the ancestral lineage that preceded their split to provide a diverse set that would help to identify a suitable backbone which can be used in combination with hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins from any IBV strain to be incorporated into the seasonal vaccine. We have characterized and ranked the growth profiles of the 71 IBV strains and the best performing strains were used for co-infection of eggs, followed by serial passaging to select for high-growth reassortant viruses. After serial passaging, we selected 10 clonal isolates based on their growth profiles assessed by hemagglutination and plaque-forming units. We then generated reverse genetics systems for the three clones that performed best in growth curves. The selected backbones were then used to generate different reassortant viruses with HA/NA combinations from high and low titer yielding wild type IBV. When the growth profiles of the recombinant reassortant viruses were tested, the low titer yielding HA/NA viruses with the selected backbones yielded higher titers similar to those from high titer yielding HA/NA combinations. The use of these IBV backbones with improved replication in eggs might increase yields for the influenza B virus components of seasonal influenza virus vaccines.

### Keywords
Backbone, Influenza b virus, High yield, Vaccine

### Affiliations
Microbiology department at the Icahn School of Medicine atMount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey R. Johnson
Microbiology department at the Icahn School of Medicine atMount Sinai


