### Accession
PXD026238

### Title
PAD2-mediated citrullination of Fibulin-5 promotes elastogenesis

### Description
The formation of elastic fibers is active only in the perinatal period. How elastogenesis is developmentally regulated is not fully understood. Citrullination is a unique form of post-translational modification catalyzed by peptidylarginine deiminases (PADIPADs), including PADIPAD1-4. Its physiological role is largely unknown. By using an unbiased proteomic approach of lung tissues, we discovered that FBLN5 and LTBP4, two key elastogenic proteins, were temporally modified in mouse and human lungs. We further demonstrated that PADIPAD2 citrullinated FBLN5 preferentially in young lungs compared to adult lungs. Genetic ablation of PADIPAD2 resulted in attenuated elastogenesis in vitro and age-dependent emphysema in vivo. Mechanistically, citrullination protected FBLN5 from proteolysis and subsequent inactivation of its elastogenic activity. Furthermore, citrullinated but not native FBLN5 partially rescued in vitro elastogenesis in the absence of PADIPAD activity. Our data uncover a novel function of citrullination, namely promoting elastogenesis, and provide additional insights to how elastogenesis is regulated.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated-PG pulldown Cell or tissue extract was incubated with phenylglyoxal (PG)-biotin (0.1mM) in a buffer containing 50 mM HEPES and 20% trichloroacetic acid at 37°C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in PBS containing 0.25% SDS, 0.14% BME, 0.4 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 2 mM arginine, 2 mM NaCl. Biotin-PG labeled citrullinated proteins were captured with streptavidin–agarose beads (Thermo Fisher) over night at 4°C.   Mass spectrometry sample preparation Organs were placed into a 2 mL screw-cap plastic tube along with 1.4 mm ceramic beads and 1 mL of cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF).  Tissue was lysed using a FastPrep24TM 5G homogenizer (MP) using factory-preset, tissue-specific protocols.  Lysate was cleared via centrifugation at 17,000 x g on a tabletop centrifuge at 4C for 20 min. Concentration of lysate was determined using a Bradford Assay.   Sample preparation was performed according to a published procedure [61].  Equal amounts of cell lysates from each experimental group (300 g) were diluted in buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.6) to a final concentration of 1 g/L and incubated with  20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 5 mM biotin-PG [62] for 30 min at 37 C.  Labeled proteins were precipitated on ice for 30 min.  Samples were pelleted via tabletop centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 15 min) at 4C.  The supernatants were discarded and the pellets were washed with cold acetone (300 L).  After drying for 5 min, the pellets were resuspended in 1.2% SDS in PBS by bath sonication and heating.    Samples were transferred to 15 mL screw cap tubes and diluted to 0.2% SDS in PBS.  Samples were incubated with a streptavidin agarose slurry (Sigma Aldrich, 170 L) overnight at 4C and another 3 hr further at 25 C.  After discarding the flow through, the streptavidin beads were then washed with 0.2% SDS in PBS (5 mL) for 10 min at 25 C.  The beads were then washed with PBS (5 mL 3 times), and water (5 mL 3 times) in order to remove any unbound proteins.  Beads were transferred to a screw cap microcentrifuge tube and heated in a buffer containing 500 L 6 M urea in PBS and 10 mM DTT (65 C, 20 min).  Proteins bound to the beads were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 37C for 30 min).  The beads were then pelleted by centrifugation (1,400 x g for 3 min) and the supernatant was removed.  The pellet was resuspended in 200 L of a premixed solution composed of 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2, and 2 g Trypsin Gold (Promega) in PBS.  These were agitated overnight at 37 C.  The supernatant was collected and the beads were washed with water (50 L, 2X), each time collecting the eluent. The fractions were combined and acidified with formic acid (5% final concentration).  These were then stored at -20C until MS analysis.  Citrullinated FBLN5 (50 μL) was lyophilized and resolubilized in 2 M urea (30 μL) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (70 μL) solution.  Once dissolved, the samples were incubated with 1 M DTT (1.5 μL) for 15 min at 65 °C followed by incubation with 500 mM iodoacetamide (2.5 μL) for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were then treated with trypsin (1:40 dilution) overnight at 37 °C, dried using a SpeedVac and resolubilized in Buffer A (5% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid) and stored at −20 °C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Easy-nLC HPLC (ThermoFisher).  Samples were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused-silica capillary hand packed with 4 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). Samples were separated on a hand packed 100 µm fused-silica capillary column with a 5 µm tip packed with 10 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex).  Peptides were eluted using a 10-hour gradient of 0-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  The flow rate through the column was set to ~400 nL/min and the spray voltage was set to 2.5 kV.  One full MS scan (FTMS) was followed by 7 data-dependent MS2 scans (ITMS) of the nth most abundant ions.    The tandem MS data of mouse lungs was searched using the SEQUEST algorithm using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the mouse UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide.  SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were reconstituted in a solution of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic in water and injected into a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an in-house packed pre-column (C18, 200A, 5µm, 2cm), followed by an in-house packed analytical column (C18, 100A, 3 µm, 25 cm). The aqueous mobile phase (A) was water + 0.1 % formic acid, and the organic mobile phase (B) was acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 4 µL/min (for 4 min) and carried over to the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient: 5-35% B (for 60 min), 35-60% B (for 30 min) , 60% B (for 3 min) , 60-90% B (for 1 min), 90% B (for 15 min) , 90-5% B (for 1 min), 5%B (for 18 min). The peptide mixture was then injected into a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer using electrospray ionization voltage 1.45 kV in positive ionization mode. The data was acquired using the following parameters: MS1 data acquisition: MS resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 30 ms, and m/z scan range of 300 to 1750. For MS2 data acquisition (in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode): MS resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time of 110 ms, the isolation width of 1.6 Da, and HCD collision energy of 27 volts. LC-MS/MS data processing The raw data was processed and searched using Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (PD 2.1.1.21) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). To identify the citrullination sites in human FBLN5, the database search was performed against SwissProt human database by Mascot Server 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd) in PD pipeline using the following search parameters: Tryptic digest with the maximum number of two missed cleavage sites per peptide, peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment tolerance of 0.05 Da, dynamic modifications of peptide N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate, peptide N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, citrullination on arginine, and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and static modification of carbamidomethyl on cysteine. The results were further processed using Scaffold 4.10.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The neutral loss of -43 Da (-CHNO) on citrullinated arginine was imported to Scaffold using a custom UNIMOD file. The protein identification threshold was set to greater than 99% probability using Protein Prophet algorithms [63] applied in Scaffold. The minimum number of unique peptides per protein was set to 2, with 1% peptide Prophet FDR [64] applied in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of elastic fibers is active only in the perinatal period. How elastogenesis is developmentally regulated is not fully understood. Citrullination is a unique form of post-translational modification catalyzed by peptidylarginine deiminases (PADs), including PAD1-4. Its physiological role is largely unknown. By using an unbiased proteomic approach of lung tissues, we discovered that FBLN5 and LTBP4, two key elastogenic proteins, were temporally modified in mouse and human lungs. We further demonstrated that PAD2 citrullinated FBLN5 preferentially in young lungs compared to adult lungs. Genetic ablation of PAD2 resulted in attenuated elastogenesis in vitro and age-dependent emphysema in vivo. Mechanistically, citrullination protected FBLN5 from proteolysis and subsequent inactivation of its elastogenic activity. Furthermore, citrullinated but not native FBLN5 partially rescued in vitro elastogenesis in the absence of PAD activity. Our data uncover a novel function of citrullination, namely promoting elastogenesis, and provide additional insights to how elastogenesis is regulated.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Deimination, Lung compliance, Deiminase, Elastic fiber, Fibulin-5

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Massachusetts Medical School Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology
Univeristy of Massachusetts Medical School

### Submitter
Paul Thompson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Thompson
Univeristy of Massachusetts Medical School Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology


