### Accession
PXD036949

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the developing solid endosperm from Mexican Pacific Tall and Yucatan Green Dwarf coconuts (Cocos nucifera L.): an insight to carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolisms

### Description
The coconut tree (Cocos nucifera L.) is an ancient palm species that since early times had been integrally exploited due to their many benefits to the habitants of the tropical and subtropical areas (Niral and Jerard, 2018). The coconut together with the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) and date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) belongs to the Arecaceae family and represent a natural source of oils and carbohydrates both, highly demanded in food and pharmaceutical industries.  The coconut shows high morphological variations, but grouping normally in two groups, according to their morphology and growth habits, the “Tall” and the “Dwarf” varieties. Frequently, hybrids are considered as a third variety resulting from cross pollination between Tall and Dwarfs.  Tall varieties begin to flowering at 5-7 years after planting, and continue emitting inflorescences and fruits up to 80 to 100 years. When adults, tall palms reach heights between 20-30 m; producing fruits from medium to large in size with abundant solid endosperm and high oil content. In case of dwarf palm varieties, they start flowering and fruiting at 3-4 years after planting, and continue producing by almost 50 years. As adults, their height is 8-10 m, producing fruits from small to medium size with moderate amounts of solid endosperm and less oil content than tall varieties.  The solid endosperm, also named as “coconut meat” and when it is dry “copra”, is the source of medium chain saturated fatty acids (MCSFA), e.g. lauric acid (C12:0), myristic acid (C14:0) and palmitic acid (C16:0), among others, and their content of total fatty acids is higher in Tall than in Dwarf varieties.  Coconut Oil contains high levels of lauric acid and exhibit characteristics as increased oxidative stability, low melting points and formation of stable emulsions, all them highly appreciated in the food and chemical industries (Kumar, 2011; Reynolds et al., 2019). Moreover, due to its high content of antioxidants such as tocopherol and beta-carotene, coconut oil exhibit various health benefits, such as antibacterial, antiviral, and cardiovascular protection. Coconut fruit growth and ripening is intrinsically related with development of the different seed tissues, i.e., endosperms, embryo and pericarp. The endosperms of the coconut fruit did not accumulate synchronically with fruit maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Coconut fruits from the cultivars Yucatan Green Dwarf and Mexican Pacific Tall were harvested in a coconut plantation located in San Crisanto, Yucatan, Mexico. Coconut palms produce one inflorescence per month. The youngest inflorescence is located at the top of palm, closest to apical meristem and showing a closed spata (0 stage), and from there, in direction to the ground the months of maturity increases until reach the oldest inflorescence nearest to the ground. According with this criterion, the maturity stages of the fruits were determined as immature fruits at 6-8 months old, intermediate 9-10 months old, and mature 11-14 months old. Physiological parameters including the hardness of epicarp, endosperm thickness, water volume, and nut weight of coconut fruit were assessed. Hardness test was performed using a Shore A-C-D durometer. To the macerate was added 1 mL of buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM ß-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), ¼ of pill protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and homogenized. The homogenate was centrifuged for 30 minutes at 13,000 rpm and 4°C, and the supernatant was kept at -20°C until use. Biological replicates were in triplicated.After protein quantitation, a chloroform-methanol precipitation was carried out. Trypsin digested peptides were recovered, and interfering salts in the individual samples were removed using enzymatic digestion and dried at room temperature. In contrast, acetonitrile was gently shaken into each TMT label. Peptide samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB for 5 minutes before being coupled with a TMT tag and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. In this study, the samples were labeled with TMT 10plex reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples of both varieties Yucatan Green Dwarf and Mexican Pacific Tall were run at different time and were labeling separately as follow: immature stages were labeled with reagents 126, 127N, 128N, intermediate stages labeling was 128C, 129N, 129C, and for mature stages 130N, 130C, 131 were applied. To stop the peptide labeling procedure, 5% hydroxylamine was applied to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. Labeled samples were pooled and fractionated using strong cation exchange and high pH reversed phase C18 cartridges (Thermo Scientific). Each fraction was desalted with C18 cartridges and dried using a CentriVap. Dried samples were redissolved with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 5 µL of this solution was injected into a nano-LC platform (UltiMate 3000 RSLC system, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) through a nanoviper C18 trap column (3 µm, 75 µm x 2 cm, Dionex), and separated on an EASY spray C-18 RSLC column (2 µm, 75 µm x 25 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase gradient was as follows: a 10 min gradient was set using Solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile (Solvent B), 10 min of Solvent A, 7-20% Solvent B over 25 min, 20% Solvent B for 15 min, 20-25% Solvent B over 15 min, 25-95% Solvent B over 20 min, and 8 min of Solvent A. The nano-LC was interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY Spray” nano ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
The spectra acquired by MS/MS and (SPS)-MS 3 were analyzed with the program Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Data were processed using the search engines Amanda, Mascot server (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) and Sequest HT algorithm,As search parameters, we considered full-tryptic protease specificity, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT 9-plex N-terminal/lysine residues (+229.163 Da). Moreover, we considered methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and deamidation in asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da) as dynamic modifications. Protein identification was carried out at a lower resolution in the linear ion trap with tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da. Peptide hits were filtered for a maximum of 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm. roteins and peptides abundance was generated on the Proteome Discover 2.3 platform. Normalization was carried out based on the total peptides amount. Thereafter, we determined the fold change of proteins abundance in the ratio Int/Imm, Mat/Imm, and Mat/Imm. Differential proteins [fold change >1.5 and < 0.66 (log2 fold change > 0.59 and < -0.59)] were analyzed based on biological process gene ontology (GO) enrichment using the platform DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/summary.jsp) and the resulting GO terms were then summarized by finding a representative subset with a simple clustering algorithm that relies on semantic similarity measures using REVIGO software (http://revigo.irb.hr/). We used proteins homologs to Arabidopsis and Elaeis guineensis. The output data were presented using Treemaps, displaying a two-level hierarchy of GO terms – each rectangle is a single cluster representative, and the representatives are joined into ‘superclusters’ of loosely related terms. Principal Component Analysis (PCA)-based normalized protein abundances were calculated to visualize the differences in protein abundances between conditions. We used the log2 ratios Int/Imm, Mat/Imm, and Mat/Imm, significant values (P value -log10) and a Man hattan distance for a criterion for raking hits in the platform VolcaNosR (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR2/). The plant metabolic database (https://plantcyc.org/) was used and samples were computed by using the cellular overview/omics viewer tool to generate pathways diagrams and protein accumulation intensities based on the Int/Imm, Mat/Imm, and Mat/Imm ratios.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cocos nucifera</i> L. is a crop grown in the humid tropics. It is grouped into two classes of varieties: dwarf and tall; regardless of the variety, the endosperm of the coconut accumulates carbohydrates in the early stages of maturation and fatty acids in the later stages, although the biochemical factors that determine such behavior remain unknown. We used tandem mass tagging with synchronous precursor selection (TMT-SPS-MS3) to analyze the proteomes of solid endosperms from Yucatan green dwarf (YGD) and Mexican pacific tall (MPT) coconut cultivars. The analysis was conducted at immature, intermediate, and mature development stages to better understand the regulation of carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms. Proteomic analyses showed 244 proteins in YGD and 347 in MPT; from these, 155 proteins were shared between both cultivars. Furthermore, the proteomes related to glycolysis, photosynthesis, and gluconeogenesis, and those associated with the biosynthesis and elongation of fatty acids, were up-accumulated in the solid endosperm of MPT, while in YGD, they were down-accumulated. These results support that carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolisms differ among the developmental stages of the solid endosperm and between the dwarf and tall cultivars. This is the first proteomics study comparing different stages of maturity in two contrasting coconut cultivars and may help in understanding the maturity process in other palms.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cocos nucifera, Developing solid endosperm, Tmt, Carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolisms

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.,

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr eliel ruiz
Instituto de Ecología, A.C.,


