### Accession
PXD009629

### Title
Photoferrotroph R. palustris TIE-1

### Description
The underlying adaptations required by anoxygenic phototrophs to oxidize Fe(II), a potential stressor, are not well constrained. We used quantitative proteomics to compare cells of the photoferrotroph Rhodopseudomonas palustris TIE-1 grown photoautotrophically with Fe(II) or H2, and photoheterotrophically with acetate. We observed unique proteome profiles for each condition with differences primarily driven by carbon source. Growth on Fe(II) was characterized by a response typical of iron homeostasis which included an increased abundance of proteins required for metal efflux (particularly copper), and decreased abundance of iron import proteins, including siderophore receptors, with no evidence of further stressors such as oxidative damage. This study suggests that the main challenge facing photoferrotrophs comes from limitations imposed by autotrophic growth and, once this challenge is overcome, iron stress can be mitigated using iron management mechanisms common to diverse bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction with SDS protein extraction buffer containing 4% w/v SDS, 10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8.0), 5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 5 mM sodium orthovanadate and 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) at 95°C for 10 minutes before sonication (2 mins). Addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and iodoacetamide to 5.5 mM. Proteins were precipitated from supernatant by acetone:methanol precipitation. Proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin. Desalting was conducted using C18 Stage tips. Peptide separation was conducted  on an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with a 227 minute segmented gradient of 5-33-50-90% solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000. Accumulation target value of 106 charges was set and the lock mass option was used for internal calibration. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap at the ion accumulation target value of 5000 and default CID settings. Sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Rhodopseudomonas palustris TIE-1 database obtained from Uniprot, containing 5,247 protein entries, and 285 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
The oxidation of Fe(II) by anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria was likely a key contributor to Earth's biosphere prior to the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis and is still found in a diverse range of modern environments. All known phototrophic Fe(II) oxidizers can utilize a wide range of substrates, thus making them very metabolically flexible. However, the underlying adaptations required to oxidize Fe(II), a potential stressor, are not completely understood. We used a combination of quantitative proteomics and cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) to compare cells of <i>Rhodopseudomonas palustris</i> TIE-1 grown photoautotrophically with Fe(II) or H<sub>2</sub> and photoheterotrophically with acetate. We observed unique proteome profiles for each condition, with differences primarily driven by carbon source. However, these differences were not related to carbon fixation but to growth and light harvesting processes, such as pigment synthesis. Cryo-TEM showed stunted development of photosynthetic membranes in photoautotrophic cultures. Growth on Fe(II) was characterized by a response typical of iron homeostasis, which included an increased abundance of proteins required for metal efflux (particularly copper) and decreased abundance of iron import proteins, including siderophore receptors, with no evidence of further stressors, such as oxidative damage. This study suggests that the main challenge facing anoxygenic phototrophic Fe(II) oxidizers comes from growth limitations imposed by autotrophy, and, once this challenge is overcome, iron stress can be mitigated using iron management mechanisms common to diverse bacteria (e.g., by control of iron influx and efflux).<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The cycling of iron between redox states leads to the precipitation and dissolution of minerals, which can in turn impact other major biogeochemical cycles, such as those of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur. Anoxygenic phototrophs are one of the few drivers of Fe(II) oxidation in anoxic environments and are thought to contribute significantly to iron cycling in both modern and ancient environments. These organisms thrive at high Fe(II) concentrations, yet the adaptations required to tolerate the stresses associated with this are unclear. Despite the general consensus that high Fe(II) concentrations pose numerous stresses on these organisms, our study of the large-scale proteome response of a model anoxygenic phototroph to Fe(II) oxidation demonstrates that common iron homeostasis strategies are adequate to manage this. The bulk of the proteome response is not driven by adaptations to Fe(II) stress but to adaptations required to utilize an inorganic carbon source. Such a global overview of the adaptation of these organisms to Fe(II) oxidation provides valuable insights into the physiology of these biogeochemically important organisms and suggests that Fe(II) oxidation may not pose as many challenges to anoxygenic phototrophs as previously thought.

### Keywords
Anoxygenic photosynthesis, Oxidation, Iron, Photoferrotroph

### Affiliations
Geomicrobiology Center for Applied Geoscience (ZAG) University of Tübingen
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Andreas Kappler
Geomicrobiology Center for Applied Geoscience (ZAG) University of Tübingen


