### Accession
PXD006260

### Title
The proteome of respiratory exudate and similarity to the plasma proteome in bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus)

### Description
The primary objective of the present study was to use proteomic analysis as a non-targeted approach to initially identify and classify the proteome of respiratory exudate or blow in aquarium-based bottlenose dolphins.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentrations in the blow samples were determined using 5 uL of blow from each of the four dolphins in the Bradford protein assay (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) with bovine serum albumin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) as standard (Vandenplas et al. 2002). Blow proteins were resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE, Laemmli 1970) with all materials and reagents purchased from BioRad (Hercules, CA, USA). Briefly, 20 µg of protein/10 µL from each of the four blow samples were mixed with an equal volume of 2x Laemmli buffer with 5% β-mercaptoethanol as reducing agent. Thereafter, the samples were heated to 95°C for 5 min and allowed to cool to room temperature. For protein separation, each sample (20 µL) was loaded on AnykD Criterion TGX Precast Protein Gels with BioRad broad range molecular weight standards from 6.5 to 200 kD. Electrophoresis was carried out at 45 mV until the bromophenol blue front reached the bottom of the gel. Bands of proteins were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue for 30 to 45 min and destained overnight on a plate rocker in 7% methanol. An image of the gel was captured using a Syngene G:BOX chemiluminescence imaging system (Frederick, MD, USA). As shown in Figure 2, bands of blow proteins were distinct for Dolphins A, C, and D but not Dolphin B. Perhaps, total blow protein was under estimated; nonetheless, Dolphin B was not used in subsequent analysis. For Dolphins A, C, and D, 15 bands of proteins were sliced from the gel using a scalpel blade (Figure 1), placed in individual Eppendorf tubes with approximately 50 μL deionized water, labelled, and stored at 4°C until shipment for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.  Proteins in gel slices were digested with trypsin and peptide fragments extracted from the gel following the manufactures instructions (Thermo, In-Gel Tryptic Digestion Kit #89871). Peptides from each slice were injected on to an HPLC column using a Proxeon Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) connected to the mass spectrometer. The chromatography used a trapping column (Proxeon Easy-Column, 2 cm, ID 100 μm, 5 um, 120A, C18) and an analytical column (Proxeon Easy-Column, 10 cm, ID 75 μm, 3um, 120A, C18). The gradient using a mobile phase A (95% H2O:5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (5% H2O:95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The gradient was as follows: 0% B for 3 min, 0% to 8% B from 3 to 5 min, 8 to 18% B from 5 to 85 min, 18 to 30% B from 85 to 100 min, 30 to 90% B from 100 to 105 min, and held at 90% B from 105 to 120 min at continuous flow rate throughout the gradient of 300 nl/min. The analytical column was connected to a PicoTip Emitter (FS360-75-15-N-20; New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA) cut to size. The column and Emitter were attached to a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) mass spectrometer using the Proxeon Nanospray Flex Ion Source. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C and spray voltage was 2.8 kV. The mass spectrometer used a data dependent method. In MS mode, the instrument was set to scan 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM. A minimal signal of 20,000 could trigger MS/MS and 10 consecutive MS/MS were possible. The activation type used was CID. The repeat mass exclusion was set to 120 sec.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from all slices from a single protein gel lane were combined and MS/MS data were analyzed using Protein Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Sequest was set up to search a database restricted to all mammalian proteins downloaded from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) on 7/13/2016. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.2 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.1; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at >95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at >99.9% probability and contained ≥one peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing substantial peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Blow proteins among the 3 dolphins were further defined as having ≥2 peptides in at least 2 of the 3 dolphins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dolphin plasma respiratory exudate

### Affiliations
USDA/ARS/NADC

### Submitter
John Lippolis

### Lab Head
Dr John D. Lippolis
USDA/ARS/NADC


