### Accession
PXD023121

### Title
FAM83F regulates canonical Wnt signalling through an interaction with CK1α

### Description
The function of the FAM83F protein, like the functions of many members of the FAM83 family, is poorly understood. Here we show that injection of Fam83f mRNA into Xenopus embryos causes axis duplication, a phenotype indicative of enhanced Wnt signalling. Consistent with this, overexpression of FAM83F activates Wnt signalling, whilst ablation of FAM83F from human colorectal cancer (CRC) cells attenuates it. We demonstrate that FAM83F is farnesylated and interacts and co-localises with CK1α at the plasma membrane. This interaction with CK1α is essential for FAM83F to activate Wnt signalling, and FAM83F mutants that do not interact with CK1α fail to induce axis duplication in Xenopus embryos and to activate Wnt signalling in cells. FAM83F acts upstream of GSK-3β, because the attenuation of Wnt signalling caused by loss of FAM83F can be rescued by GSK-3 inhibition. Introduction of a farnesyl-deficient mutant of FAM83F in cells through CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing redirects the FAM83F-CK1α complex away from the plasma membrane and significantly attenuates Wnt signalling, indicating that FAM83F exerts its effects on Wnt signalling at the plasma membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were affinity purified from clarified extracts by GFP-TRAP beads (ChromoTek). Purified proteins were resolved by 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE, the gels were stained with InstantBlue™ (Expedeon), and gel slices covering each lane were excised and digested with trypsin. The peptides were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis performed by LC-MS-MS on a Linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap-VelosPro, Thermo) coupled to a U3000 RSLC HPLC (Thermo). Peptides were trapped on a nanoViper Trap column, 2 cm x 100 m C18 5 m 100 Å (Thermo, 164564), then separated on a 15 cm Thermo EasySpray column (ES800) equilibrated with a flow of 300 nl/min of 3% Solvent B. [Solvent A: 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid, 3% DMSO in H2O]. The elution gradient was as follows; Time(min):Solvent B(%); 0:3, 5:3, 45:35, 47:99, 52:99, 55:3, 60:3. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS-MS acquisition. Full scan spectra (m/z 400-1600) were acquired in the orbitrap with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to an FTMS Full AGC Target; 1,000,000; FTMS MSn AGC Target; 50,000). The 20 most intense ions, above a specified minimum signal threshold (2,000), based upon a low resolution (R=15,000) preview of the survey scan, were fragmented by collision induced dissociation and recorded in the linear ion trap (Full AGC Target; 30,000. MSn AGC Target; 5,000).

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (www.ThermoScientific.com), using Mascot 2.4.1 (www.matrixscience.com), and searching the SwissProt Human database. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.4.7 (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was also used to examine the Mascot result files. Allowance was made for the following fixed, Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M) and Farnesyl (C). Error tolerances were 10ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2. Scaffold Q/Q+S V4.4.6 (www.ProteomeSoftware.com) was used to further analyse the data and obtain values for the total unique peptide counts for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fam83f

### Affiliations
MRC-PPU
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Gopal Sapkota

### Lab Head
Dr Gopal Sapkota
MRC-PPU


