### Accession
PXD002548

### Title
Inner membrane proteome of E. coli Min mutant

### Description
In bacteria, proteins of the MinD/ParA superfamily are reported to partition DNA and protein complexes to designate subcellular location. Among them, the E. coli Min system is a prominent example to demonstrate that the protein function is spatially regulated by the dynamic subcellular localization and by the reversible membrane topology. It is curious that pole-to-pole oscillation of MinDE involves continuous cycles of protein attachment to and detachment from the membrane, an environment that is crowded with a variety of proteins of different functions. We therefore took a quantitative proteomic approach, the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) method, to analyze the inner memrbane proteome of the wild-type and Min mutant strains, aiming at identifying membrane and memrbane associated proteins that are affected in the absence of the Min system. The study reveals a physiological adapation strategy that could be used to rescue the unproductive rounds of cell division. The study also suggests that partition of macromolecules by the MinD/ParA family of proteins may have broader roles in bacterial physiology.

### Sample Protocol
The inner membrane of E. coli was isolated using sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. Proteins of the inner memrbane fraction were recovered from a SDS-PAGE, cystein blocked and digested. Protein digests from each strain after enrichment were created with a different iTRAQ reagent containing different isobaric tag (114, 115, 116,117) following the manufacturer's instruction. The procedure was done with 4 sample repeats of each strain that were subsequently analyzed by NanoLC-nanoESI-MS/MS. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350-1600) with the resolution set to 120K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control (AGC) target at 10E6. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for HCD MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the orbitrap with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s. For MS/MS, we used a resolution of 15000, an isolation window of 2 m/z and a target value of 50000 ions, with maximum accumulation times of 200 ms. Fragentation was performed with normalized collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 0.1 ms. Ions with singly and unrecognized charge state were also excluded.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4.1.14) for protein identification and iTRAQ 4plex quantitation. A database of E. coli strain K12 (organism ID 83333) was downloaded from Uniprot (October 2013) and combined with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) from the Global Proteome Machine (http://www.thegpm.org) as the reference for initial analysis. Mascot (v 1.4) was used for protein identification with the following settings, including precursor mass tolerance window of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance window as 50 mmu, dynamic Cabamidomethylation on cycteine, dynamic oxidation on methionine, dynamic N-terminal and cysteine iTRAQ labeling. All peptides of first rank in each spectrum with Mascot significant threshold less than 0.05 were used for data analysis to control the false discovery rate under 1% based on the target-decoy database algorithm. The raw quantitation value of each iTRAQ for all peptides were exported from Proteome discoverer and analyzed with an in-house statistical script using R languange (http://www.r-project.org/). The script first integrated data from all four iTRAQ mass spectrometry experiments in which the four replicates in the experiments all had different tags (114,115,116,117) to minimize any possible bias from iTRAQ labeling among experimental subjects, i.e. MC1000 and YLS1.  Any peptides that were asigned to multiple protein groups were removed from the dataset. To normalize the system error among samples, the intensities of the peptides in YLS1 from each MS experiment were normalized by the log2 median ratio of YLS1 versus MC1000. To normalize the system error among different MS experiments, the normalized intensities of the peptides in each sample were normalized again by the ratio of total normalized tag intensity between the target MS experiment and a reference MS experiment (using experiment with the highest total intensity as a reference). These normalized peptide intensities were then summed up to represent protein intensities per sample per MS experiment.

### Publication Abstract
The Min system of Escherichia coli mediates placement of the division septum at the midcell. It oscillates from pole to pole to establish a concentration gradient of the division inhibition that is high at the poles but low at the midcell; the cell middle thereby becomes the most favorable site for division. Although Min oscillation is well studied from molecular and biophysical perspectives, it is still an enigma as to whether such a continuous, energy-consuming, and organized movement of the Min proteins would affect cellular processes other than the division site selection. To tackle this question, we compared the inner membrane proteome of the wild-type and &#x394;min strains using a quantitative approach. Forty proteins that showed differential abundance on the inner membrane of the mutant cells were identified and defined as proteins of interest (POIs). More than half of the POIs were peripheral membrane proteins, suggesting that the Min system affects mainly reversible protein association with the inner membrane. In addition, 6 out of 10 selected POIs directly interacted with at least one of the Min proteins, confirming the correlation between POIs and the Min system.Further analysis revealed a functional relationship between metabolism and the Min system. Metabolic enzymes accounted for 45% of the POIs, and there was a change of metabolites in the related reactions. We hypothesize that the Min system could alter the membrane location of proteins to modulate their enzymatic activity. Thus, the metabolic modulation in the &#x394;min mutant is likely an adaptive phenotype in cells of abnormal size and chromosome number due to an imbalanced abundance of proteins on the inner membrane. Taken together, the current work reports novel interactions of the Min system and reveals a global physiological impact of the Min system in addition to the division site placement.

### Keywords
The min system, Cell division, Membrane, Itraq, E. coli

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Yu-Ling Shih

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ling Shih
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


