### Accession
PXD021057

### Title
Identification of Merlin ubiquitination sites

### Description
To identify the ubiquitination sites on Merlin, Flag-tagged wild-type Merlin or the S518D mutant were stably transduced into LN229 cells. These cells were treated with thapsigargin for 15 minutes and subjected to immunoprecipitation and followed by Mass Spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were treated by thapsigargin for 15 minutes and subjected to immunoprecipitation by a Flag antibody. Immunoprecipitated products were resolved using SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by staining with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific). Protein bands were excised from the gel and digested in situ by trypsin. The purified peptides were then subjected to nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identifications from the LC-MS data were performed using the Global Proteome Machine (https://www.thegpm.org/). For ubiquitination identification, internal Lysine residues that carry GlyGly as variable modifications were searched against Ensembl mouse databases.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor Merlin/NF2, a key activator of the Hippo pathway in growth control, is regulated by phosphorylation. However, it is uncertain whether additional post-translational modifications regulate Merlin. Here, we show that ubiquitination is required to activate Merlin in the Hippo pathway. Ubiquitinated Merlin is mostly conjugated by one or two ubiquitin molecules. Such modification is promoted by serine 518 dephosphorylation in response to Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling or cell detachment. Merlin ubiquitination is mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, NEDD4L, which requires a scaffold protein, AMOTL1, to approach Merlin. Several NF2-patient-derived Merlin mutations disrupt its binding to AMOTL1 and its regulation by the AMOTL1-NEDD4L apparatus. Lysine (K) 396 is the major ubiquitin conjugation residue. Disruption of Merlin ubiquitination by the K396R mutation or NEDD4L depletion diminishes its binding to Lats1 and inhibits Lats1 activation. These effects are also accompanied by loss of Merlin's anti-mitogenic and tumor suppressive properties. Thus, we propose that dephosphorylation and ubiquitination compose an intramolecular relay to activate Merlin functions in activating the Hippo pathway during growth control.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ubiquitination, Calcium, Nf2, Merlin

### Affiliations
Penn State College of Medicine
Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA

### Submitter
Wei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Li
Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA


