### Accession
PXD029601

### Title
Patient-derived anti-Siglec-6 antibodies engineered into T cell-recruiting bispecific antibody formats for treating leukemia

### Description
Despite numerous therapeutic options, safe and curative therapy is out of reach for most chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients. We previously reported the identification of a patient-derived CLL-binding antibody, JML-1, and identified Siglec-6 as the target of JML-1. Siglec-6 is an attractive target for cancer immunotherapy due to its absence on healthy tissues and potential role in immune signaling. In this work, we identify additional patient-derived anti-Siglec-6 antibodies, RC-1 and RC-2, that bind with higher affinity than JML-1, yet exhibit similar specificity and overlapping conformational epitopes. Both JML-1 and RC-1 were employed to generate anti-Siglec-6 x anti-CD3 T cell-recruiting bispecific antibodies (T-biAbs) which were effective in vitro at activating T cells and lysing target cells. Upon engineering RC-1 into more compact and rigid T-biAb formats, we achieved sub-pM EC50 values for cell lysis in vitro. In addition, the T-biAbs mediated the killing of primary CLL cells by autologous T cells at natural effector-to-target cell ratios ex vivo. The increased potency of this T-biAb format  appears to be due to the reduction in the length and/or flexibility of the cytolytic synapse. Furthermore, the anti-Siglec-6 x anti-CD3 T-biAb was effective at curing mice in a systemic in vivo model of CLL.

### Sample Protocol
For differential HDX, deglycosylated Siglec-6 (10 μM) was preincubated with RC-1 Fab at a 1:1 molar ratio for 1 h on ice for complex formation before subjecting them to HDX analysis. For the differential HDX experiments, 5 μL of either Siglec-6 (apo) or the complex (1:1 molar mixture Siglec-6 and RC-1 Fab) were mixed with 20 μL of D2O-exchange buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.8) and incubated at 4°C for predetermined times up to 1 h. Back-exchange was minimized by adding 25 μL of 3 M urea, 1% TFA, pH 2.5. Samples were then passed through an immobilized pepsin column (0.1% v/v TFA, 4°C); the resulting peptides were trapped on a C8 trap column (Hypersil Gold, Thermo Fisher). Peptides were then gradient-eluted (4-40% CH3CN v/v and 0.3% v/v formic acid) across a C18 separation column (Hypersil Gold, Thermo Fisher) and electrosprayed directly into an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Fisher). The experiment was performed with three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments performed on a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) over a 70 min gradient. Product ion spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and the five most abundant ions were selected for the product ion analysis per scan event. The MS/MS *.raw data files were converted to *.mgf files and then submitted to MASCOT (version 2.3 Matrix Science, London, UK) for peptide identification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 with the mass tolerance for precursor ions +/- 0.6 Da and for fragment ions +/- 8 ppm. Oxidation to methionine was selected for variable modification. Pepsin was used for digestion and no specific enzyme was selected in MASCOT during the search. Peptides included in the peptide set used for HDX detection had a MASCOT score of 20 or greater. The MS/MS MASCOT search was also performed against a decoy (reverse) sequence and false positives were ruled out if they did not pass a 1% false discovery rate. Data analysis was conducted using HDX Workbench software. The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This is accomplished by determining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra using the conventional formula described elsewhere [31]. The fully deuterated control, 100% deuterium incorporation, was calculated theoretically, and corrections for back-exchange were made on the basis of an estimated 70% deuterium recovery and accounting for 80% final deuterium concentration in the sample (1:5 dilution in D2O HDX buffer). Statistical significance for the differential HDX data is determined by an unpaired t-test for each time point.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Antibody, Siglec-6

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute; Jupiter, FL, USA
Scripps Research

### Submitter
Valentine Courouble

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Rader
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute; Jupiter, FL, USA


