### Accession
PXD037754

### Title
P2X7 signaling drives Th1 cell differentiation through metabolic reprogramming for aerobic glycolysis

### Description
This study provides evidence on the molecular mechanisms by which P2RX7 signaling promotes Th1 cell differentiation. P2RX7 induces T-bet expression and aerobic glycolysis in splenic CD4+ T cells that respond to malaria, at a time prior to Th1/Tfh polarization. Cell-intrinsic P2RX7 signaling sustains the glycolytic pathway and causes bioenergetic mitochondrial stress in activated CD4+ T cells. We also show in vitro the phenotypic similarities of Th1-polarized CD4+ T cells that do not express P2RX7 and those in which the glycolytic pathway is pharmacologically inhibited. In addition, ATP synthase blockade in vitro and the consequent inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation, which forces cells to use aerobic glycolysis, is sufficient to promote rapid CD4+ T cell proliferation and polarization to the Th1 profile in the absence of P2RX7. These data demonstrate that P2RX7-mediated metabolic reprograming for aerobic glycolysis is a key event for Th1 cell differentiation and suggest that ATP synthase inhibition is a fundamental mechanism by which P2X7 signaling induces the Th1 response.

### Sample Protocol
: CD11a+CD4+ and CD11a-CD4+ T cells from B6 and P2rx7-/- mice were separated by sorting (Aria device, BD Biosciences ) and frozen in a freezer -20ºC (Figure S3). For protein extraction, the cells were unfreezed and the remaining medium was removed by centrifugation at low speed (700g for 3min, 4°C). The supernatant was discarded. After washing, the pellet was resuspended in 150 μl of Urea buffer (8 M) containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. It was performed 6 cycles of thermal shock: the tubes were emerged in liquid nitrogen for 30s; the tubes were transferred to a 30°C bath and mixed for 1 min. Protein was quantified using Qubit according to the manufacturer's instructions. It was added ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) to a final concentration of 50mM. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 10 mM, incubated for 45 min at 30°C, subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 5mM and incubate for 15 min at 30°C. Next, the samples were diluted to Urea 10 times by adding Ambic 50mM, and pH checked (approximately 7) to perform trypsin digestion at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio (w/w), overnight incubation at 30°C The samples were acidified adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% and digested peptides were desalted using C18 microcolumns (10.1007/978-1-61779-148-2_21). The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA, injected, and loaded on ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in-house packed trap column (2 cm x 100 μm inner diameter; 5 μm). Peptides were separated at a flow of 300 nl/min on an analytical ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) packed in a house column (17 cm x 75 μm; 3 μm) by reversed-phase chromatography, which was operated on an EASY NanoLC II system (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase was water/0.1% FA (A) and 95% ACN/0.1% FA (B). The gradient was 2-30% phase B (0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile) for 80 minutes, 30-95% B for 5 minutes, and holding at 95%B for 20 minutes. The EASY NanoLC II was coupled into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode ion. The mass spectrometer acquired a full MS scan at 60,000 full width half maximum (FWHM) resolution with a 350-1500 Da mass range. The top 20 most intense peptide ions were selected from MS for Collision Ion Dissociation (CID) fragmentation (normalized collision energy: 35.0 V). The samples were analyzed by the Biomass - Mass Spectrometry and Proteome Discovery Facility at Centro de Facilidades à Pesquisa (CEFAP) of the Institute of Biomedical Sciences of the University of São Paulo.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in the Maxquant software (version  1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine in the Maxquant environment. Raw data were searched against Mus musculus reviewed Uniprot database (November 2018 release, 17,001 entries). The parameters used were trypsin full specificity; two missed cleavages allowed, protein common contaminants, and reverse sequences included. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Identification of protein was accepted with less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus, using Student’s T-test followed by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (Tyanova  et al., 2016 - https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901). Proteins identified in at least 3 samples in total and regulated with FDR<0.05 were considered for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Aerobic glycolysis, Th1 cell differentiation, P2x7 signaling

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
- Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Veronica Santiago

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Regina D’Império Lima
- Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


