### Accession
PXD035230

### Title
Repurposing of a known antipsychotic drug to target arthritogenic synovial fibroblasts

### Description
We applied quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to investigate the phosphoproteome of hTNF-stimulated and Amisulpride-treated synovial fibroblasts (SFs), as part of a study aiming to find new potent orally-administered therapeutics to reverse the pathogenic expression signature of arthritogenic SFs. Phosphoproteomics analysis were done by DIA-based phosphoproteomic profiling of synovial fibroblasts. Samples consisted of hTNF-induced WT SFs. Three different time points (5’, 15’, 30’) of hTNF induction were used and compared to cells pretreated with Amisulpride for 1h before being stimulated at similar time points with hTNF (5’, 15’, 30’).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and analyzed in triplicates for phosphoproteomics analysis. Samples were lysed and processed with automated PAC digestion and enrichment of phosphopeptides on a KingFisher™ Flex robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific) essentially as described in Bekker-Jensen et al. 2020 and Martinez-Val et al. 2021. Samples were analyzed on the EvoSep One system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS using data-independent acquisition (DIA).

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were analyzed using Spectronaut with a library-free approach (directDIA).

### Publication Abstract
Synovial fibroblasts (SFs) are key pathogenic drivers in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Their in vivo activation by TNF is sufficient to orchestrate full arthritic pathogenesis in animal models, and TNF blockade proved efficacious for a high percentage of patients with RA albeit coinducing rare but serious side effects. Aiming to find new potent therapeutics, we applied the L1000CDS2 search engine, to repurpose drugs that could reverse the pathogenic expression signature of arthritogenic human TNF-transgenic (hTNFtg) SFs. We identified a neuroleptic drug, namely amisulpride, which reduced SFs' inflammatory potential while decreasing the clinical score of hTNFtg polyarthritis. Notably, we found that amisulpride function was neither through its known targets dopamine receptors D2 and D3 and serotonin receptor 7 nor through TNF-TNF receptor I binding inhibition. Through a click chemistry approach, potentially novel targets of amisulpride were identified, which were further validated to repress hTNFtg SFs' inflammatory potential ex vivo (Ascc3 and Sec62), while phosphoproteomics analysis revealed that treatment altered important fibroblast activation pathways, such as adhesion. Thus, amisulpride could prove beneficial to patients experiencing RA and the often-accompanying comorbid dysthymia, reducing SF pathogenicity along with its antidepressive activity, serving further as a "lead" compound for the development of novel therapeutics against fibroblast activation.

### Keywords
Synovial fibroblasts, Small molecule repurposing, Tumor necrosis factor alpha, Lc-msms, Rheumatoid arthritis

### Affiliations
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DK-2200, Denmark

### Submitter
Anna-Kathrine Pedersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DK-2200, Denmark


