### Accession
PXD029007

### Title
Plasma-derived Exosome-Like Vesicles (ELVs) of COVID-19 patients expose SARS-CoV-2-Spike-derived fragments and contribute to the adaptive immune response

### Description
COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by beta-coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 which has rapidly spread across the globe starting from February 2020. It is well established that during viral infection extracellular vesicles become delivery/presenting vectors of viral material. However, studies regarding extracellular vesicle function in COVID-19 pathology are still scanty. Here, we performed a comparative study on plasma-derived Exosome-Like Vesicles (ELVs) of either MILD or SEVERE COVID-19 patients. We show that, although both types of vesicles efficiently display SARS-CoV-2-Spike-derived peptides and carry immunomodulatory molecules, only those of MILD patients are capable to efficiently regulate antigen-specific CD4+ T cell responses. Accordingly, by mass spectrometry we show that the proteome of ELVs of MILD patients correlates with a proper functioning of the immune system, while that of SEVERE patients is associated with increased and chronic inflammation. Overall, we show, that plasma-derived ELVs of COVID-19 patients possess SARS-CoV-2-derived protein material, have an active role in enhancing the immune response and possess a cargo which reflects the pathological state of patients in the acute phase of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
ELVs were purified from the plasma of 3 healthy donors, 4 patients presenting MILD COVID-19 symptoms and 4 patients presenting SEVERE COVID-19 symptoms using qEV SMART Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) columns following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 150 ul of plasma was centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 minutes to remove cells and large contaminant particles. After a subsequent centrifugation at 10000 g for 10 minutes, supernatants were loaded on IZON qEV/35nm columns, previously washed and equilibrated with 3 volumes of PBS. After column loading, samples were eluted with PBS, using a void volume of 1ml and an elution volume of 600ul. Purified ELVs were then concentrated and processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Quantitative proteome profiling from ELVs was achieved by a library-based approach combined with MS boxcar acquisition method in a label free experiment as reported before. We constructed three different libraries by pooling proportional quantities of different exosome preparations from each sample types (MILD, SEVERE and HD) assessed by BCA protein quantitation assay. Samples were run independently and then aligned to their respective libraries. In brief, proteins were 197 denatured, reduced, alkylated, digested and peptides purified on StageTips using reagents from the PreOmics “iST” Kit. Only samples for the library were fractionated using a commercial High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. In all cases dried peptides were reconstituted in 5 µl of LC-LOAD buffer. Samples were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY nLC 1200 system coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source and a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (all 203 Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were separated on an EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 204  kept at 45°C constant to reduce column back pressure. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were loaded in aqueous 0.1% (FA) solution at constant pressure of 980 Bar. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 3– 207 30% solvent B over 39 min followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 5 min and 60–95% over 1 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For the library, standard DDA experiments were performed with a data dependent top15 method. In brief, MS spectra (from m/z 375-1550) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 80ms for MSMS and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e5. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data obtained by mass spectrometry analysis were analysed using the MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.6.10.43 and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (74470 Entries) with the Andromeda search engine. The main search was performed with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm. False discovery rate for both protein and peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1% with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids and Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. ‘Match between run algorithm’ (MBR) in MaxQuant was performed after constructing a matching library consisting of polled samples. For label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) we required a minimum ratio count of all proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. ProteinGroups.txt table from MQ output was analysed using Perseus platform version. In brief, Two-sample Student’s t-test was used to determine the significantly changed proteins between disease and control groups with a permutation-based FDR of 5%. For significant hits, minimal fold changes together with P values (controlled by the s0 parameter in Perseus) were used with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 resulting from an s0 set to 0.1. Heatmap were generated using Heatmapper. Proteins were hierarchically clustered by setting Euclidean distance and average linkage method as parameters. Specific biological process enrichment and their plotting was generated in R Studio using R v4.0.3 237 and topGO v2.42.0 passing the weight algorithm and Fisher test to the runTest function. A cut off 0.05 was applied and top 18 enriched terms were visualized with ggplot v3.3.3. Protein protein interaction networks (PPI) of unique upregulated and downregulated proteins are retrieved using the online version of STRING – database version 11.0, settings the maximum number of interactions for the first and second shell no more than 10 interactors both. Generated networks are imported in Cytoscape v3.8.2, where functional enrichment was performed using STRINGapp enrichment. GO term sorting is performed combining strength and number of input proteins retrieve for the term. Omics visualizer app is used to show biological relevant terms. For the other comparative analyses, a two-tailed t-Test and ANOVA test were used.

### Publication Abstract
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by beta-coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that has rapidly spread across the globe starting from February 2020. It is well established that during viral infection, extracellular vesicles become delivery/presenting vectors of viral material. However, studies regarding extracellular vesicle function in COVID-19 pathology are still scanty. Here, we performed a comparative study on exosomes recovered from the plasma of either MILD or SEVERE COVID-19 patients. We show that although both types of vesicles efficiently display SARS-CoV-2 spike-derived peptides and carry immunomodulatory molecules, only those of MILD patients are capable of efficiently regulating antigen-specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell responses. Accordingly, by mass spectrometry, we show that the proteome of exosomes of MILD patients correlates with a proper functioning of the immune system, while that of SEVERE patients is associated with increased and chronic inflammation. Overall, we show that exosomes recovered from the plasma of COVID-19 patients possess SARS-CoV-2-derived protein material, have an active role in enhancing the immune response, and possess a cargo that reflects the pathological state of patients in the acute phase of the disease.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Lcmsms, Exosome-like vesicles (elvs)

### Affiliations
IEO
National Institute of Molecular Genetics (INGM), Italy

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Renata M. Grifantini
National Institute of Molecular Genetics (INGM), Italy


