### Accession
PXD004499

### Title
Human temporal neocortex brain LC-MS

### Description
We used label-free shotgun mass spectrometry to analyze temporal neocortex samples from AD brain, other neurological disorders and non-demented controls, in order to identify additional proteins thatare altered in AD.  The mass spectrometry results were then verified by antibody suspension bead arrays.

### Sample Protocol
The temporal neocortex samples were homogenized and after homogenization, the samples were incubated. The supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected. Aliquots of the protein extracts were mixed with ice-cold and incubated. The precipitate was pelleted and washed sequentially and finally air-dried.  After on-filter tryptic digestion with trypsin, nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a 7 T hybrid LTQ FT mass spectrometer fitted with a nano-electrospray ionization (ESI) ion source.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from MS was converted to open source format was processed using OpenMS platform. Identification was performed using X!Tandem and OMSSA on UniProt/Swiss-Pro human database combined with a decoy database using the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin, missed cleavages: 2 precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.7 Da, minimum charge: 1, maximum charge: 4, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Oxidation (M) and Deamidated (N and Q).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immobilized/chemistry; extracellular vesicles; exosomes; exocytosis; endocytosis., Alzheimer’s disease; mass spectrometry; antibodies

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Department of Medical Sciences, Cancer Pharmacology and Computational Medicine, Uppsala University Academic Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

### Submitter
Payam Emami Khoonsari

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Kultima
Department of Medical Sciences, Cancer Pharmacology and Computational Medicine, Uppsala University Academic Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.


