### Accession
PXD034168

### Title
LC-MSMS of HEK 293T cells transfected with Flag-EV or Flag-ACE2

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the causative agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Alongside investigation into the virology of SARS-CoV-2, understanding the host–virus dependencies are vital for the identification and rational design of effective antiviral therapy. Here, we report the dominant SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor, ACE2, conjugates with small ubiquitin-like modifier 3 (SUMO3) and pharmacological intervention of ACE2 SUMOylation blocks SARS-CoV-2 infection as well as viral infection-triggered immune responses. E3 SUMO ligase PIAS4 prompts the SUMOylation and stabilization of ACE2, whereas deSUMOylation enzyme SENP3 reverses this process. Conjugation of SUMO3 with ACE2 at lysine (K) 187 hampers the K48-linked ubiquitination of ACE2, thus suppressing its subsequent cargo receptor TOLLIP-dependent autophagic degradation. TOLLIP depletion leads to the accumulation of ACE2 and the elevated SARS-CoV-2 infection. Collectively, our findings suggest selective autophagic degradation of ACE2 orchestrated by SUMOylation and ubiquitination can be targeted to future antiviral therapy of SARS-CoV-2.

### Sample Protocol
Total lysates were prepared from 293T cells transfected with Flag-ACE2 and followed by immunoprecipitation with α-FLAG M2 beads. Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and then stained with Coomassie Blue. The entire lane was excised, digested with trypsin and analyzed with LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS identification of peptide mixtures was performed at Applied Protein Technology (aptbiotech, Inc. Shanghai, China).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were chromatographed through the Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher, California, USA). Peptide samples were loaded by Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100 (100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) and separated by Thermo scientific EASY column (10 cm, ID75 μm, 3 μm, C18-A2) at 300 nL min−1 for 60 min using a three-step acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) gradient: 0–35% over the first 50 min and 35–100% for 50–55 min and 100% for 55–60 min. The tandem mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, California, USA). The MS1 survey scan (300–1800 m/z) was at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was 60.0 s. Each full scan takes 20 MS2 scans. MS2 activation type was HCD model. Isolation window was 2 m/z. MS2 scan was at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z with normalized collision energy 30 eV. Underfill was 0.1%. RAW files generated by spectrometer was subjected to Biopharma Finder1.0 software for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to investigating the virology of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), discovering the host-virus dependencies are essential to identify and design effective antiviral therapy strategy. Here, we report that the SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor, ACE2, conjugates with small ubiquitin-like modifier 3 (SUMO3) and provide evidence indicating that prevention of ACE2 SUMOylation can block SARS-CoV-2 infection. E3 SUMO ligase PIAS4 prompts the SUMOylation and stabilization of ACE2, whereas deSUMOylation enzyme SENP3 reverses this process. Conjugation of SUMO3 with ACE2 at lysine (K) 187 hampers the K48-linked ubiquitination of ACE2, thus suppressing its subsequent cargo receptor TOLLIP-dependent autophagic degradation. TOLLIP deficiency results in the stabilization of ACE2 and elevated SARS-CoV-2 infection. In conclusion, our findings suggest selective autophagic degradation of ACE2 orchestrated by SUMOylation and ubiquitination as a potential way to combat SARS-CoV-2 infection.

### Keywords
Ace2, Hek 293t, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 510275, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510275, China.

### Submitter
Zheyu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Cui
MOE Key Laboratory of Gene Function and Regulation, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 510275, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.


