### Accession
PXD017869

### Title
Affinity Purification of ISWI chromatin remodeler in Trypanosoma cruzi

### Description
Chromatin remodeling is a general mechanism involved in DNA-dependent processes, including gene expression regulation. ISWI ATPase is the catalytic subunit in diverse chromatin remodeling complexes that changing histone–DNA interactions and therefore play a pivotal role in different nuclear processes. Here, the ISWI remodeler was fused to GFP (NH and CO fusions) and its partners were determined by affinity purification-mass spectrometry (MS) assay. This approach identified known ISWI partners (NLP, RCCP and FYRP), previously characterized in T. brucei, and new components of TcISWI complex (DRBD2, DHH1 and proteins containing SMC domains).

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi cells were lysed by cryogenic grinding and the ISWI complex was enriched by affinity of GFP to nanobodies from llama. The enriched extracts were analyzed on 13% SDS-PAGE, then, each lane was fractionated in three pieces and proteins were subject to in-gel trypsin digestion. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were fractionated via reverse-phase chromatography using a 15 cm fused silica capillary containing 3 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The chromatography was carried out at 250 nl/min with a gradient of 5 to 40% of MeCN in 0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO for 60 min. Mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent acquisition mode, operating to alter automatically between MS1 and MS2 acquisition. MS1 spectra (m/z 300-2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000. The top 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented by CID and detected in the LTQ (linear trap quadrupole).

### Data Protocol
Protein validation, quantification and identification used the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.3.4) set to default parameters. Proteins were identified by an automatic search against a T. cruzi protein data bank (TriTrypDB-41_TcruzicruziDm28c_AnnotatedProteins) containing 20,257 sequences. Contaminant proteins (human keratins, BSA and porcine trypsin) and the reverse of all the sequences, including contaminants, were also included in the search and manually removed from the list of identifications. Protein quantification was based on the unique peptide identified and on the protein intensity (MS1 XIC).

### Publication Abstract
BACKGROUND Imitation SWItch (ISWI) ATPase is the catalytic subunit in diverse chromatin remodeling complexes. These complexes modify histone-DNA interactions and therefore play a pivotal role in different DNA-dependent processes. In Trypanosoma cruzi, a protozoan that controls gene expression principally post-transcriptionally, the transcriptional regulation mechanisms mediated by chromatin remodeling are poorly understood. OBJECTIVE To characterise the ISWI remodeler in T. cruzi (TcISWI). METHODS A new version of pTcGW vectors was constructed to express green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged TcISWI. CRISPR-Cas9 system was used to obtain parasites with inactivated TcISWI gene and we determined TcISWI partners by cryomilling-affinity purification-mass spectrometry (MS) assay as an approximation to start to unravel the function of this protein. FINDINGS Our approach identified known ISWI partners [nucleoplasmin-like protein (NLP), regulator of chromosome condensation 1-like protein (RCCP) and phenylalanine/tyrosine-rich protein (FYRP)], previously characterised in T. brucei, and new components in TcISWI complex [DRBD2, DHH1 and proteins containing a domain characteristic of structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins]. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD017869. MAIN CONCLUSIONS In addition to its participation in transcriptional silencing, as it was reported in T. brucei, the data generated here provide a framework that suggests a role for TcISWI chromatin remodeler in different nuclear processes in T. cruzi, including mRNA nuclear export control and chromatin compaction. Further work is necessary to clarify the TcISWI functional diversity that arises from this protein interaction study.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Affinity purification, Iswi, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Applied Science and Technology in Health, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Fabricio Klerynton Marchini
Laboratory for Applied Science and Technology in Health, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil


