### Accession
PXD020355

### Title
Prothrombin is a binding partner of the human Receptor of Advanced Glycation End products

### Description
The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) plays a key role in mammal physiology and in the etiology and progression of inflammatory and oxidative stress-based diseases. In adults, RAGE expression is high only in the lung where the protein concentrates in the basal membrane of Type I alveolar epithelial cells. In diseases, RAGE levels increase in the affected tissues and sustain chronic inflammation. RAGE exists as a single trans-membrane protein with an ectodomain and a short carboxyl-terminal tail essential for signaling, or also as a soluble ectodomain (sRAGE) that acts as a decoy receptor. The ectodomain is composed of a variable and two constant IgG-like domains (V, C1 and C2). VC1 is a single integrated unit responsible for binding of RAGE to the majority of its ligands including the advanced glycation End products (AGEs), S100 proteins and HMGB-1. Here, we report the identification of 20 new RAGE binding partners captured from human plasma and involved in the coagulation and complement processes and in the extracellular matrix. Four proteins contained a -carboxyl glutamic acid (Gla)-domain. Using MicroScale Thermophoresis, we quantified the interaction of prothrombin (PT) with VC1 and with sRAGE. Calcium competed in the binding of PT to sRAGE and PT devoid of the Gla-domain did not bind to sRAGE, providing evidence that the Gla-domain is critical for the interaction. Finally, the presence of VC1 delayed plasma clotting in a dose-dependent manner. We propose that RAGE is involved in modulating blood coagulation presumably in conditions of lung injury.

### Sample Protocol
After SDS-PAGE analysis of pull-down assays, single bands or areas of the gel were excised from the gels and an in gel digestion was performed. After a destaining step, gel pieces were incubated with 150 µl of reducing solution (10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 °C for 1 hour and then with 150 µl of alkylating solution (55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. In-gel protein digestion was performed by two sequential digestions, one with 1 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Roche) dissolved in digestion buffer and incubated for 16 hours, followed by a second digestion with a sequencing-grade chymotrypsin (1 µg) for 7 hours at 25 °C in the presence of calcium chloride (10 mM). Peptide mixtures were extracted, dried in a vacuum concentrator and then dissolved in an appropriate volume (20 µl) of 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Peptide mixtures from the in-gel digestion were separated by reversed-phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). For each analysis 5 μl of solubilized peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap™ C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, pores 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States), protected by a pre-column, namely the Acclaim PepMap™ (100 µm x 2 cm, pores 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). Samples were loaded onto the pre-column by means of the loading pump at 5 µl/min of mobile phase consisting of 99% of buffer A_LP (0.1% TFA) and 1% of buffer B_LP (0.1% HCOOH in CH3CN) for 3 minutes. After the loading valve switching, peptide separation was performed by the NC_pump with a 91 minutes linear gradient of buffer B_NP (0.1% HCOOH in CH3CN) from 1% to 40%, and further 12 minutes of linear gradient from 40% to 95% (Buffer B_NP). 9 minutes at 95% of buffer B_NP to rinse the column following the separative gradient, and the last 5 minutes served to re-equilibrate the column to initial conditions. The nano-chromatographic system, an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex), was connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Milan, Italy) equipped with a Thermo Scientific dynamic Nanospray ion source set as follows: positive ion mode, spray voltage 1.7 Kv; capillary temperature 220 °C, capillary voltage 35 V; tube lens offset 120 V. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) to acquire both the full MS spectra and the MS/MS spectra. Full MS spectra were acquired in "profile" mode, by the Orbitrap (FT) analyzer, in a scanning range between 300-1800 m/z, using a capillary temperature of 220 °C, AGC target = 5x105 and resolving power 60,000 (FWHM at 400 m/z). Tandem mass spectra MS/MS were acquired by the Linear Ion Trap (LTQ) in CID mode, automatically set to fragment the nine most intense ions in each full MS spectrum (exceeding 1x104 counts) under the following conditions: centroid mode, normal mode, isolation width of the precursor ion of 2.5 m/z, AGC target 1x104 and normalized collision energy of 35 eV. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion dynamics for 45 seconds for those ions observed 3 times in 30 seconds). Charge state screening and monoisotopic precursor selection were enabled, singly and unassigned charged ions were not fragmented. Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Scientific Inc., Milan, Italy) was used to control the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.338, Thermo Scientific, USA), implemented with the algorithm SEQUEST, was used to compare the experimental full and tandem mass spectra with the theoretical ones obtained by the in silico digestion of all the proteins within the Homo sapiens proteome database. Trypsin and chymotrypsin were selected as the cleaving proteases, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 10 mmu, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fix modification (+57.02147), while methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. As a quality filter, only peptide with an XCorr value grater then 2.2 for doubly-charged peptides, 2.5 for triply-charged, 2.75 for quadruply charged peptide ions, and 3 for charge states quintuple or higher were considered as genuine peptide identifications. To ensure the lowest number of false positives, the mass values experimentally recorded were further processed through a combined search with the Database Decoy, where the protein sequences are inverted and randomized. This operation allows the calculation of the false discovery rate (FDR) for each match, so that all the proteins out of range of FDR between to 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed) were rejected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Receptor for advanced glycation end product (rage); pattern recognition receptor (prr); scavenger receptor; prothrombin; coagulation factor; mass spectrometry (ms); plasma; protein -carboxylation; lung injury; protein-protein interaction.

### Affiliations
University of Milan, DISFARM
University of Milan (DISFARM)

### Submitter
Alessandra Altomare

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Altomare
University of Milan, DISFARM


