### Accession
PXD009800

### Title
Multi-Enzymatic Limited Digestion - the Next-Generation Sequencing for Proteomics

### Description
An innovative approach merging both the bottom-up and middle-down ideologies to provide fast, robust and comprehensive solutions for proteomics studies. The methodology, referred to as MELD for Multiple-Enzymatic Limited Digestion, capitalizes on a single two-hour long proteolytic step involving the synergic action of a diluted mix of several enzymes. While the multi-enzymatic benefits are retained, the lower enzyme concentrations induce a limitation in the proteolytic reaction. This feature engenders numerous missed cleavage events and results in abundant peptides of diverse length with overlapping stretches of residues. This outcome eventually increases the extent and confidence in the sequence coverage while opening roads for refined and comprehensive protein characterization. We here use Adalimumab, a therapeutic ~144 kDa human immunoglobulin G IgG1 as a candidate molecule to compare the respective efficacy of state-of-the-art complete mono-enzymatic strategies encompassed in individual or combinational workflows with the standard MELD protocol for extensive protein characterization. The benchmarking analysis was performed over 12 Adalimumab samples issued from independent proteolytic digestions: 6 samples were processed using the MELD methodology, 3 with the combinatory methodology and 3 with the mono-enzymatic tryptic methodology. They were all subjected to independent database searches, using both constrained and unconstrained cleavage site rules for the latter.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Adalimumab antibody was purchased as a 40 mg/0.8 mL Humira solution (AbbVie, Rungis) encapsulated in a subcutaneous injection pen and diluted at 2 mg/mL using NH4HCO3 50 mM. Both compounds were aliquoted as 20 µg proteins fractions, and further processed for cysteine reduction and alkylation following a three-step reaction scheme performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate:  a) reduction with dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM final at 60° for 1 h.  b) alkylation in iodoacetamide (IAA) 20 mM final at room temperature for 30 mins.  c) quenching of the alkylation reaction by addition of DTT 11 mM to reach 21 mM final.  The so-reduced and alkylated samples were purified by precipitation using the 2D clean-up kit commercialized by GE Healthcare (Little Chalfont, UK). They were subsequently reconstituted to 0.5 mg/mL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.   Enzymatic digestion: Each pure enzyme solution (Trypsin, Glu-C, Chymotrypsin) was added to a 20µg protein fraction to reach a final protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50, according to manufacturer’s recommendations. The tube were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h under stirring before the digestion was stopped using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a 0.5% (v/v) final concentration to reach pH < 3. The resulting samples were evaporated to dryness under vacuum and reconstituted to 1 pmole/1 µL in H2O with 0.1% TFA for injection.  The MELD protocol is designed around a single proteolytic step involving the synergic action of three mixed enzymes (Trypsin, Glu-C and Chymotrypsin) in low concentrations for a 2-hour duration.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Analysis: The chromatographic separation was performed on an M-Class ACQUITY UPLC from Waters (Manchester, UK). A 3-min long sample trapping step was first achieved on a reversed-phase (RP) ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column (5 µm, Spherical Silica, 180 µm x 20 mm) from Waters (Manchester, UK). The subsequent stationary phase consisted of a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 RP column (100 Å, 1.8 µm spherical silica, 75 µm X 150mm) from Waters (Manchester, UK), while the mobile phase was obtained from water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% (V/V) of formic acid (FA) and mixed according to a 177-min long method. The flow rate was set at 0.6 µL/min. The mass analysis was performed by an online hyphenated Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA) operated in MS/MS positive mode, and calibrated using LTQ ESI positive ion calibration solution purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Source parameters were set as follows: spray voltage = 2.3 kV, capillary temperature = 270 °C and S-lens RF Level = 50. The MS spectra were acquired with 70,000 mass resolution (m/z 200) from m/z 400 to m/z 1600, AGC target of 1e6 and lock mass internal calibration at m/z 445. The MS/MS spectra were acquired for the 12 most intense ions of each scan (TopN = 12) with 17,500 mass resolution (m/z = 200), an isolation window of m/z 2, AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms and (N)CE = 28. Single-charged ions and a 10s dynamic exclusion were used.

### Data Protocol
Database search: The database search was performed in PEAKS Studio Software v7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, ON, Canada) on the bovine-backgrounded Adalimumab sequence. Tolerances of 5 ppm and 0.02 Da were allowed on the precursor and fragment masses respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and glycosylation (dHex1Hex5HexNAc4, corresponding to G2F N-glycan) of asparagine were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 PTMs per peptide was allowed. Except otherwise stated, no-enzyme rule was used. Results were filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past 40 years, proteomics, generically defined as the field dedicated to the identification and analysis of proteins, has tremendously gained in popularity and potency through advancements in genome sequencing, separative techniques, mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics algorithms. As a consequence, its scope of application has gradually enlarged and diversified to meet specialized topical biomedical subjects. Although the tryptic bottom-up approach is widely regarded as the gold standard for rapid screening of complex samples, its application for precise and confident mapping of protein modifications is often hindered due to partial sequence coverage, poor redundancy in indicative peptides, and lack of method flexibility. We here show how the synergic and time-limited action of a properly diluted mix of multiple enzymes can be exploited in a versatile yet straightforward protocol to alleviate present-day drawbacks. Merging bottom-up and middle-down ideologies, our results highlight broad assemblies of overlapping peptides that enable refined and reliable characterizations of proteins, including variant identification, and their carried modifications, including post-translational modifications, truncations, and cleavages. Beyond this boost in performance, our methodology also offers efficient de novo sequencing capabilities, in view of which we here present a dedicated custom assembly algorithm.

### Keywords
Protein characterization, Limited digestion, De novo sequencing; mabs, Proteolytic method, Ptms, Digestibility profile, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-MolSys, Department of Chemistry, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, MolSys Research Unit, University of Liege, Liege 4000, Belgium

### Submitter
Gabriel Mazzucchelli

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriel Mazzucchelli
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-MolSys, Department of Chemistry, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.


