### Accession
PXD010997

### Title
Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Regulates Nuclear Gene Expression in Macrophages Exposed to PGE2

### Description
Metabolic engagement is intrinsic to immune cell function. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been shown to modulate macrophage activation, yet how PGE2 might affect metabolism is unclear. Here we show that PGE2 causes mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm) to dissipate in interleukin-4 activated macrophages (M(IL-4)). Effects on Δψm are a consequence of PGE2-initiated transcriptional regulation of genes in the malate-aspartate shuttle (MAS), particularly GOT1. Reduced Δψm causes alterations in the expression of 126 voltage regulated genes (VRGs) including Resistin like molecule-α (RELMα), a key marker of M(IL-4), and genes that regulate cell cycle, The transcription factor ETS variant 1 (ETV1) plays a role in the regulation of 38% of the VRGs. These results reveal ETV1 as a Δψm-sensitive transcription factor, and Δψm as a mediator of mitochondrial-directed nuclear gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs transduced with a V5 tagged ETV1 protein were washed twice with ice cold PBS and lysed in 1 x Cell Signaling lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na2EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mg/mL leupeptin – Cell Signaling Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF (SIGMA). Samples were frozen and thawed 3 times followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Immunoprecitipation (IP) of V5 tagged ETV1 was performed in triplicate. Cleared protein lysates were diluted to 0.2 x Cell Signaling lysis buffer in PBS supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Cell Signaling Technologies) and incubated for 3 h at 4°C with anti-V5 antibody (clone D3H8Q – Cell Signaling Technologies). Negative IP controls, performed in duplicate, were carried out under identical conditions, but with the addition of 16 μg of purified V5 peptide (New England peptide, GKPIPNPLLGLDST). Samples were subsequently incubated with Protein G dynabeads (Invitrogen, 10003D) for 1.5 h,  which were then repeatedly washed with 0.2 x Cell lysis buffer in PBS with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Recovered beads were washed once in 750 µl 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 and 500 µl 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 (supplemented with 0.01% Rapigest (Waters)), respectively. Following addition of 500 µl 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate (supplemented with 0.01% Rapigest) beads were transferred to a 1.5 ml low-bind tube and finally resuspended in 50 µl urea digestion buffer (4 M urea, 2 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris pH8.0). Magnetic beads were digested (Thermomixer) with 400 ng endoproteinase Lys-C for 1.5 hours at 28°C in order to shave-off proteins associated with the V5 antibody. The Lys-C digested peptides were transferred to another 1.5 ml low-bind tube and pooled with a final wash of the beads (100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 min, 25°C, Thermomixer) followed by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 3 mM and incubation for 2 hr at 25°C. The sample was ultimately digested with trypsin (400 ng, Promega) for 13 hours at 25°C and digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA (ad 1%). Tryptic peptides were then cleaned-up/desalted and eluted using C18-STAGE tips as described previously (Rappsilber, J. et al., 2007, Nature Protocol 2, 1896-1906).General nanoLC-MS setup and DDA  analysis was performed essentially as reported (Musa, Y.R. et al., 2018, J. Proteome Res. 17, 76-85) with modifications detailed in the following. QExactive mass spectrometer  and Easy nanoLC-1000 were employed for all experiments. Tryptic peptides were separated by a 2h linear gradient of 5-80% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at constant flowrate of 300 nL/min. For MS data acquisition the “sensitive” method from Kelstrup et al. (Kelstrup et al., 2012, J. Proteome Res.11, 3487-3497) was adopted.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (1.5.7.4) and peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA (October 2017) database (concatenated with a database containing common contaminants) by the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367-1372; Cox et al., 2011, J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794-1805). MS1-based label free quantification (LFQ) was done using maxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014, Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513-2526). We require a minimum of two peptide ratios in order to consider a given protein as valid (protein and peptide ID FDR=0.01). Perseus platform (Tyanova et al., 2016, Nat. Methods 13, 731-740) was used to perform data normalization, filtering and statistical testing. Student’s t-test was utilized to define differentially expressed proteins employing a 4-fold change as a cut-off at a 1% FDR. Negative IP control replicates and IP sample triplicates were measured twice on the mass spectrometer, and the resulting 4 or 6 datasets respectively used to calculate protein enrichment across the IP samples.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic engagement is intrinsic to immune cell function. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been shown to modulate macrophage activation, yet how PGE2 might affect metabolism is unclear. Here, we show that PGE2 caused mitochondrial membrane potential (&#x394;&#x3c8;<sub>m</sub>) to dissipate in interleukin-4-activated (M(IL-4)) macrophages. Effects on &#x394;&#x3c8;<sub>m</sub> were a consequence of PGE2-initiated transcriptional regulation of genes, particularly Got1, in the malate-aspartate shuttle (MAS). Reduced &#x394;&#x3c8;<sub>m</sub> caused alterations in the expression of 126 voltage-regulated genes (VRGs), including those encoding resistin-like molecule &#x3b1; (RELM&#x3b1;), a key marker of M(IL-4) cells, and genes that regulate the cell cycle. The transcription factor ETS variant 1 (ETV1) played a role in the regulation of 38% of the VRGs. These results reveal ETV1 as a &#x394;&#x3c8;<sub>m</sub>-sensitive transcription factor and &#x394;&#x3c8;<sub>m</sub> as a mediator of mitochondrial-directed nuclear gene expression.

### Keywords
Immunometabolism, Got1, Prostaglandin e2, Il-4, Malate-aspartate shuttle, Etv1, Alternative activation, Camp, Macrophage, Mitochondrial membrane potential

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics


