### Accession
PXD025171

### Title
proteome analysis of Lung tissue of mice bearing B16-F10-luc-G5 melanoma tumor with sleep fragmentation and with or with out the asdmistration of GL-pp

### Description
Proteome analysis of Lung tissue of mice bearing B16-F10-luc-G5 melanoma tumor with sleep fragmentation and with or with out the asdmistration of GL-pp.  The mice were randomly divided into 4 groups: control group in general condition with no further treatment (CON group), tumor group with the burden of B16-F10-luc-G5 cells (Tumor group), T+SF group with SF and the burden of B16-F10-luc-G5 cells (T+SF group), and GL-pp group with SF, tumor cells burden, and the administration of 80 mg/kg GL-pp (GL-pp group). B16-F10-luc-G5 cells (5 × 1000000 cells/100 µL per mouse) were injected into the mice through the tail vein.  The lung tissue of T+SF group and GL-pp group were analyzed by the proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tissues were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Proteins were extracted with RIPA lysis buffer, and each group was analyzed in triplicate. Protein samples (200 μg) from each group were processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol.roteins were concentrated using Vivacon 500 filtration tubes (Cat No. VNO1HO2, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, UK), mixed with 100 μL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCL (pH 8.5), and centrifuged at 14,000 g, 20 °C for 15 min. This step was performed twice, after which 10 μL of 0.05 M Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in water was added and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h, and then 10 μL of 0.1 M iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and samples were incubated in darkness for 30 min. Finally, 4 μg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to each filter. The protein to enzyme ratio was 50:1. Samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C and the released peptides were collected by centrifugation.  LC-MS experiments were performed on a nano-flow HPLC system (Easy-nLC II, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap mass analyzer) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures (5 μL) were injected onto a pre-column (Easy-column C18-A1, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse-phase C18 column (Easy-column C18-A2, 75 μm I.D. × 100 mm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 60 min gradient of 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The electrospray voltage was maintained at 2.2 kV with the capillary temperature at 250 °C.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant software (v1.4.1.2). For protein identification, MS/MS data were submitted to the UniProt human protein database (release 3.43, 72340 sequences) using the Andromeda search engine23 with the following settings: trypsin cleavage; fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications of methionine oxidation; a maximum of two missed cleavages; false discovery rate calculated by searching the decoy database. Other parameters were set as default. The results were imported into Microsoft excel for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Ganoderma lucidum</i> (Lingzhi) polysaccharide peptide (GL-pp) is a component of the globally acknowledged traditional Chinese medicine <i>Ganoderma lucidum</i>; <i>Ganoderma lucidum</i> is known for its sedative, hypnotic, immune regulatory, antitumor, and other pharmacological effects. In recent years, sleep disorders have been linked to many diseases and human body disorders, including cancer. Some experimental studies in mice found that sleep fragmentation could promote tumor development and progression. However, effects on GL-pp on tumor metastasis under circumstances of sleep disorders have rarely been studied. Thus, in this study, we used mice with sleep fragmentation (SF) bearing B16-F10-luc-G5 melanoma tumors to investigate the effect of SF on melanoma metastasis. Furthermore, we investigated the antitumor and antimetastatic effects of GL-pp (80&#xa0;mg/kg) in mice suffering from SF and bearing B16-F10-luc-G5. Then, whole proteomics was used to analyze the differences in protein expression in the lung tissue between SF mice bearing B16-F10-luc-G5 with and without GL-pp administration. High-throughput pyrosequencing of 16S rRNA was also used to analyze the impact of GL-pp on the gut microbiota composition in SF mice bearing B16-F10-luc-G5. Last, the effects of GL-pp on macrophage polarization and TNF-&#x3b1; serum levels were detected. Collectively, we found that SF significantly facilitated the B16-F10-luc-G5 melanoma tumor metastasis in mice, while GL-pp significantly reduced B16-F10-luc-G5 melanoma tumor metastasis under the condition of SF, in which proteomics and gut microbiota had been changed greatly.

### Keywords
Gl-pp, Mouse, Lung, B16-f10-luc-g5

### Affiliations
Peking University
Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science Center, Peking University and Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China

### Submitter
Haocheng Xian

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Pan
Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science Center, Peking University and Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China


