### Accession
PXD028423

### Title
TMT-based proteomic analysis and protein expression during excystation of Cryptosporidium andersoni

### Description
Cryptosporidium andersoni initiates infection first caused by the release of sporozoites by excystation. However, the proteins involved in excystation remain unknown. The research of the molecules that participate in the excystation of C. andersoni oocysts will fill a gap in our understanding of the excyst system of this parasitic pathogen

### Sample Protocol
1.8 × 109 C. andersoni oocysts were used in proteomics analyses, and each group (excystation group and non-excystation group) used 9 × 108 oocysts, containing three independent biological replicates (3 × 108 each). Excystation was performed at 37°C (∼3 h and mixing every 10 mins) and continued until >80% excystation had been observed by microscopic examination at ×400 magnification. Lysis buffer (pH 8.5) containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 65mM Tris, 2% DTT, 4% CHAPS, 0.2% IPG buffer (GE Amersham, USA) and 0.1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck, USA) was added into the tubes containing excysted or unexcysted oocysts. Oocyst’s disruption was achieved by sonication at 80 W for 3 s × 100 with intervals of 10 s. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and concentration was determined with BCA Protein Assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. They were stored at -80 °C until the following proteomic analyses.

### Data Protocol
TMT tagging and analysis was performed as described previously. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Proteome Cryptosporidium database (28217 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt proteomic, Excystation, Oocyst, Cryptosporidium andersoni

### Affiliations
Henan Agriculture University
College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China

### Submitter
Dongfang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Longxian Zhang
College of Veterinary Medicine, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China


