### Accession
PXD034183

### Title
Phosphorylation of RXRa mediates the effect of JNK to suppress hepatic FGF21 expression and promote metabolic syndrome

### Description
The cJun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway in the liver promotes systemic changes in metabolism by regulating PPARa-dependent expression of the hepatokine FGF21. Hepatocyte-specific gene ablation studies demonstrated that the Mapk9 gene (encodes JNK2) plays a key mechanistic role. Mutually exclusive inclusion of exons 7a and 7b yields expression of the isoforms JNK2a and JNK2b. Here we demonstrate that Fgf21 gene expression and metabolic regulation is primarily regulated by the JNK2a isoform. To identify relevant substrates of JNK2a, we performed a quantitative phosphoproteomic study of livers isolated from control mice, mice with JNK-deficiency in hepatocytes, and mice that express only JNK2a or JNK2b in hepatocytes. We identified the JNK substrate RXRa as a protein that exhibited JNK2a-promoted phosphorylation in vivo. RXRa functions as a heterodimeric partner of PPARa and may therefore mediate the effects of JNK2a signaling on Fgf21 expression. To test this hypothesis, we established mice with hepatocyte-specific expression of wild-type or mutated RXRa proteins. We found that the RXRa phosphorylation site Ser260 was required for suppression of Fgf21 gene expression. Collectively, these data establish a JNK-mediated signaling pathway that regulates hepatic Fgf21 expression.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed individually by cervical dislocation and their livers were harvested, washed twice with PBS, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Livers were mechanically lysed with an Omni mixer homogenizer in SDS lysis buffer [2 % SDS w/v, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM NEM, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)]. Suspensions were centrifuged at maximum speed for 15 min at 4°C and lysates were transferred to a clean 50 mL tubes. Lysates were reduced for 1 hr at room temperature with 5 mM TCEP followed by cysteine alkylation with iodoacetamide via a 30 min incubation at room temperature in the dark. Protein content was extracted twice by methanol-chloroform precipitation and subsequent ice-cold acetone washes. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) buffer and protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 mg of protein per sample were then diluted to 4 M urea with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested at 30°C for 6 hr with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Japan) at a 1/100 enzyme/protein ratio. The mixtures were then diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and trypsin was added at a 1/50 enzyme/protein ratio. The reaction was incubated overnight at 37°C with gentle end-over-end rotation and stopped by  acidification with formic acid (FA) 0.5% (v/v) (pH ~ 2). Peptides were subjected to tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (SPE) (Waters) and lyophilized. Peptides were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and peptide concentration was determined using the microBCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). From each sample, 50 μg of peptide was removed for protein level analysis and the remaining amount of the liver digests were used for phosphoprotein enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched using a method based on that of Kettenbach and Gerber (57). In brief, Titanosphere TiO2 5 μm particles (GL Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan) were washed three times with 2 M lactic acid/ 50% acetonitrile. Peptides were resuspended in 2.5 mL of 2 M lactic acid/50 % acetonitrile. For ~10 mg of peptide digest, 40 mg beads were added and incubated with gentle rotation for 1 hr at room temperature. Beads were washed twice with 2.5 mL of 2 M lactic acid/ 50% acetonitrile, then twice with 2.5 mL of 50% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA, and finally twice with 2.5 mL of 25% acetonitrile/ 0.1% TFA. Enriched phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 500 μL of 50 mM K2HPO4 pH 10 and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. In preparation for TMT labeling, desalted peptides (both for protein level -50 μg- and phosphopeptide level analysis -10mg) were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5.). Peptides from each sample were labeled with a specific TMT reagent, and channels 130c and 131 were duplicate mixtures from peptides of each of the 8 individual samples. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 10 μL was added to the peptides (resuspended in 70 μL of 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) along with 20 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hr, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The TMT-labeled samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The  sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep- Pak, Waters). Protein-level and total phosphoproteome analysis was performed using TMT labeled peptides subjected to orthogonal basic-pH reverse phase (bpHrp) fractionation. Peptides were solubilized in 5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) buffer and separated on an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). Using an Agilent 1100 binary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280-nm wavelength) from ThermoFisher (Waltham, MA), a 50 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min with an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length) separated the peptide mixture into a total of 96 fractions. The 96 fractions were consolidated into 24 samples in a checkerboard manner, acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) pump. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 100 μM inner diameter column containing 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources), serving as a frit, followed by 25 cm of Sepax Technologies GP-C18 resin (1.8 μm, 120 Å, Newark, DE) using a 2h gradient of 3-22 % ACN, 0.125% FA at a ∼300 nL/min. For each analysis, we loaded ~1 μg onto the column. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode and each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method (58, 59). The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 2 × 105 , maximum injection time 100 ms). The ten most intense ions were selected for MS/MS analysis. Precursor ions were filtered according charge state (z > 1), monoisotopic peak assignment and a dynamic window of 75 s ± 10ppm. MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 0.5 m/z. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum using our recently described method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches (58). MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 55%, Max AGC 5 × 104 , maximum injection time 250 ms, isolation specificity 0.5 Th, resolution was 60,000 at 400 Th).  Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the mouse Uniprot database (August 10, 2011), which was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphoprotein analysis, +79.96633 Da on serine, threonine, and tyrosine was also set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were altered to a 1% FDR (60). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (61), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.002 Th to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. We used a modified version of the Ascore algorithm to quantify the confidence with which each phosphorylation site could be assigned to a particular residue. Phosphorylation sites with Ascore values >13 (P ≤ 0.05) were considered confidently localized to a particular residue (61). Proteins and phosphorylation sites were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using in-house software, as described previously (61). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. For each peptide, a total minimum sum signal-to-noise value of 200 and an isolation purity greater than 70% was required. The complex heatmap package (version 1.10.2) (62) was used to display significant differences in hepatic protein phosphorylation. The clustering_distance_rows parameter was set to maximum; the clustering_method_rows parameter was set to ward.D. Phosphorylation sites were included that conformed to pSer-Pro or pThr-Pro motifs and were differentially expressed (>1.2) between Control (Alb-Cre+/- Mapk8+/+ Mapk9+/+) and JNK-deficient (Alb-Cre+/- Mapk8loxP/loxP MapkloxP/loxP) mice. Phosphorylation sites were excluded if differential phosphorylation in the JNK-deficient mice was not partially suppressed (>1.2) by JNK2 expression. The remaining phosphorylation sites were examined by heatmap analysis of the mean phosphorylation (k=2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Jnk, Liver, Metabolism, Rxr, Fgf21

### Affiliations
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.
Odyssey Therapeutics

### Submitter
Marta Isasa

### Lab Head
Dr Roger J. Davis
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.


