### Accession
PXD002829

### Title
A human interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by stoichiometries and abundances -- auxiliary dataset

### Description
The organization of a cell emerges from the interactions in protein networks. The interactome is critically dependent on the strengths of interactions and the cellular abundances of the connected proteins, both of which span orders of magnitude. However, these aspects have not yet been analyzed globally. Here, we have generated a library of HeLa cell lines expressing 1,125 GFP-tagged proteins under near-endogenous control, which we used as input for a next-generation interaction survey. Using quantitative proteomics, we detect specific interactions, estimate interaction stoichiometries and measures cellular abundances of interacting proteins. These three quantitative dimensions reveal that the protein network is dominated by weak, substoichiometric interactions that play a pivotal role in defining network topology. The minority of stable complexes can be identified by their unique stoichiometry signature. This study provides a rich interaction dataset connecting thousands of proteins, and introduces a framework for quantitative network analysis. -- This is an auxiliary dataset containing follow-up experiments. The main dataset is available under the identifier PXD002815.

### Sample Protocol
Dynamic exchange dataset: HeLa Kyoto cell lines expressing GFP-tagged CCT3, KIAA1430, or CDC23 from BAC transgenes were generated and cultured as previously described (Poser et al., 2008). Tagged and parental HeLa lines were metabolically labeled with 13C6 15N4-arginine and 13C6 15N2-lysine, or their light counterparts, for 2 weeks in media containing dialyzed serum. Heavy, tagged and light, untagged lysates (and vice versa) were mixed 1:1 to a total volume of 800µl immediately before subjecting them to the standard affinity enrichment protocol, as described for the main dataset. The incubation time for dynamic exchange was 15 minutes. Each cell line was analyzed with label-swap and in triplicate for each labeling state. Yeast dataset: S. cerevisiae straing from the GFP library collection (Huh et al., 2003) expressing GFP-tagged EMP65 (YER140W) or SLP1 (YOR154W), and their parental strain BY4741 were grown, harvested, lysed and subjected to affinity enrichment exactly as described (Keilhauer et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant as described for the main dataset. For the SILAC dynamic exchange experiment, the ‘re-quantify’ feature was activated and we required 1 minimum SILAC ratio count. Yeast samples were analyzed as described by Keilhauer et al., 2015."

### Publication Abstract
The organization of a cell emerges from the interactions in protein networks. The interactome is critically dependent on the strengths of interactions and the cellular abundances of the connected proteins, both of which span orders of magnitude. However, these aspects have not yet been analyzed globally. Here, we have generated a library of HeLa cell lines expressing 1,125 GFP-tagged proteins under near-endogenous control, which we used as input for a next-generation interaction survey. Using quantitative proteomics, we detect specific interactions, estimate interaction stoichiometries, and measure cellular abundances of interacting proteins. These three quantitative dimensions reveal that the protein network is dominated by weak, substoichiometric interactions that play a pivotal role in defining network topology. The minority of stable complexes can be identified by their unique stoichiometry signature. This study provides a rich interaction dataset connecting thousands of proteins and introduces a framework for quantitative network analysis.

### Keywords
Dynamic exchange, Stoichiometries, Protein abundances, Human interactome, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


