### Accession
PXD031634

### Title
Multifactorial remodeling of the cancer immunopeptidome by interferon gamma

### Description
In this study we combined previous transcriptomics and immunopeptidomics data with new proteomics data from untreated and IFNg-treated CRC PDOs to dissect mechanisms that lead to remodeling of the immunopeptidome through IFNg treatment (this is from the paper introduction, let me know if it needs any stylistic changes).  ·         Experiment description: The cells were grown in DMEM/F12 media with 20% fetal bovine serum, 1X Glutamax, 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin and 2% matrigel, and treated with 600ng/mL IFNg for 48 hours before harvesting. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS then snap-frozen.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed with SDC lysis buffer [1% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% glycerol, 50mM NaCl] with HaltTM protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific). Cell pellet samples were completely homogenized with probe sonication (EpiShear) for 15 seconds at 40% power with 1 second on and 1 second off, heated at 90oC for 5 minutes and then repeated the probe sonication. Proteins were quantified using Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad).  100 µg protein was taken from each sample and lysis buffer was added so each sample were at the same volume.  Proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride solution (TCEP, Sigma) at room temperature (RT) for 10 minutes and then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) for 30 minutes at RT. Protein was then purified by 20% trichloroacetic acid precipitation.  The pellet was resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer, and digested by 3.3 µg trypsin (Pierce, MS Grade) at a ratio of 1:30 (trypsin:protein by weight) at 37C for 18 hours.   40 µg of protein digest were labelled with 0.5 mg TMTproTM 16plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction.  After 1 hour incubation at RT and 15 min quenching by 4 µl of 5% hydroxylamine (ThermoFisher Scientific), the labelled samples were combined.  Sodium deoxycholate was precipitated by adding formic acid (FA) (Honeywell Fluka). After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and dried in Speedvac.  The sample were resuspended in 0.1% NH4OH/100% H2O, and fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with an initial 5 min loading then linear gradient from 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) – 35% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 30 min, then to 80% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 5 min and stayed for another 5 min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min.  Fractions were collected at every 42 seconds from retention time at 7.8 min to 50 min and then concatenated to 28 fractions and dried in SpeedVac. Samples were then resuspended in 0.5% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS Analysis  The LC-MS/MS analysis was on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. All instrument and columns used below were from Thermo Fisher.   50% of peptides were injected. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 nanotrap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, and then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient of 8-32% ACN/0.1% FA in 90 min /total cycle time at 120 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used standard data-dependant acquisition mode with a cycle time at 3 sec.  The full MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in Orbitrap with a resolution at 120,000 at m/z 200, and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 400,000 with maximum injection time at 50 msec. The most abundant multiply charged ions (2+ ~ 5+) with intensity threshold at 5000 were isolated by quadrupole at the isolation window at 0.7 Da and then subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) in ion trap at 35% normalized collision energy (NCE).  The AGC was set at 10,000 and maximum injection time at 35 msec.  The TMT report ions were detected by further fragmentation of the 5 most abundant fragment ions produced in MS2: they were isolated by synchronous precursor selection (SPS) method with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented by higher energy collisionally activated dissociation (HCD) at 55% NCE, and detected in the Orbitrap in a scan range 100-500 m/z.  The resolution was set at 50,000 at m/z 200, the AGC at 50,000 with maximum injection time at 86 msec.  The dynamic exclusion was set 40 s with ± 10 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine to searched against reviewed Uniprot database of Homo Sapiens (Version February 2020) and contaminate database (from Thermo).  Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 10 ppm for the precursor, and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions; dynamic modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (N, Q), TMTpro (K, peptide N-terminus) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-terminus).  Search result was validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 for the decoy database search, and only high confident PSMs (Peptide Spectrum Matches) were considered.  Protein FDR was set at 0.01. Only master proteins were reported. For reporter ion intensity detection, the reporter ion quantifier node parameters were integration window tolerance 20ppm, integration most confident centroid for peak detection.  Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. TMTpro Quan value correction factor, provided by the manufacturer’s certificate of analysis, was applied.  Co-isolation threshold was set at 100, reporter ions average S/N threshold at 3 and SPS mass matches threshold 55%. Report ions intensities were normalized by total peptide amount to correct the variation by for different protein loading in each channel, and then scaled on all average.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Immuno, Hcd, Tmtpro, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


