### Accession
PXD006591

### Title
Aging-related proteome alterations in B cells may predispose for chronic lymphocytic leukemia - cytoplasmic proteins of JVM-13 cells

### Description
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common type of leukemia in adults, is still incurable despite the development of novel therapeutic strategies. This reflects the incomplete understanding of the pathophysiology of this disease. In order to get more detailed insights into CLL development, we performed a comprehensive proteome analysis of primary human CLL cells and B cells from young and age-matched healthy individuals. For comparison, we also analyzed the chronic B cell leukemia cell line JVM-13 showing rather limited similarity to the primary cells. A principal component analysis comprising 6945 proteins separated these four groups, placing B cells of aged-matched controls between those of young donors and CLL patients. Remarkably, B cells from aged controls displayed significant regulation of proteins related to metabolic processes and stress response in mitochondria such as DLAT, FIS1 and NDUFAB1 as well as DNA repair including RAD9A, MGMT and XPA. Interestingly, these alterations apparently correlating with aging of B cells may also be essential for tumorigenesis and were observed similarly in CLL cells. In CLL cells, in addition, some remarkable unique features like the loss of tumor suppressor molecules PNN and JARID2, and high expression of CCDC88A, PIGR and ID3 otherwise associated with epithelial mesenchymal transition and stemness were determined. Furthermore, while typical hallmarks of cancer such as cell proliferation were hardly apparent for CLL cells, alterations of metabolic enzymes were another outstanding feature in comparison to normal B cells, indicating increased beta-oxidation of fatty acids and increased consumption of glutamine. Targeted metabolomics assays corroborated these results. The present findings identify previously unrecognized features of CLL cells and suggest that aging may be accompanied by proteome alterations functionally relevant for predisposing B cells to transform to CLL cells.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain the cytoplasmic protein extract, JVM-13 cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (pepstatin, leupeptin and aprotinin, each at 1 μg/ml; 1 mM PMSF) and mechanical shear stress. By centrifugation at 2300g and 4°C for 5min the cytoplasmic proteins were separated from the nuclei. The supernatant, containing the cytoplasmic protein fraction, was harvested and extracted proteins were then precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C. After precipitation, samples were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT) and the protein concentrations were determined by means of Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany).   For digestion of cytoplasmic proteins, a variation of the FASP protocol was used. 3kD MWCO filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) were rinsed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH). 20µg of protein samples obtained each from two of the two biological replicates was concentrated onto the pre-washed filter by centrifugation at 15000g for 15min to get a final sample volume of 10-20µl. For reduction, 200µl of DTT solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer), pH 8) were added and incubation was performed at 56°C for 30min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, a washing step with ABC buffer was performed. For alkylation, 200µl of IAA solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50mM ABC buffer) were added and incubation was performed in the dark for 45min. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, proteins on top of the filter were washed with ABC buffer. Dual enzyme digestion of proteins was achieved by applying a Trypsin/Lys-C Mix with Mass Spec Grade quality (Promega) o/n and a second time after the initial application for 4h. Tryptic peptides were eluted by centrifugation and clean-up up using C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) was performed. The eluates of the three elution steps were pooled and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis was performed.  For LC-MS/MS analyses dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 10µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). All samples were analyzed in duplicates. As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235min with a total chromatographic run time of 280min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the eight most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), the most common type of leukemia in adults, is still essentially incurable despite the development of novel therapeutic strategies. This reflects the incomplete understanding of the pathophysiology of this disease. A comprehensive proteome analysis of primary human B-CLL cells and B cells from younger as well as elderly healthy donors was performed. For comparison, the chronic B cell leukemia cell line JVM-13 was also included. A principal component analysis comprising 6,945 proteins separated these four groups, placing B cells of aged-matched controls between those of young donors and B-CLL patients, while identifying JVM-13 as poorly related cells. Mass spectrometric proteomics data have been made fully accessible via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006570-PXD006572, PXD006576, PXD006578, and PXD006589-PXD006591. Remarkably, B cells from aged controls displayed significant regulation of proteins related to stress management in mitochondria and ROS stress such as DLAT, FIS1, and NDUFAB1, and DNA repair, including RAD9A, MGMT, and XPA. ROS levels were indeed found significantly increased in B cells but not in T cells or monocytes from aged individuals. These alterations may be relevant for tumorigenesis and were observed similarly in B-CLL cells. In B-CLL cells, some remarkable unique features like the loss of tumor suppressor molecules PNN and JARID2, the stress-related serotonin transporter SLC6A4, and high expression of ZNF207, CCDC88A, PIGR and ID3, otherwise associated with stem cell phenotype, were determined. Alterations of metabolic enzymes were another outstanding feature in comparison to normal B cells, indicating increased beta-oxidation of fatty acids and increased consumption of glutamine. Targeted metabolomics assays corroborated these results. The present findings identify a potential proteome signature for immune senescence in addition to previously unrecognized features of B-CLL cells and suggest that aging may be accompanied by cellular reprogramming functionally relevant for predisposing B cells to transform to B-CLL cells.

### Keywords
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Primary human b lymphocytes, Aging, Glutaminolysis, Shotgun proteomics, Fatty acid beta oxidation, Q exactive orbitrap

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


