### Accession
PXD009083

### Title
Quantitative tandem affinity purification, an effective tool to investigate protein complex composition in plant hormone signaling: strigolactones in the spotlight

### Description
Phytohormones tightly regulate plant growth by integrating changing environmental and developmental cues. Although the key players have been identified in many plant hormonal pathways, the molecular mechanisms and mode of action of perception and signaling remain incompletely resolved. Characterization of protein partners of known signaling components provides insight into the formed protein complexes, but, unless quantification is involved, does not deliver much, if any, information about the dynamics of the induced or disrupted protein complexes. Therefore, in proteomics research, the discovery of what actually triggers, regulates or interrupts the composition of protein complexes is gaining importance. Here, tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) is combined with label-free quantification (LFQ) to a highly valuable tool to detect physiologically relevant, dynamic protein-protein interactions in Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures. To demonstrate its potential, we focus on the signaling pathway of one of the most recently discovered phytohormones, strigolactones.

### Sample Protocol
TAP was carried out as described (Van Leene et al., 2015), with some modifications. Material was harvested from Arabidopsis cell culture expressing 35S::GSrhino-SMXL7, 35S::GSrhino-ΔSMXL7 and 35S:: ΔSMXL7-GSrhino after 10 min of treatment with 1 μM rac-GR24 or the equal volume of acetone. Total protein extract was prepared with extraction buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 15 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 15 mM p-nitrophenyl phosphate, 60 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1% NP-40, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], 1 μM E64, EDTA-free Ultra complete tablet [1/10 mL; Roche Diagnostic], 0.1% benzonase, and 5% ethylene glycol). Total protein extract (25 mg) was incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 25 µL IgG-Sepharose 6 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare), pre-equilibrated in extraction buffer. After careful removal of the unbound fraction, the beads were washed on the Mobicol column with wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 μM E64, 1 mM PMSF, and 5% ethylene glycol). The beads were incubated with 10 units of Rhinovirus 3C protease (GE Healthcare) for 1 h at 4°C. The IgG-eluted fraction was incubated with Streptavidin beads (GE Gealthcare), equilibrated in wash buffer for 1 h at 4°C on a tube rotator. Bound complexes were eluted by streptavidin elution buffer (20 mM desthiobiotin in wash buffer) and proteins were concentrated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation at 4°C overnight. In total, for each condition, four repeats were done for the cell cultures expressing 35S::GSrhino-SMXL7 and two for 35S::GSrhino-ΔSMXL7, and two for 35S:: ΔSMXL7-GSrhino. The latter two were combined for the quantitative analysis.  In-gel protein digestion Purified protein samples were migrated on 4–12% gradient NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) for 7 min at 200 V and visualized with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G- 250 (Sigma-Aldrich). The NuPAGE gel was de-stained twice for 1 h in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade water (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated in 6.48 mM dithiothreitol and 50 mM NH4HCO3 in HPLC-grade water for 40 min to reduce disulfide bridges, and subsequently for 30 min in 54 mM iodoacetamide and 50 mM NH4HCO3 in HPLC-grade water in the dark for alkylation of the reduced thiol groups. After washing for 30 min in 25 mL of HPLC-grade water, the gel was placed on a glass plate and the section containing all eluted proteins was cut out per lane. Next, this gel part was sliced into about 18 gel plugs. These plugs were dehydrated in 600 µL 95% (v/v) acetonitrile for 10 min, rehydrated with HPLC-grade water, and dehydrated again. Next, the gel plugs were rehydrated in trypsin digest buffer (1.125 mg trypsin [MS Gold; Promega], 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10% [v/v] acetonitrile in HPLC-grade water) for 30 min at 4°C. Subsequently, proteins were digested for 3.5 h at 37°C. The resulting peptide samples in the trypsin solution were sonicated for 5 min. The remaining gel plugs were dehydrated with 95% (v/v) acetonitrile for 10 min and added to the peptide solution. The overall resulting trypsin digest was vacuum-dried. LC–MS/MS analysis The obtained peptide mixture was analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) with a tandem UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a Pneu-Nimbus dual-column source (Phoenix S&T). Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm internal diameter [I.D.] × 20 mm length, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD [Dr. Maisch]) and then eluted and bound onto a reverse-phase analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. × 150 mm length, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD [Dr. Maisch]). The peptides were solubilized in 20 µl loading solvent (0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid in 98/2 water/acetonitrile [v/v]), of which 10 µl was loaded and separated with a linear gradient from 98% of solvent A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid in water) to 40% of solvent B (0.1% [v/v] formic acid in 20/80 [v/v] water/acetonitrile) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and followed by a 5-min wash reaching 99% of solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. In the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The 10 most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts. The background ion Asn3 at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The derived data were searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Arabidopsis thaliana forward/reversed version of the TAIR10_pep_20101214 database containing also sequences of frequently observed contaminants, including human keratins, bovine serum proteins, or proteases. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as the fixed modification, whereas variable modifications were set to oxidation and acetylation (protein N-term). Trypsin\P was selected as enzyme setting. Cleavage was allowed when arginine or lysine was followed by proline with two missed cleavages permitted. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching window time of 30 s. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was selected by means of the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant. With the minimum ratio count set to 1, the FastLFQ option was enabled, LFQ minimum number of neighbors was set to 3, and the LFQ average number of neighbors to 6, as per default. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were retained. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Detailed MaxQuant search parameters can be found in Supplemental Table 2.  After MS data processing, LFQ values from the “proteinGroups.txt” output ﬁle of MaxQuant were further analyzed in the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.2). First, the reverse database hits, contaminants, and proteins identified only by modified peptides were filtered out. Then, log2 values were taken from the LFQ intensities, whereafter samples were grouped in ‘mock’ and ‘treatment’. Proteins that did not contain at least four valid values in at least one group were filtered out and missing LFQ values were imputed/replaced by values from a normal distribution that are slightly lower than the lowest (Log) value measured, as described in (Smaczniak et al., 2012b; Wendrich et al., 2017). All the imputed missing values can be found in the Supplementary Dataset 1. To normalize on the bait level, the intensity values from the “proteinGroups.txt” output ﬁle of MaxQuant were analyzed in the same manner as LFQ values. Before imputation step, the intensity of SMXL7 was subtracted from the intensity value of each protein. A Student’s t test was applied to determine statistical outliers between ‘mock’ and ‘treatment’ groups. The resulting differences between the means of the two groups (“log2(mock/treatment”) and the negative log10 P values were plotted against each other in volcano plots. The multiple hypothesis testing problem was corrected with a permutation based FDR (0.05). The threshold value S0 was set at 0.1 by default.

### Publication Abstract
Phytohormones tightly regulate plant growth by integrating changing environmental and developmental cues. Although the key players have been identified in many plant hormonal pathways, the molecular mechanisms and mode of action of perception and signaling remain incompletely resolved. Characterization of protein partners of known signaling components provides insight into the formed protein complexes, but, unless quantification is involved, does not deliver much, if any, information about the dynamics of the induced or disrupted protein complexes. Therefore, in proteomics research, the discovery of what actually triggers, regulates or interrupts the composition of protein complexes is gaining importance. Here, tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) is combined with label-free quantification (LFQ) to a highly valuable tool to detect physiologically relevant, dynamic protein-protein interactions in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cell cultures. To demonstrate its potential, we focus on the signaling pathway of one of the most recently discovered phytohormones, strigolactones.

### Keywords
Qtap, Strigolactones, Smxl7, Plant hormone signaling

### Affiliations
Gent University
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Sylwia Struk

### Lab Head
Dr Sofie Goormachtig
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium


