### Accession
PXD030983

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based draft of the mouse proteome

### Description
Quantitative draft map of the proteomes of 41 healthy tissues of the animal model Mus musculus and a panel of 66 murine pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines and. Our in-depth analysis provides evidence for proteins encoded by >16,000 genes (~76% of the total annotated protein-coding genes), where they are expressed and in which quantities. Moreover, a widespread yet tissue- and cell type-specific phosphorylation pattern is clearly represented in our data (>50,000 sites). We further leverage our analysis by integrating the phenotypic response of a the murine PDAC cell lines panel to cancer drugs and ionizing radiation, to shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying drug action and radioresistance. This large and unique atlas is made available to the scientific community also via ProteomicsDB (https://www.proteomicsDB.org) and the interactive web application PACiFIC (http://pacific.proteomics.wzw.tum.de).

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were pulverized on liquid nitrogen and resuspended in ice-cold 1% (w/v) SDC, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 buffer and subsequently lysed by 5 min boiling at 95 °C. One mg of protein material was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 55 mM CAA for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. The solution was then diluted to a final urea concentration of 0.1% (w/v) SDC with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and proteins were digested at 37 °C with trypsin. Samples were acidified with FA at 1% (v/v) final concentration and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, dried in vacuo, and stored at -80 °C until further use. PDAC cells (PMID: 29364867) were resuspended in ice-cold 2% (w/v) SDS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 buffer and subsequently lysed by heating to 95 °C for 5 min, followed by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Subsequently N-Methylmorpholine was added to a final concentration of 4% (v/v) to adjust the pH to ~7.5. Protein digestion was performed via an automated SP3-based method by using the AssayMAP Bravo. For each cell lines, 100 μg of protein material were transferred to a 96 deep well plate, then 10 μL of SP3 beads were added to the lysate, and finally ethanol was added to a final concentration of 70% (v/v). The SP3 beads were washed 3 times with 200 μL of 80% (v/v) ethanol/water and once with 200 μL of ACN. The bound proteins were reduced and alkylated, then 3 μg of trypsin were added to each well, and the plate was incubated overnight at 37 °C in the thermal shaker at 1000 rpm. Samples were acidified with FA at final concentration of 1% (v/v), desalted, dried in vacuo, and stored at -80 °C. For the tissues samples, phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by loading peptides on a Fe3+-IMAC column (PMID: 28188522, PMID: 28188525). For whole proteome analysis, peptides contained  in the IMAC flow-thought fraction were subjected to trimodal mixed mode chromatography on an Acclaim Trinity P1 (PMID: 28759994). For the PDAC cells, phosphopeptides were enriched by using 5 µL Fe(III)-NTA cartridge on the AssayMAP Bravo. The desalted peptides were dissolved in 100 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA), and loaded onto the cartridges with a flow rate of 5 μL/min, the flow-through was collected. The cartridges were washed with 50 μL of washing buffer 2, which was collected and pooled with the first flow-through. The bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 μL of 1% ammonia. For whole proteome analysis, peptides contained  in the Fe(III)-NTA flow-thought fraction were re-suspended in 100 μL of buffer A  (25 mM ammonium formate, pH 10), and subjected to C18 high pH RP fractionation with the AssayMap Bravo platform. Seven fractions were collected with flow-through, which were then combined into four fractions for the MS analysis. Nano flow LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system coupled to a QExactive Orbitrap HF for tissues analysis. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (75 μm i.d. × 2 cm, 5 μm Reprosil C18 resin) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 45 cm, 3 μm Reprosil C18 resin) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) and solvent A (0.1% FA in 5% DMSO). The full proteome analysis of the PDAC cells was performed on a micro-flow LC system (PMID: 31919466), using a 60 min linear gradient (3% to 28%) of 0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN and 0.1% FA in 3% DMSO, coupled to a QExactive Orbitrap HF-X mass spectrometer. For the PDAC phosphoproteome analysis, the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system described above was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (with a FAIMS device). Peptides were separated using a two-step increase gradient of solvent B and solvent A, from 4% to15% of B in 60 min, followed by 15% to 27% of B in 34 min. Full scan MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap from 360 to 1,300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 using an AGC target value of 3e6 charges and maxIT of 10 ms (50 ms for HF-X and 45 ms for Exploris 480). The 20 most intense precursors were isolated with an isolation window of 1.7 m/z (1.3 m/z for HFX and 1.2 m/z for Exploris 480) for HCD fragmentation, and fragments ions were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 (30,000 for Exploris 480), AGC of 1e5 and maxIT of 25 ms (22 for HF-X and 54 ms for Exploris 480). For phosphoproteome analysis of tissues samples, the 15 most intense precursor were selected instead, while AGC and maxIT were set to 2e5 and 50ms, respectively. For the Exploris 480, the data dependent mode was set to cycle time, the cycle time was set to 0.8 s, and an internal compensate voltages stepping experiments with values of -35 V, -45 V and -60 V was applied. NCE was set to 25% for the HF and 28% for the HF-X and Exploris 480.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8), using default settings with the following minor changes: oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed, minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. Searches were performed against the Mus musculus UniProt FASTA database (UP000000589, March 2018, 61,307 entries), containing canonical and isoform sequences, as well as against a common contaminants database. The FDR was set to 1, meaning 100%, to allow for a subsequent PSMs rescoring via Prosit and Percolator, implemented in ProteomicsDB. The phosphoproteome raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.13), as described above, with the following changes: phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (Phospho STY) was selected as variable modification, and results were adjusted to 1 % FDR at protein, peptide, and site levels within the MaxQuant pipeline. For sORF-encoded peptides (SEPs) identification, full proteome MS/MS spectra were searched and rescored as described above, against a custom database containing murine short open reading frame-encoded polypeptide sequences (downloaded from www.sorfs.org, September 2018, 503,779 entries) together with protein sequences from UniProt (UP000000589). For variant peptides identification, the full proteome data set was additionally processed applying the so-called “open-search” strategy. Raw mass spectrometry data were converted to mzML format using msconvert in the ProteoWizard Toolkit. Peak lists were searched with MSFragger (version 2.4) using the same UniProt database as mentioned above, but in a concatenated forward-decoy version. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 500 Da and remaining settings were used at their default value. The search results were processed with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet as part of the MSFragger, and identification were flittered to retain only hits with a probability > 0.9.

### Publication Abstract
The laboratory mouse ranks among the most important experimental systems for biomedical research and molecular reference maps of such models are essential informational tools. Here, we present a quantitative draft of the mouse proteome and phosphoproteome constructed from 41 healthy tissues and several lines of analyses exemplify which insights can be gleaned from the data. For instance, tissue- and cell-type resolved profiles provide protein evidence for the expression of 17,000 genes, thousands of isoforms and 50,000 phosphorylation sites in vivo. Proteogenomic comparison of mouse, human and Arabidopsis reveal common and distinct mechanisms of gene expression regulation and, despite many similarities, numerous differentially abundant orthologs that likely serve species-specific functions. We leverage the mouse proteome by integrating phenotypic drug (n&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;400) and radiation response data with the proteomes of 66 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell lines to reveal molecular markers for sensitivity and resistance. This unique atlas complements other molecular resources for the mouse and can be explored online via ProteomicsDB and PACiFIC.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Pdac, Mouse, Pancreatic cancer, Proteome, Radiation sensitivity, Phosphoproteome, Drug sensitivity

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich


