### Accession
PXD039713

### Title
Proteasomes of autophagy-deficient cells exhibit changes in associated regulatory proteins in conjunction with a dramatic decrease in activity

### Description
To identify possible differences in proteasome-associated proteins, we generated AX2 wild-type and ATG16¯ cells expressing the GFP-tagged 20S proteasomal subunit PSMA4 and performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments followed by mass spectrometric analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Co-immunoprecipitation experiments for the identification of differences of the proteasomes and/or proteasome-associated proteins were performed with log phase AX2/RFP-PSMD1 (negative control), AX2/RFP-PSMD1/PSMA4-GFP, ATG16‾/RFP-PSMD1 (negative control), and ATG16‾/RFP-PSMD1/PSMA4-GFP cells (2–4 × 106 cells/ml) cells. 1 × 108 cells were harvested (500 x g, 5 min), washed twice with Soerensen phosphate buffer (14.6 mM KH2PO4, 2.0 mM KH2PO4, pH 6.0) and the cell pellet shock frozen with liquid nitrogen. Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 20 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1 mM benzamidine, 10 µg/ml aprotinin/leupeptin, 1:50 proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1:100 PEFA block) followed by centrifugation at 20,000x g for 10 min. The supernatant, containing soluble proteins, was incubated with GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) for 2 h at 4 °C. Beads were washed four times with wash buffer I (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.2% NP-40) and twice with wash buffer II (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT).  Data Acquisition: Mass spectrometry was carried out at the CECAD/CMMC Proteomics Facility (University of Cologne). Samples were prepared by the in-solution digestion of proteins and StageTip purification of peptides according to the protocol of the facility (http://proteomics.cecad-labs.uni- koeln.de/Protocols.955.0.html). The samples were analysed using an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., packed with 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell beads, Agilent) and were at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient followed by a 10 min wash with 95 % Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3×106 ions collected with 20 ms. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. The ten most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) and its implemented Andromeda search engine. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Dictyostelim discoideum proteome database (UP000002195, 12746 entries, downloaded at 23.07.2018) and a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Acetyl (K), GlyGly (K) and Phospho (STY) and were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled within replicate groups. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Search ouput was loaded into  Perseus (version 1.6.5.0). Decoys and potential contaminants were removed and the log2 transformed LFQ intensities were filtered for at least 3 out of 3 values in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the lower end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults.and Two-sample two-tailed Student’s t-test were calculated for pairwise comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy and the ubiquitin proteasome system are the two major processes for the clearance and recycling of proteins and organelles in eukaryotic cells. Evidence is accumulating that there is extensive crosstalk between the two pathways, but the underlying mechanisms are still unclear. We previously found that autophagy 9 (ATG9) and 16 (ATG16) proteins are crucial for full proteasomal activity in the unicellular amoeba <i>Dictyostelium discoideum</i>. In comparison to AX2 wild-type cells, ATG9<sup>-</sup>and ATG16<sup>-</sup> cells displayed a 60%, and ATG9<sup>-</sup>/16<sup>-</sup> cells a 90%, decrease in proteasomal activity. Mutant cells also showed a significant increase in poly-ubiquitinated proteins and contained large ubiquitin-positive protein aggregates. Here, we focus on possible reasons for these results. Reanalysis of published tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomic results of AX2, ATG9<sup>-</sup>, ATG16<sup>-</sup>, and ATG9<sup>-</sup>/16<sup>-</sup> cells revealed no change in the abundance of proteasomal subunits. To identify possible differences in proteasome-associated proteins, we generated AX2 wild-type and ATG16<sup>-</sup> cells expressing the 20S proteasomal subunit PSMA4 as GFP-tagged fusion protein, and performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments followed by mass spectrometric analysis. The results revealed no significant differences in the abundance of proteasomes between the two strains. However, we found enrichment as well as depletion of proteasomal regulators and differences in the ubiquitination of associated proteins for ATG16<sup>-</sup>, as compared to AX2 cells. Recently, proteaphagy has been described as a means to replace non-functional proteasomes. We propose that autophagy-deficient <i>D. discoideum</i> mutants suffer from inefficient proteaphagy, which results in the accumulation of modified, less-active, and also of inactive, proteasomes. As a consequence, these cells exhibit a dramatic decrease in proteasomal activity and deranged protein homeostasis.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium, Atg16, Ubiquitin proteasome system (ups), Autophagy

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Ludwig Eichinger
Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 52, 50931 Cologne, Germany


