### Accession
PXD000965

### Title
N-glycosylation site occupancy in human prostaglandin H synthases expressed in Pichia pastoris

### Description
Prostaglandin H synthases (PGHSs) are N-glycosylated membrane proteins that catalyse the committed step in prostaglandin synthesis. Unlike PGHS-2, the production of recombinant PGHS-1 in non-mammalian expression systems is complicated. The majority of the heterologous enzyme is inactive due to misfolding. N-glycosylation is proposed to be obligatory for the correct folding of mammalian PGHSs. In this study, human PGHS-1 and -2 (hPGHS-1 and -2) were expressed in the yeast Pichia pastoris, and the N-glycosylation patterns of the purified recombinant proteins were characterised using nano-LC/MS/MS. Recombinant hPGHS-2 was catalytically active, whereas hPGHS-1 was inactive. Unexpectedly, the accumulation of non-glycosylated hPGHS-1 was not observed in the crude lysate of the yeast cells. In addition, the purified hPGHS isoforms exhibited similar N-glycosylation site occupancy. The results indicate that there are more complex grounds for the inactivity of the recombinant hPGHS-1 produced in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
Purified hPGHS fractions were separated on a SDS-PAGE gel and the bands corresponding to hPGHS enzymes were cut from the gel, in-gel trypsinated and reconstituted in acidic 18O water based buffer. PNGase F enzyme was used for deglycosylating the peptides and introducing 18O deamidated Asn as a result. After deglycosylation the peptide mixtures were analysed with nano-LC MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package. Spectra were searched against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) P. pastoris complete proteome database (2013 September) supplemented with hPGHS sequences and common contaminants. Missed cleavages were set to 2 and only identifications with a minimum of 2 peptides 6 amino acids long were accepted. The protein and peptide false discovery rate was set below 1%. Methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation (with and without 18O) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylated cysteines were set as fixed modifications. It was noted that in some samples C-terminal oxygens were also extensively replaced with 18O, indicating residual trypsin activity in the deglycosylation mix. For those cases, analysis was redone using C-terminal 18O double substitution as an additional fixed modification. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
Prostaglandin H synthases (PGHSs) are N-glycosylated membrane proteins that catalyse the committed step in prostaglandin synthesis. Unlike PGHS-2, the production of recombinant PGHS-1 in non-mammalian expression systems is complicated. The majority of the heterologous enzyme is inactive due to misfolding. Correct N-glycosylation is proposed to be obligatory for proper folding of mammalian PGHSs. In this study, human PGHS-1 and -2 (hPGHS-1 and -2) were expressed in the yeast Pichia pastoris. Recombinant hPGHS-2 was catalytically active, whereas hPGHS-1 was inactive. Accumulation of non-glycosylated hPGHSs was not observed in the crude lysate of the yeast cells. The N-glycosylation patterns of the purified recombinant proteins were characterised using nano-LC/MS/MS. The isoforms exhibited similar N-glycosylation site occupancy. The results indicate that there are more complex grounds for the inactivity of the recombinant hPGHS-1 produced in yeast.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pghs, Lc-ms/ms, Recombinant protein, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Proteomics core facility
Tallinn University of Technology

### Submitter
Sergo Kasvandik

### Lab Head
Dr Nigulas Samel
Tallinn University of Technology


