### Accession
PXD011865

### Title
SFPQ interacted proteins in HEK293T nucleus and cytoplasm

### Description
Splicing factor proline and glutamine rich (SFPQ), DNA- and RNA binding protein, is crucial in various nuclear processes, including paraspeckle formation, miRNA synthesis and specially in transcription regulation. In addition, SFPQ play a role in the innate immune response to viruses, including DNA and RNA viruses. However, the connections between SFPQ and EMCV infection remain unclear. Here we report that the SFPQ is essential for EMCV replication. Depletion of SFPQ impairs EMCV production, while forced expression of SFPQ could promote viral replication. Mechanistically, EMCV inhibited viral RNA-mediated type I IFN and IL6 production to eliminate host antiviral immune responses. Cellular SFPQ was cleaved by the EMCV proteinase then entered the cytoplasm and interacted with other ribosomal proteins to facilitate its internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-dependent translation. Moreover, loss of SFPQ may impress host translation related gene expression and thus facilitate the EMCV replication. Altogether, our work provides a possible target for resisting EMCV or EMCV-like virus’s infection.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions extraction of HEK293T cells were generated according to the instruction of Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Protein Extraction Kit (Beyotime, China). Briefly, 1×107 HEK293T were washed, scraped, pelleted and centrifuged, and then incubated on ice in 200 µL cytoplasmic protein extraction buffer A for 5 minutes and following by add 10 µL cytoplasmic protein extraction buffer B. The resulting cell lysis was subjected to centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 5 minutes), and the supernatant collected as the cytoplasmic fraction. The pellet was washed with PBS, centrifugation was repeated as above, and the remaining pellet was lysis by 50 µL nuclear protein extraction buffer for 30 minutes and subjected to centrifugation (12,000 rpm, 5 minutes), and the supernatant collected as the nuclear fraction. The 2 µg mouse anti-SFPQ antibody were added to the nuclear or cytoplasmic extracts and incubated at 4°C for 4 hr followed by incubation with SureBeads Protein G Magnetic Beads (Bio-Rad, USA) at 4°C for 2 hr. The beads were wash three times in ice-cold wash buffer and were eluted by boiling for 3 min in SDS sample lysis buffer.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Homo sapiens protein database were downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine, pyroglutamate on peptide N-terminal, acetylation and methylation on protein N-terminal, acetylation on cysteine and lysine, and methylation on lysine and arginine as variable modifications. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sfpq; hek2893t; nucleus; cytoplasm

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences Fudan University

### Submitter
Bin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Qian
School of Life Sciences Fudan University


