### Accession
PXD002013

### Title
Lysine Acetylation Dynamics -  The Tec Kinase-Regulated Phosphoproteome Reveals a Mechanism for the Regulation of Inhibitory Signals in Murine Macrophages

### Description
Cultured carcinoma cells were stimulated with growth factors and lysine acetylation and/or tyrosine phosphorylation dynamics were quantified.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8M urea, digested to peptides, desalted, and labeled with iTRAQ.

### Data Protocol
Samples were searched using Mascot and spectra were manually valuated using CAMV.

### Publication Abstract
Previous work has shown conflicting roles for Tec family kinases in regulation of TLR-dependent signaling in myeloid cells. In the present study, we performed a detailed investigation of the role of the Tec kinases Btk and Tec kinases in regulating TLR signaling in several types of primary murine macrophages. We demonstrate that primary resident peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete less proinflammatory cytokines in response to TLR stimulation than do wild-type cells. In contrast, we found that bone marrow-derived and thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages deficient for Btk and Tec secrete more proinflammatory cytokines than do wild-type cells. We then compared the phosphoproteome regulated by Tec kinases and LPS in primary peritoneal and bone marrow-derived macrophages. From this analysis we determined that Tec kinases regulate different signaling programs in these cell types. In additional studies using bone marrow-derived macrophages, we found that Tec and Btk promote phosphorylation events necessary for immunoreceptor-mediated inhibition of TLR signaling. Taken together, our results are consistent with a model where Tec kinases (Btk, Tec, Bmx) are required for TLR-dependent signaling in many types of myeloid cells. However, our data also support a cell type-specific TLR inhibitory role for Btk and Tec that is mediated by immunoreceptor activation and signaling via PI3K.

### Keywords
Tyrosine phosphorylation, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
MIT
MIT Department of Biological Engineering David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research

### Submitter
Bryan Bryson

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
MIT Department of Biological Engineering David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research


