### Accession
PXD027053

### Title
Characterization of two mutually orthogonal pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNAPyl pairs residing in the same organism

### Description
Site-specific incorporation of distinct non-canonical amino acids (ncAAs) into proteins via genetic code expansion requires mutually orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (aaRS)/tRNA pairs. Pyrrolysyl–tRNA synthetase (PylRS)/tRNAPyl pairs are ideal for genetic code expansion and have been extensively engineered for developing mutually orthogonal pairs. Here, we identify two novel PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs from extremely halophilic methyl-reducing euryarchaeal HMET1. In order to demonstrate that HMET1 PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs are functional and orthogonal in H. volcanii, we transformed plasmids encoding HMET1 PylRS/tRNAPyl pair and reporter protein SAMP1(G24amb), and cultured the cells in the presence and absence of 1 mM ncAA. Amber suppression ability of HMET1 PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs were assayed by monitoring the production of the full-length SAMP1(G24amb) and the SAMP1(G24amb)-MoaE conjugate via anti-Flag immunoblotting. LC-MS/MS confirmed that BocK (ncAA) was incorporated into the reporter protein at site-directed position. Thus, these two distinct PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs are functional in Haloferax volcanii, a model halophilic archaeon. Furthermore, by swapping these two PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs in the expression vector followed by anti-Flag immunoblotting, we found these two PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs are mutually orthogonal. Finally, we demonstrate HMET1 PylRS/tRNAPyl-derived pairs can decode two stop codons and incorporate distinct ncAAs. LC-MS/MS analysis of the purified reporter protein confirmed that BocK and 3-I-phe were incorporated at the TAA and TAG-directed positions respectively.

### Sample Protocol
H. volcanii cells were harvested by centrifugation (8,000 g, 10 min, 25°C) and washed in 20 ml TBS buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). Cell were harvested by centrifugation and lysed by the use of a French press (17,000 lb/in2). Flag-tagged reporter proteins were enriched by the anti-Flag immunoprecipitation. Purified proteins were separated by reducing SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie G250 dye. The protein band representing SAMP1(G24amb)-MoaE conjugate at 50 kDa was cut for further analysis with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Proteins of interest were first excised from the gel. After destaining, reduction and alkylation, the proteins in gel were digested by 0.02 μg/μl trypsin. The peptides were then extracted by acetonitrile. After drying, the peptides were dissolved in 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid. A total of 1 μg peptides was injected into the Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). The LC conditions and MS parameters were described in previous study (PMID: 28960076).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and 2.4 with the Mascot or SequestHT search algorithm. Mascot or SequestHT was set up to search the database including H. volcanii DS2 proteins, common pollution proteins, SAMP1-MoaE protein with BocK and 20 natural amino acids at G24 residue and SAMP1-MoaE protein with BocK, 3-I-phe and 20 natural amino acids at G14 and G24 residue assuming the digestion with trypsin. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 50 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidation of Asn and Gln and oxidation of Met were specified as variable modifications. The false-discovery rate (FDR) was specified at 1.0% to filter the peptides. Finally, the MS/MS spectrums were labeled by pLabel software.

### Publication Abstract
Site-specific incorporation of distinct non-canonical amino acids into proteins via genetic code expansion requires mutually orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pairs. Pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase (PylRS)/tRNAPyl pairs are ideal for genetic code expansion and have been extensively engineered for developing mutually orthogonal pairs. Here, we identify two novel wild-type PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs simultaneously present in the deep-rooted extremely halophilic euryarchaeal methanogen Candidatus Methanohalarchaeum thermophilum HMET1, and show that both pairs are functional in the model halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii. These pairs consist of two different PylRS enzymes and two distinct tRNAs with dissimilar discriminator bases. Surprisingly, these two PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs display mutual orthogonality enabled by two unique features, the A73 discriminator base of tRNAPyl2 and a shorter motif 2 loop in PylRS2. In vivo translation experiments show that tRNAPyl2 charging by PylRS2 is defined by the enzyme's shortened motif&#xa0;2 loop. Finally, we demonstrate that the two HMET1 PylRS/tRNAPyl pairs can simultaneously decode UAG and UAA codons for incorporation of two distinct noncanonical amino acids into protein. This example of a single base change in a tRNA leading to additional coding capacity suggests that the growth of the genetic code is not yet limited by the number of identity elements fitting into the tRNA structure.

### Keywords
Genetic code expansion, Pyrrolysyl-trna synthetase, Archaea, Mutually orthogonal, Trnapyl

### Affiliations
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083,China
Building 11, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen (518083)（518083）

### Submitter
Yuxing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xian Fu
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083,China


