### Accession
PXD041737

### Title
Mezigdomide is effective alone and in combination with Menin inhibition in Acute Myeloid Leukemia

### Description
Small molecules that target the MENIN-KMT2A protein-protein interaction (Menin inhibitors) have recently entered clinical trials in lysine methyltransferase 2A (KMT2A, MLL1) rearranged (KMT2A-r) and nucleophosmin mutant (NPM1c) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are demonstrating encouraging results. However, rationally chosen combination therapy is needed to improve responses and prevent resistance. We have previously identified IKZF1/IKAROS as a target in KMT2A-r AML and shown in preclinical models that IKAROS protein degradation with Lenalidomide or Iberdomide has modest single-agent activity yet can synergize with Menin inhibitors. Recently, the novel IKAROS degrader Mezigdomide was developed and has greatly enhanced IKAROS protein degradation. In this study we show that Mezigdomide has increased preclinical activity in vitro as a single-agent in KMT2A-r and NPM1c AML cell lines, including sensitivity in cell lines resistant to Lenalidomide and Iberdomide. Further, we demonstrate that Mezigdomide has the greatest capacity to synergize with and induce apoptosis in combination with Menin inhibitors. We show that the superior activity of Mezigdomide compared to Lenalidomide or Iberdomide is due to its increased depth, rate, and duration of IKAROS protein degradation. Single-agent Mezigdomide was efficacious in five patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of KMT2A-r and one NPM1c AML. The combination of Mezigdomide with a Menin inhibitor increased survival and prevented the development of recently described MEN1 mutations. These results support prioritization of Mezigdomide for early phase clinical trials in KMT2A-r and NPM1c AML, either as a single-agent or in combination with Menin inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry based global protein measurements were performed in 7.5 million cells per condition on MV4;11 and OCI-AML2 cell lines. Cells were treated for 3 hrs and 12 hrs with either 1 µM of lenalidomide, 1 µM of iberdomide or 10 nM of Mezigdomide. Cells were harvested, washed twice in PBS, and then snap frozen. Pellets were thawed and resupended in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (EPPS) pH 8.5, Protease and Phosphatase inhibitors) and manually homogenized by 20 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 in. long) needle and resulting cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay, and 50 μg of protein from each sample was reduced, alkylated, LysC/Trypsin digested and desalted. Data were obtained using a TimsTOF Pro2 system (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) linked to a nanoElute LC pump (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) through a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray source. Peptides were separated using a reversed-phase C18 column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µM, IonOpticks, Australia) that contained an integrated captive spray emitter. The separation was achieved with a 50-minute gradient of 2 - 30% buffer B (acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and a column temperature of 50 ºC. To determine effective ion mobility windows for downstream diaPASEF data collection (Meier et al., 2020), DDA was performed in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. The ddaPASEF parameters included a 100% duty cycle using accumulation and ramp times of 50 ms each, 1 TIMS-MS scan, and 10 PASEF ramps per acquisition cycle. The TIMS-MS survey scan was conducted between 100 – 1700 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2. Precursors with 1 – 5 charges were chosen, and those with an intensity threshold of 20,000 arbitrary units were actively excluded for 0.4 min. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 m/z for m/z <700 and 3 m/z for m/z >800, and m/z between 700-800 was linearly interpolated. The TIMS elution voltages were calibrated linearly with three points (Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix Ions; 622, 922, 1,222 m/z) to determine the reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0). To perform diaPASEF, an acquisition scheme for DIA data collection was designed using the precursor distribution in the DDA m/z-ion mobility plane. This scheme included two windows in each 50 ms diaPASEF scan. Data was acquired using sixteen of these 25 Da precursor double window scans (creating 32 windows) that covered the diagonal scan line for doubly and triply charged precursors, with singly charged precursors being excluded by their position in the m/z-ion mobility plane. These precursor isolation windows were defined between 400 - 1200 m/z and 1/k0 of 0.7 - 1.3 V.s/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of diaPASEF raw files, including controlling false discovery rates at the peptide and protein levels, assembling proteins from peptides, and quantifying proteins from peptides, was performed using DIA-NN 1.8 (Demichev et al., 2020) in a library-free mode. In this mode, the DIA precursor data were extracted into a collection of MS2 spectra using an in silico digestion of a given protein sequence database and deep learning-based predictions. The search results were used to generate a spectral library, which was then used for the targeted analysis of the DIA data against a Swissprot human database (January 2021). The default settings for directDIA were largely followed, including tryptic with two missed cleavages, carbomidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine, with a precursor Q-value (FDR) cut-off of 0.01. The precursor quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) with RT-dependent cross-run normalization. Proteins with mean number of precursors used for quantification of < 2 were excluded from further analysis. In-house scripts in the R framework were used to scale protein abundances, and statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework (Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Small molecules that target the MENIN-KMT2A protein-protein interaction (Menin inhibitors) have recently entered clinical trials in lysine methyltransferase 2A (KMT2A, MLL1) rearranged (KMT2A-r) and nucleophosmin mutant (NPM1c) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are demonstrating encouraging results. However, rationally chosen combination therapy is needed to improve responses and prevent resistance. We have previously identified IKZF1/IKAROS as a target in KMT2A-r AML and shown in preclinical models that IKAROS protein degradation with lenalidomide or iberdomide has modest single-agent activity yet can synergize with Menin inhibitors. Recently, the novel IKAROS degrader mezigdomide was developed with greatly enhanced IKAROS protein degradation. In this study we show that mezigdomide has increased preclinical activity in vitro as a single-agent in KMT2A-r and NPM1c AML cell lines, including sensitivity in cell lines resistant to lenalidomide and iberdomide. Further, we demonstrate that mezigdomide has the greatest capacity to synergize with and induce apoptosis in combination with Menin inhibitors, including in MEN1 mutant models. We show that the superior activity of mezigdomide compared to lenalidomide or iberdomide is due to its increased depth, rate, and duration of IKAROS protein degradation. Single-agent mezigdomide was efficacious in five patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of KMT2A-r and one NPM1c AML. The combination of mezigdomide with the Menin inhibitor VTP-50469 increased survival and prevented and overcame MEN1 mutations that mediate resistance in patients receiving Menin inhibitor monotherapy. These results support prioritization of mezigdomide for early phase clinical trials in KMT2A-r and NPM1c AML, either as a single-agent or in combination with Menin inhibitors.

### Keywords
Ikaros, Mezigdomide, Menin-kmt2a, Acute myeloid leukemia, Menin inhibitor

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


