### Accession
PXD030803

### Title
Paladin, a pseudo-phosphatase overexpressed in colon cancer, is required for actin polymerization and liver metastasis dissemination

### Description
Colorectal cancer remains a public health issue and most of colon cancer patients succumb to the development of metastases. Using a specific protocol, we identified paladin as a potential colon cancer liver metastases biomarker. We then explored the biological function of paladin in colon cancer cells. We discovered that paladin is required for cell migration and metastasis. We reported that paladin depletion altered the phospho-proteome within colon cancer cells. Thanks to immuno-precipitation experiments, we demonstrated that paladin was interacting with SSH-1, a phosphatase involved in colon cancer metastasis. Finally, we showed that paladin depletion in cancer cells altered the interaction between SSH-1 and actin, which results in a less dynamic actin cytoskeleton. In conclusion, paladin is an under undervalued protein in oncology participating in actin cytoskeleton remodelling and necessary for an efficient cancer cell migration

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scrapped and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 4% Sodium Deoxycholate). The suspension was thoroughly heated to 95°C for 5 minutes before being probe-sonicated 3 times for 15 sec. Clear lysates were obtained by centrifugation at 18,000g for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermofisher Scientific). Samples (500 µg) were diluted with lysis buffer to a final volume of 270 µL before being processed as described previously (16). At the end of the process, enriched phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 8 µL of solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% acetonitrile), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. An aliquot (800 ng) of the original peptide mixture was also analyzed for total proteome determination. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-27.5% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) for 100 min, 27.5%-40% solvent B for 10 min, 40%-95% solvent B for 1 min and holding at 95% for the last 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system. Peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 30, ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 sec for ions above a threshold ion count of 5.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1E5 ions and a maximum injection set to 110 ms. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 325 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 against a Human database protein database obtained from Uniprot. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr (+79.966 Da), conversion of Gln (-17.027 Da) or Glu (- 18.011 Da) to pyro-Glu at the peptide N-term were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. For abundance comparison, abundance ratios were calculated by Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of the precursor intensities within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Phosphoproteome, Paladin, Actin cytoskeleton

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Metastasis Research Laboratory Liège université GIGA institute ULIEGE-CHU-B23 +4, 4000 Liège Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Peulen
Metastasis Research Laboratory Liège université GIGA institute ULIEGE-CHU-B23 +4, 4000 Liège Belgium


