### Accession
PXD038136

### Title
Integrative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses revealed the regulation mechanism of Clematis terniflora DC. response to UV-B stress

### Description
Clematis terniflora DC. is used as traditional herb medicine since ancient China. The active substances in C.terniflora have been confirmed to be effective in treating disease like prostatitis. The UV light radiation is a common environmental factor that damage the plants and has an influence on the primary metabolism and secondary metabolism. Previous researches have shown that ultraviolet B (UV-B) radiation followed by dark stress acting on C.terniflora leaves，resulting in the accumulation of secondary metabolites. An in-depth understanding of how C.terniflora leaves respond to UV-B stress is crucial for improving medicinal plants value. Here, we conducted label-free proteomic and phosphoproteomic to explore the protein changes under UV-B and UV-B combined with dark treatment, respectively. A total of 2839 proteins and 1638 phosphorylated proteins were identified. Integrative omics revealed the photosynthetic system and carbohydrate balance were modulated in both stresses. The phosphoproteomic data indicated that, mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway was triggered, meanwhile, the abundance of phosphorylated proteins related to the osmotic stress were increased under UV-B stress. Differential abundant phosphoproteins from UV-B followed by dark treatment were mainly enriched in response to stimulus including calcium-mediated proteins. This study dissects the impact of UV-B stress on C.terniflora and the plant molecular resistant mechanisms through proteomic and phosphoproteomic in a new sight.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation and phosphopeptide enrichment  Frozen leaf grounded into powder was transferred to extraction solution (100 mM KCl, phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics, NSW, Australia), 5 mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 30% sucrose and 50 mM Tris–HCl at pH 8.5). The mixture was added tris-buffer phenol and centrifuged at 6,000g. Five-time volume 100 mM ammonium acetate was added to the protein supernatant and precipitated at -20℃ over 12 h. After centrifugation at 6,000 g for 10 min, the precipitate was collected and then washed twice with acetone. Precipitate was added buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF to dissolve. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation as crude protein. The Bradford method was used for protein concentration determination with minor modification. Protein purification, reduction and alkylation were referred to a previous study. Finally, the trypsin was added at a 1:50 (trypsin-to-protein) ratio at 37°C for 16 h in the dark to digest protein and desalted with Strata X Column (Phenomenex, United States) to obtain total peptide samples and phosphopeptide enrichment prior samples. The TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (PTM BioLab, Hangzhou, China) was prepared for enrich the peptide according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS) analysis Peptides were redissolved with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and analyzed by Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA, USA), using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (25 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm-C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The peptides were separated by an Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 system. The parameters and gradient setting were referred to Zhong et al’s protocol with minor modification.  The mass scan range was 350–1500 m/z at a resolution of 60000, and top ten most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) with an isolation width of 1.6 Da and minimum intensity of 8000. The normalized collision energy was 30. Charge state dependent CID was enabled for fragmentation. The MS/MS ions were detected using a normal ion trap scan rate.  Data processing and bioinformatics anlysis Raw data files were searched using SEQUEST HT search engine embedded into Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Spectral libraries were generated by searching Uniprot database (Raninculales, 233,260 entries, 2022.6.15) and C. terniflora DC. transcriptome database. Trypsin/P was configured as a cleavage enzyme (up to 2 missing cleavages), and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% cutoff. For phosphoproteomic search, phosphoRS mode was enabled and phospho (S/T/Y) was specified as an additional variable modification and default settings were used for other modification. Relative quantitation of total proteins of phosphoproteins according to respective peptides or phosphopeptides. The proteins with adjusted p value < 0.05 and fold change > 1.2 or < 0.83were considered as differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) with statistically significant. Differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) used the same screening method, and overlapped proteins with the same change trend between DAPs and phosphorylated proteins were deleted. Functions annotations of DAPs or DPPs were performed by eggNOG-mapper, based on Gene ontology (GO). GO terms enrichment was performed by TBtools software. DAPs and DPPs were submitted to the online KOBAS 3.0 software for Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment. The subcellular prediction was performed by WoLF PSORT (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Clematis terniflora</i> <i>DC.</i> (<i>C. terniflora</i>) has been used as an ancient Chinese traditional herbal medicine. The active substances in <i>C. terniflora</i> have been confirmed to be effective in treating diseases such as prostatitis. UV light radiation is a common environmental factor that damages plants and influences primary and secondary metabolism. Previous studies showed that ultraviolet B (UV-B) radiation followed by dark stress resulted in the accumulation of secondary metabolites in <i>C. terniflora</i> leaves. An in-depth understanding of how <i>C. terniflora</i> leaves respond to UV-B stress is crucial for improving <i>C. terniflora</i> value. Here, we conducted label-free proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to explore the protein changes under UV-B and UV-B combined with dark treatment. A total of 2839 proteins and 1638 phosphorylated proteins were identified. Integrative omics revealed that the photosynthetic system and carbohydrate balance were modulated under both stresses. The phosphoproteomic data indicated that the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway was triggered, while the abundance of phosphorylated proteins related to osmotic stress was increased under UV-B stress. Differentially abundant phosphoproteins from UV-B followed by dark treatment were mainly enriched in response to stimulus including calcium-mediated proteins. This study provides new insight into the impact of UV-B stress on <i>C. terniflora</i> and plant molecular resistance mechanisms through proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses.

### Keywords
Clematis terniflora dc.; ultraviolet b; proteomic; phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Minglei Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Minglei Tao
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University


