### Accession
PXD013702

### Title
Protein identification in 1000 U2OS cells

### Description
In this study, we aim to optimize sample processing methods using a conventional in-solution proteomic sample processing workflow. We then compared protein idetnfication numbers withour improved sample processing methods versus the original method, in 1000 U2OS human osteosarcoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets of ~1e6 U2OS cells (~100µg lysate protein) were suspended in 200µL of lysis buffer composing of 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) each. For ~10,000 and ~1,000 cells (~1µg and ~0.1µg total lysate, respectively), the volume of lysis buffer used for each sample was 40µL and 20µL, respectively. Cells were then vortexed at 2,800rpm using Mini Vortex Mixer (Fisher Scientific, USA) for ten seconds, followed by ten seconds of incubation on ice. This procedure was repeated six times. The lysate was then centrifuged at 21,000xg using Sorvall Legend Micro 21R Centrifuge (Thermo Scientific, USA) for five minutes at 4°C. Protein reduction was conducted using 5mM of tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) for 45 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently, 10mM of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) was added for protein alkylation for 45 minutes at room temperature (dark). Following alkylation, cell lysate was diluted five-fold with 100mM of ammonium bicarbonate to lower urea concentration. 2/0.2/0.2?g Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was then added for overnight digestion at 37°C for samples of ~1e6, ~10,000, and ~1,000 cells, respectively. Trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific, USA) was added to reduce pH, and desalting was conducted with SOLA Solid Phase Extraction 10mg (for ~100µg peptides from 1e6 cells) and 2mg (for ~1µg and ~0.1µg tryptic peptides from ~10,000 and ~1,000 U2OS cells) 96-well plates (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were eluted using 400µL (for ~100µg total peptides) and 200µL (for ~1µg and ~0.1µg total peptides) 80% Acetonitrile - 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Eluted peptides were speed-vacuum dried using Labconco CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Kansas City, MO).

### Data Protocol
Acquired LC-MS/MS raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer V2.2 (Thermo Fisher). Search was conducted against the SwissProt human database (released in June 2017), with the following parameters: full tryptic specificity with up to two missed cleavage sites, carbami-domethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation plus methionine oxida-tion as variable modifications. False discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Protein and peptide adhesion is a major factor contributing to sample loss during proteomic sample preparation workflows. Sample loss often has detrimental effects on the quality of proteomic analysis by compromising protein identification and data reproducibility. When starting with a low sample amount, only the most abundant proteins can be identified, which often offers little insights for biological research. Although the general idea about severe sample loss from low amount of starting material is widely presumed in the proteomics field, quantitative assessment on the impact of sample loss has been poorly investigated. In the present study, we have quantitatively assessed sample loss during each step of a conventional in-solution sample preparation workflow using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) and targeted LC/MS/MS protein and peptide assays. According to our assessment, for starting materials of &#x223c;1000 mammalian cells, surface adhesion, along with desalting and speed-vacuum drying steps, all contribute heavily to sample loss, in particular for low-abundance proteins. With this knowledge, we have adapted slippery liquid infused porous surface (SLIPS) treatment, commercial LoBind tubes, and in-line desalting during sample processing. With these improvements, we were able to use a conventional in-solution sample handling method to identify on average 829 proteins with 1000 U2OS osteosarcoma cells (&#x223c;100 ng) with 75-min LC/MS/MS runs, an 11-fold increase in protein identification. Our optimized in-solution workflow is straightforward and also much less equipment- and technique-demanding than other advanced sample preparation protocols in the field.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, 1000 cells, Osteosarcoma, U2os, Sam ple processing, Sample recovery yield

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


