### Accession
PXD025849

### Title
Molecular characterization of hematopoietic stem cells after in vitro amplification on biomimetic 3D PDMS cell culture scaffoldsMolecular characterization of hematopoietic stem cells after in vitro amplification on biomimetic 3D PDMS cell culture scaffolds

### Description
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is successfully applied since the late 1950s, however, its efficacy still needs to be improved. A promising strategy is to transplant high numbers of pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Therefore, an advanced ex vivo culture system is needed that supports the proliferation and maintains the pluripotency of HSC to override possible limitations in cell numbers gained from donors. To model the natural HSC niche in vitro and thus, to amplify high numbers of undifferentiated HSCs, we used an optimized HSC cell culture medium in combination with artificial 3D bone marrow-like scaffolds made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). After 14 days in vitro (DIV) cell culture, we performed transcriptome and proteome analysis of the whole cell populations. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) indicated that our 3D PDMS cell culture scaffolds activated interleukin, SREBP, mTOR and FOXO signaling pathways as well as the HSC metabolism, which we confirmed by ELISA, Western blot and metabolic flux analysis. These molecular signaling pathways and HSC metabolism are well known to promote the expansion HSCs and are involved in their pluripotency maintenance. After selection and enrichment of immature CD34-positive/CD38-negative HSCs using FACS sorting, we could confirm our findings by another proteome analysis followed by IPA. Thus, we could show that our 3D bone marrow-like PDMS scaffolds activate key molecular signaling pathways to amplify the numbers of undifferentiated HSC efficiently ex vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis, samples were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode, Belgium) for 10 cycles (30 sec ON/60 sec OFF) at high setting, at 20 °C, followed by boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Reduction was followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 15 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein amounts were estimated following an SDS-PAGE gel of 10 µL of each sample against an in-house cell lysate of known quantity. 30 µg of each sample was taken along for digestion. Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C after addition of 8x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant carefully removed (Eppendorf 5810R, Eppendorf AG, Germany). Pellets were washed twice with 300 µL ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removing the acetone, pellet were air-dried before addition of 25 µL of digestion buffer (1M Guanidine, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). Samples were resuspended with sonication as explained above, then LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C under shaking (1000 rpm for 1 h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C under shaking (650 rpm). The day after, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), heated at 37 °C and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) under a soft vacuum following the manufacturer instruction. Briefly, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile; 0.05% (v/v) formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x100 µL solvent A (0.05% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into 0.2 mL PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down using a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Germany) . Dried samples were stored at -20°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prior to analysis, samples were reconstituted in in MS Buffer (5% acetonitrile, 95% Milli-Q water, with 0.1% formic acid) and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Peptides were separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA ) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). Solvent A was water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 1 µl of the sample (∼1 μg on column) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 120 min. Total run time was 145 min. including equilibration and conditioning. The LC was coupled to either to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HFX or to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%.  For sample-specific spectral library generation, pooled samples of the different condition were analyzed additionally by data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1650 m/z (using quadrupole isolation) were acquired with resolution of 60,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with limitation of 3 x 106 ions. The “Top Scan” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 4.4 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 27%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) with a cycle time of 20 scans.  The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed.  MS/MS data were acquired with a resolution of 15,000  FWHM and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z.  The filling time was set at maximum of 25 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm.  Isotopes were excluded.  For data independent acquisition (DIA), full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25, 27.5, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 35 ms (whichever occurred first). All data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo) and Tune version 2.9 were used. Acquired data were processed using Spectronaut Professional v13.10 (Biognosys AG). For library creation, the DDA and DIA raw files were searched with Pulsar (Biognosys AG) against the human UniProt database (Homo sapiens, 20,186 entries, release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended, using default settings. For library generation, default BGS factory settings were used. DIA data were searched against this spectral library using BGS factory settings, except: Proteotypicity Filter = Only Protein Group Specific; Major Group Quantity = Median peptide quantity; Major Group Top N = OFF; Minor Group Quantity = Median precursor quantity; Minor Group Top N = OFF; Data Filtering = Qvalue sparse; Normalization Strategy = Local normalization; Row Selection = Automatic. The candidates and protein report tables were exported from Spectronaut and used for volcano plots generation and Principal Component Analysis (PCA), respectively, using R version 3.4.1 and RStudio server version 1.1.463. Protein groups were considered as significantly enriched in if they displayed a Q value < 0.01 and average log2 ratio > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Foxo, Srebp, Biomimetic, Human hematopoietic stem cell (hsc), Proteomics, 3d cell cultivation system, Cell metabolism, Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hsct), Cholesterol, Mtor, In vitro amplification

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Alternsforschung - Fritz-Lipmann-Institut e.V. (FLI)  Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Zhao-Qi Wang
Leibniz-Institut für Alternsforschung - Fritz-Lipmann-Institut e.V. (FLI)  Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena


