### Accession
PXD014982

### Title
Light acclimation response of the thylakoid proteome in Arabidopsis

### Description
The plant chloroplast thylakoid membrane must respond to environmental variations in light intensity to maximise the efficiency of photosynthesis and minimise photo-oxidative stress. Plants respond to changing light intensity in the short-term (seconds to minutes) through altered regulation of the structure and function of existing thylakoid components, whereas long-term acclimation (hours to days) involves changes in gene expression, protein synthesis and degradation, which modulate the composition of the thylakoid membrane. Here we have investigated the long-term changes in the thylakoid membrane composition in Arabidopsis thaliana plants acclimated to low, moderate and high light intensities using quantitative label-free proteomics in combination with a range of biochemical and spectroscopic functional analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes were solubilised in 1% sodium laurate and centrifuged to remove starch granules. In triplicate, 50 µg of solubilised protein was reduced with 1.5 µl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine-HCl and incubated at 37 ˚C for 30 min, then alkylated by the addition of 1.5 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at ambient temperature for 30 min. Proteolytic digestion was performed in 1% sodium laurate, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, with 2 µg pre-mixed trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega), for 3 h at 37 ˚C. Following digestion, sodium laurate was extracted by addition of an equal volume of ethyl acetate and acidification with 10 µl 10% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 15,700 x g for 5 min and the lower phase was isolated. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, resuspended in 50 µl 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples in 0.5% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile amounting to 400 ng were analysed in triplicate by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific, 50 cm x 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 40 °C) and a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.6.3.4 and the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, downloaded on 10 December 2018) with iBAQ enabled. Search parameters were: carbamidomethyl-Cys (fixed modification), Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, Lys acetylation and Gln to pyro-Glu conversion (variable modifications) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic acclimation, the ability to adjust the composition of the thylakoid membrane to optimise the efficiency of electron transfer to the prevailing light conditions, is crucial to plant fitness in the field. While much is known about photosynthetic acclimation in Arabidopsis, to date there has been no study that combines both quantitative label-free proteomics and photosynthetic analysis by gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence and P700 absorption spectroscopy. Using these methods we investigated how the levels of 402 thylakoid proteins, including many regulatory proteins not previously quantified, varied upon long-term (weeks) acclimation of Arabidopsis to low (LL), moderate (ML) and high (HL) growth light intensity and correlated these with key photosynthetic parameters. We show that changes in the relative abundance of cytb<sub>6</sub> f, ATP synthase, FNR2, TIC62 and PGR6 positively correlate with changes in estimated PSII electron transfer rate and CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation. Improved photosynthetic capacity in HL grown plants is paralleled by increased cyclic electron transport, which positively correlated with NDH, PGRL1, FNR1, FNR2 and TIC62, although not PGR5 abundance. The photoprotective acclimation strategy was also contrasting, with LL plants favouring slowly reversible non-photochemical quenching (qI), which positively correlated with LCNP, while HL plants favoured rapidly reversible quenching (qE), which positively correlated with PSBS. The long-term adjustment of thylakoid membrane grana diameter positively correlated with LHCII levels, while grana stacking negatively correlated with CURT1 and RIQ protein abundance. The data provide insights into how Arabidopsis tunes photosynthetic electron transfer and its regulation during developmental acclimation to light intensity.

### Keywords
Relative quantitation, Ibaq, Photosynthesis, Thylakoid, Label-free, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, U.K.
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Sarah Flannery

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew P Johnson
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, U.K.


