### Accession
PXD005611

### Title
Resistance to Palbociclib requires multiple targetable mechanisms highlighting the potential of drug holidays and drug switching to improve therapeutic outcome

### Description
Estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer is the most common type of breast cancer. Despite the great efficacy of endocrine therapies, resistance remains a problem. Therefore, there is an immediate need for new, effective therapies in ER+ BC. In this study, we have explored the role of a potent CDK4/6 inhibitor called palbociclib. In order to identify alterations in protein abundance between the responsive and resistant setting, we generated a panel of palbociclib-sensitive and resistant cell lines and did quantitative, shotgun proteomics using dimethyl labelling. Palbociclib sensitive cell lines (wt-MCF7 or MCF7-LTED) were cultured in phenol red-free RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1nM estradiol or 10% dextran-coated charcoal (DCC) respectively. Thereafter, palbociclib resistant cell lines were generated using 1μΜ palbociclib concentration. Samples were harvested at baseline and at the point of resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Responsive and resistant to palbociclib peptides were isotopically labelled directly using Sep-pak C18 cartridges as described previously (Boersema et al., 2009; Di Palma et al., 2012). The WT-MCF7 cells were labelled with the medium isotope reagent and the wt-MCF7 991-R cells with the light isotope reagent. The MCF7-LTED cells were labelled with the light isotope and the MCF7-LTED 991-R with the medium isotope. After labelling, each sample was eluted using 80% acetonitrile with 2% formic acid. Subsequently, the two labelled samples were pooled at an approximate 1-to-1 ratio and dried down under vacuum. The dried sample was reconstituted in OFFGEL stock solution and run using 12 cm IPG strip pH 3-10. Fractions were desalted (SUM SS18V, The Nest Group Inc) and run through LC-MS/MS using LTQ Velos Orbitrap MS.  For MS analysis, the data acquisition mode was set to acquire 1 full-scan spectra (350-1850 m/z). After survey scan, the 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for subsequent fragmentation. For collision-induced dissociation, normalized collision energy was set to 35%, q value to 0.25 and activation time to 10 ms. The isolation width was set to 1.5 and the dynamic exclusion to 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2009, 2011). Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database and a common contaminant database by the Andromeda search engine (built in MaxQuant) (Cox et al., 2011). The automatic decoy search option was enabled. Resulting peptide lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 1% and protein lists were filtered to an estimated FDR of 5%. Spectra were searched for a match to fully-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites. Search parameters were chosen as follows: Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification on all Cysteines. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of Methionines were considered as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, fragment ion mass tolerance for ion analysed spectra was set to 0.6 Da. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were enabled with default settings. Light and medium dimethyl labels (+28.0313 Da and +32.0564 Da respectively) were searched at Lysine residues and peptide N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Combination of CDK4/6 inhibitors and endocrine therapy improves clinical outcome in advanced oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer, however relapse is inevitable. Here, we show in model systems that other than loss of RB1 few gene-copy number (CN) alterations are associated with irreversible-resistance to endocrine therapy and subsequent secondary resistance to palbociclib. Resistance to palbociclib occurred as a result of tumour cell re-wiring leading to increased expression of EGFR, MAPK, CDK4, CDK2, CDK7, CCNE1 and CCNE2. Resistance altered the ER genome wide-binding pattern, leading to decreased expression of 'classical' oestrogen-regulated genes and was accompanied by reduced sensitivity to fulvestrant and tamoxifen. Persistent CDK4 blockade decreased phosphorylation of tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) enhancing EGFR signalling, leading to the re-wiring of ER. Kinome-knockdown confirmed dependency on ERBB-signalling and G2/M-checkpoint proteins such as WEE1, together with the cell cycle master regulator, CDK7. Noteworthy, sensitivity to CDK7 inhibition was associated with loss of ER and RB1 CN. Overall, we show that resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors is dependent on kinase re-wiring and the redeployment of signalling cascades previously associated with endocrine resistance and highlights new therapeutic networks that can be exploited upon relapse after CDK4/6 inhibition.

### Keywords
Resistance, Proteomics, Palbociclib, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research
BRFAA

### Submitter
Nikiana Simigdala

### Lab Head
Dr Lesley-Ann Martin
Breast Cancer Now The Institute of Cancer Research


