### Accession
PXD010626

### Title
Podocyte Focal Adhesion Proteome

### Description
Expression proteomics analysis of focal adhesion complexes isolated from a human immortalized podocyte cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of focal adhesion complexes was performed as previously described (Horton et al., 2015, Kuo et al., 2011). In brief, human immortalized podocytes were seeded to a 15 cm cell culture dish and grown on 33°C. Then podocytes were differentiated by incubation on 37°C for 10 days. Cells were incubated with the protein cross-linker DSP (3,3'-Dithiobis (sulfosuccinimidylpropionate); 100mM; Sigma-Aldrich) and DPPB (1,4-Bis[3-(2-pyridyldithio)propionamido]butane; 10mM; Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 minutes. Cross-linker treated cells were washed with PBS and cross-linkers were quenched using 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8, 10 min). Cell bodies were removed by hydrodynamic force by washing the cell culture dish using a waterpik (2x 10s; PBS). Proteins and focal adhesion complexes left bound to the ECM were recovered by scraping in 100 μl scraping buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 1% (w/v) SDS, 15% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol) and denatured at 70 °C for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software(1.4.1.2) was used for data search for identification and quantification of peptides and proteins (label-free). A full length UNIPROT human database (Sept. 2013) was used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Podocytes, highly specialized epithelial cells, build the outer part of the kidney filtration barrier and withstand high mechanical forces through a complex network of cellular protrusions. Here, we show that Arp2/3-dependent actin polymerization controls actomyosin contractility and focal adhesion maturation of podocyte protrusions and thereby regulates formation, maintenance, and capacity to adapt to mechanical requirements of the filtration barrier. We find that N-WASP-Arp2/3 define the development of complex arborized podocyte protrusions in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. Loss of dendritic actin networks results in a pronounced activation of the actomyosin cytoskeleton and the generation of over-maturated but less efficient adhesion, leading to detachment of podocytes. Our data provide a model to explain podocyte protrusion morphology and their mechanical stability based on a tripartite relationship between actin polymerization, contractility, and adhesion.

### Keywords
Human, Podocyte, Glomerulus, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Jörn Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


