### Accession
PXD001473

### Title
Brassinosteroid-Regulated Phosphorylation Dynamics in Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein phosphorylation regulated by plant hormone is involved in the coordination of fundamental plant development. Brassinosteroids (BRs), a group of phytohormones, regulated phosphorylation dynamics remains to be delineated in plants. In this study, we performed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics to conduct a global and dynamic phosphoproteome profiling across five time points of BR treatment in the period between 5 minutes and 12 hours. MS coupling with phosphopeptide enrichment techniques has become the powerful tool for profiling protein phosphorylation. However, MS-based methods tend to have data consistency and coverage issues. To address these issues, bioinformatics approaches were used to complement the non-detected proteins and recover the dynamics of phosphorylation events. A total of 1,104 unique phosphorylated peptides from 739 unique phosphoproteins were identified. The time-dependent gene ontology (GO) analysis shows the transition of biological processes from signaling transduction to morphogenesis and stress response. The protein-protein interaction analysis found most of identified phosphoproteins have strongly connections with known BR signaling components. The analysis by using Motif-X was performed to identify 15 enriched motifs, 11 of which correspond to 6 known kinase families. To uncover the dynamic activities of kinases, the enriched motifs were combined with phosphorylation profiles and revealed that the substrates of casein kinase 2 and mitogen-activated protein kinase were significantly phosphorylated and dephosphorylated at initial time of BR treatment, respectively. The time-dependent kinase-substrate interaction networks were constructed and showed many substrates are the downstream of other signalings, such as auxin and ABA signalings. Comparing BR responsive phosphoproteome and gene expression data, we found most of phosphorylation changes were not led by gene expression changes. Our results suggested BR signaling not only induces gene expression, but also change protein activation by phosphorylation via various kinases.  Through a large-scale dynamic profile of phosphoproteome coupling bioinformatics, a complicated kinase-centered network related to BR-regulated growth was deciphered. The phosphoproteins and phosphosites identified from our study provide a useful dataset for revealing signaling networks of BR regulation, and also expanded our knowledge of protein phosphorylation modification in plants as well as further deal to solve the plant growth problems.

### Sample Protocol
For hormone starvation of PSB-D cells, cultured medium in 7-day-old cultures was replaced with fresh medium and maintained for 48 h, and then 24-epibrassinolide (a highly active BR; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and DMSO (mock) were added to the medium. 24-epibrassinolide concentrations were 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, and 5 μM in the gene expression assay, and 5 μM in the phosphoproteome analysis. Treatment times were chosen as 3 h in the gene expression assay, and 5 min, 30 min, 3 h, 6 h, and 12 h in the phosphoproteome analysis. Cells (0.2 g, wet) were immediately washed with 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 5.7) and frozen in liquid nitrogen in preparation for further experiments. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Proteins were extracted by 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 8 M urea with protein phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Bioman, Taiwan) and protease inhibitors (BioShop, Canada). The protein extracts of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Wako, Japan) for 45 min at room temperature, and then carbamidomethylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, USA) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Alkylated proteins were diluted four times with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (Wako) for 2 h. Subsequently, sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Germany) was added for 16–18 h at room temperature. The digested peptides were acidified to a pH < 3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Acidified peptides were desalted using StageTips with SDB-XC Empore  disc  membranes  (SDB-XC StageTip)  (3M, Germany), and eluted in a buffer containing 0.1%  TFA and 80% acetonitrile. Dimethylation labeling 200 μg tryptic peptide of each sample were dried and re-dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB. Mock-treated samples were labeled with 4% formaldehyde-H2. BR-treated samples were labeled with formaldehyde-D2. And then, 6 μL of freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride was immediately added to sample solution. The solution was mixed for 60 min at room temperature, and then 1% ammonium hydroxide was added to stop the reaction. Formic acid was used to further stop the reaction and acidify the samples. Finally, the labeled samples were combined at a 1:1 ratio and desalted using SDB-XC StageTip. Phosphopeptide enrichment The phosphopeptide was enriched by HAMMOC as previously described. Custom HAMMOC tips were prepared by packing TiO2 beads (10 μm, GL Sciences, Japan) into C8 StageTips. Prior to sample loading, HAMMOC tips were equilibrated with solution A containing 0.1% TFA, 5% acetonitrile, and 300 mg/mL lactic acid. About 400 µg desalted peptide mixture was mixed with an equal volume of solution A and loaded onto the HAMMOC tips (100 µg mixed peptides per tip). After successive washing with solution A and solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile), the resulting phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5% and 5% piperidine (Wako). The eluent was acidified with TFA, desalted with the SDB-XC StageTip, and vacuum-dried. The phosphopeptides were re-suspended in 0.5% TFA and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis For mass spectrometry analysis, LC was performed on an Agilent 1100 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, USA) with a micro-T for flow splitting coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, USA) equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface (New Objective, USA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm × 250 mm fused silica capillary column packed in-house with C18 resin (5 μm, Nucleosil 120-5 C18; Macherey-Nagel, Germany), and were separated over 110 min using a linear gradient of 2%–50% solvent B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in positive ion mode and mass spectra from full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap analyzer (m/z 350–1600) with resolution set to R = 30,000 (at m/z 400). The ten most intense peptide ions were selected from the MS scan and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation for MS/MS scan in the LTQ analyzer. All Orbitrap measurements were performed with the “lock mass” option to improve mass accuracy of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and database search Raw spectrum files were processed for phosphopeptide identification and phosphosite quantification with MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 (http://maxquant.org/). Peptide identification was performed using Andromeda search engine against the Arabidopsis TAIR10 database (http://www.arabidopsis.org/; version pep_20101214). Search criteria were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl, variable modifications of oxidation and phosphorylation, and two allowed missed cleavages. A minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 6 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance at 0.5 Da. A target-decoy search strategy was used in this study. Protein, peptide, and site identification were accepted on the basis of posterior error probability with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Precursors of already identified peptides were further searched using the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant, which matches precursor masses in a 2 min retention time window. The localization probability of all putative phosphorylation sites was determined using the MaxQuant post-translational modification score algorithm. Proteins were counted separately if a peptide matched to multiple proteins in the database search. Identified phosphorylation sites were grouped into three classes based on the localization probability of phosphorylation: class I (p > 0.75), class II (0.5 < p < 0.75), and class III (p < 0.5). Class I sites were considered as conﬁdent assignments and used for all analyses in the study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brassinosteroid, Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University
ntu

### Submitter
Li-Ling Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University


