### Accession
PXD001274

### Title
Comparison of ribosomes between control and dyskerin-depleted human cells

### Description
Dyskerin is a pseudouridine synthase involved in fundamental cellular processes  (including rRNA and snRNA modification and telomere stabilization), whose function is altered in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita and cancer. Dyskerin role in ribosome processing was suggested to underlie the alterations in mRNA translation described in cells lacking dyskerin function. We compared the protein contents of 5 replicates of ribosomal preparations from control or dyskerin-depleted human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosomes were extracted from human MCF7 cells, in which dyskerin expression was inhibited (n=5) or not (n=5). Proteins from enriched ribosomes were solubilized in Laemmli buffer before stacking of proteins in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Life Techologies) and R-250 Coomassie blue staining. The gel bands were manually excised and proteins in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides from each sample were analysed in duplicates by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 LC (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro (ThermoFisher). Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxQuant software.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, August 2013 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Dyskerin is a pseudouridine (&#x3c8;) synthase involved in fundamental cellular processes including uridine modification in rRNA and small nuclear RNA and telomere stabilization. Dyskerin functions are altered in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita (X-DC) and cancer. Dyskerin's role in rRNA pseudouridylation has been suggested to underlie the alterations in mRNA translation described in cells lacking dyskerin function, although relevant direct evidences are currently lacking. Our purpose was to establish definitely whether defective dyskerin function might determine an intrinsic ribosomal defect leading to an altered synthetic activity. Therefore, ribosomes from dyskerin-depleted human cells were purified and 1) added to a controlled reticulocyte cell-free system devoid of ribosomes to study mRNA translation; 2) analyzed for protein contamination and composition by mass spectrometry, 3) analyzed for global pseudouridylation levels. Ribosomes purified from dyskerin-depleted cells showed altered translational fidelity and internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-mediated translation. These ribosomes displayed reduced uridine modification, whereas they were not different in terms of protein contamination or ribosomal protein composition with respect to ribosomes from matched control cells with full dyskerin activity. In conclusion, lack of dyskerin function in human cells induces a defect in rRNA uridine modification, which is sufficient to alter ribosome activity.

### Keywords
Translation ; ribosomes ; dyskerin ; nanolc-ms/ms ; label-free quantification

### Affiliations
EDyP
EDyP team, Large Scale Biology Department, iRTSV CEA - Inserm - UJF Grenoble, France

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP team, Large Scale Biology Department, iRTSV CEA - Inserm - UJF Grenoble, France


