### Accession
PXD040377

### Title
Phospho-mimics-ME2-affinity-purified mass spectrometry analysis

### Description
This project aims to identify ME2 interaction proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with 3’Flag tagged phosphomimic ME2c with Lipofectamine 2000. 36 h after transfection, cells were lysed with IP lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 Affinity gel. The immunoprecipitants were eluted and separated using SDS-PAGE gel and stained by Coomassie blue.

### Data Protocol
Gel bands of interest were excised and digested in gel with modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 30 min. The extracts were centrifuged and dried in a speedVac system. Peptides extracted were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by a high-sensitivity LC–MS/MS with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins identification results were analyzed by searching the fragment spectra against the UniProt protein database (EMBL-EBI)using the Mascot search engine (v.2.3; Matrix Science) with the Proteome Discoverer software program (v.1.4; ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Purified, Me2, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
School of Lifesciences, Tsinghua Univesity, Beijing, China
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Taiqi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Jiang
School of Lifesciences, Tsinghua Univesity, Beijing, China


