### Accession
PXD031016

### Title
Isoform-dependent lysosomal degradation and internalization of Apolipoprotein E requires autophagy proteins

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and lysosomal dysfunction has been implicated in AD pathogenesis. We found, by examining cells stably expressing each APOE isoform, that APOE4 increases lysosomal trafficking, accumulates in enlarged lysosomes and late endosomes, alters autophagic flux and the abundance of autophagy proteins and lipid droplets, and alters the proteomic contents of lysosomes following internalization. We investigated APOE-related lysosomal trafficking further in cell culture, and found that APOE from the post-Golgi compartment is degraded through autophagy. We found that this autophagic process requires the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP2 in immortalized neuron-like and hepatic cells, and in mouse brain tissue. Several macroautophagy-associated proteins were also required for autophagic degradation and internalization of APOE in hepatic cells. The dysregulated autophagic flux and lysosomal trafficking of APOE4 that we observed suggest a possible novel mechanism that might contribute to AD pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown eluates were cleaned up by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Pellets were resuspended in 50mM 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)., then reduced with the addition of 1 μL of 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. Following, 3 µL of 500 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) was added to each sample. Samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 1 hour. 500 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added to the samples, along with 2 µL (400 ng) of trypsin/lysC mix (Promega, Madison, WI). Samples were digested at 37°C overnight (16 hours). Sample peptide quantities were measured using a colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific), and volumes for 4 µg were loaded onto the nano-LC-MS system for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Results were searched individually in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt FASTA database for Homo sapiens (UP000005640). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl (Cys +57.021 Da) and dynamic modifications included phospho (Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine +79.966 Da), methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da). Results were filtered to a strict 1% false discovery rate. Samples were compared by label-free quantitation, normalizing to total peptide amount. For abundance ratios between replicate groups, p-values calculated by individual protein ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
The human apolipoprotein E4 isoform (APOE4) is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD), and lysosomal dysfunction has been implicated in AD pathogenesis. We found, by examining cells stably expressing each APOE isoform, that APOE4 increases lysosomal trafficking, accumulates in enlarged lysosomes and late endosomes, alters autophagic flux and the abundance of autophagy proteins and lipid droplets, and alters the proteomic contents of lysosomes following internalization. We investigated APOE-related lysosomal trafficking further in cell culture, and found that APOE from the post-Golgi compartment is degraded through autophagy. We found that this autophagic process requires the lysosomal membrane protein LAMP2 in immortalized neuron-like and hepatic cells, and in mouse brain tissue. Several macroautophagy-associated proteins were also required for autophagic degradation and internalization of APOE in hepatic cells. The dysregulated autophagic flux and lysosomal trafficking of APOE4 that we observed suggest a possible novel mechanism that might contribute to AD pathogenesis. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Alzheimers apoe apoe4 chaperone-mediated autophagy lc3

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of CA, Irvine, 
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior  University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Joan Steffan

### Lab Head
Dr Joan Steffan
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior  University of California, Irvine


