### Accession
PXD037565

### Title
Polyethylene terephthalate and its monomers degradation by Ideonella sakaiensis (secreted)

### Description
Synthetic plastics, like polyethylene terephthalate (PET), have become an essential part of modern life. Many of these products are remarkably persistent in the environment, and the accumulation in the environment is recognised as a major threat. Therefore, an increasing interest has been paid to screen for organisms able to degrade and assimilate the plastic. Ideonella sakaiensis was isolated from a plastisphere, a bacterium that solely was thriving on the degradation on PET films. The processes affected by the presence of PET, terephthalic acid, ethylene glycol, ethyl glycolate, and sodium glyoxylate monohydrate was elucidated by differential proteomes. The exposure of PET and its monomers seem to affect two major pathways, the TCA cycle and the β-oxidation pathway, since multiple of the conditions resulted in an increased expression of proteins directly or indirectly involved in these pathways, underlying the importance in the degradation of PET by I. sakaiensis.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were precipitated by trichloroacetic acid, followed by an in solution digestion using trypsin, and a desalting using modified stage TIP protocol was applied to all samples. Tryptic peptides were analysed by an automated LC–ESI–MS/MS. A top 20 method was used to acquire the MS data, an MS1 with an injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 60,000, an MS2 with an injection time of 45 ms and resolution of 15,000, using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and the normalised collision energy was set to 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analysed with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43), using standard settings and applying the label-free quantification (LFQ) feature. Data were cross-referenced with a downloaded proteome of I. sakaiensis (UP000037660), downloaded from UniProt (accessed 22nd of June).

### Publication Abstract
Synthetic plastics, like polyethylene terephthalate (PET), have become an essential part of modern life. Many of these products are remarkably persistent in the environment, and the accumulation in the environment is recognised as a major threat. Therefore, an increasing interest has been focusing on the screening for organisms able to degrade and assimilate the plastic. Ideonella sakaiensis originally isolated from a plastisphere has been reported as a bacterium that was solely thriving on the degradation on PET films. The processes affected by the presence of PET and its monomeric substances terephthalic acid, ethylene glycol, ethyl glycolate, and sodium glyoxylate monohydrate were elucidated by analysis of differential protein expression. The exposure of PET and its monomers induced the MHETase and affect two major pathways: the TCA cycle and the &#x3b2;-oxidation pathway. The increased expression of proteins directly or indirectly involved in these pathways suggests their underlying importance in the degradation of PET by I. sakaiensis since these proteins are mechanistically supporting the enzymes involved in the degradation of PET and its monomers.

### Keywords
Ideonella sakaiensis, Ethylene glycol, Plastic degrader, Proteomics, Polyhydroxyalkanoate, Terephthalic acid, Polyethylene terephthalate, Β-oxidation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark


