### Accession
PXD035693

### Title
A proteomic view of  WT and △ydiV(stm1344) Salmonella Typhimurium in simulated host environment medium

### Description
The flagellum provides essential motility in the pathogenic process of Salmonella host invasion. However, flagellin is strongly antigenic and can be recognized by TLR5, resulting in activation of the host immune system to clear the invading pathogen. The presence of flagella also disrupts the integrity of the bacterial cytosol, making it more vulnerable to external adversities. Salmonella must rapidly shut down the flagella synthesis system after entering the host cell to evade the host immune system and resist damage from external adverse factors. Our studies showed YdiV(STM1344) play a key role in regulating the transcription of flagella-related genes during Salmonella invasion. After the ydiV(stm1344) gene was knocked out, the pathogenicity of Salmonella was significantly reduced. Here, we performed a TMT-based comparative quantitative proteomics analysis to reveal the proteomic differences between the WT and △ydiV(stm1344) in simulated host environment medium.

### Sample Protocol
All bacterial strains were maintained at −80°C in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth supplemented with 25% (v/v) glycerol. A single colony was inoculated into 10 mL LB medium with and grown overnight at 37 °C with shaking.  The overnight culture was then subcultured (diluted 1:100 into 10 mL of LB medium) until the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) reached approximately 0.5. For iron deficiency, Salmonella typhimurium (wild-type and △ydiV) were inoculated 600 μM bipyridine for 3h. Cells were collected and washed twice using PBS to remove ions from the medium. After 12,000×g,10 min, 4 °C centrifugation, the protein concentrations of supernatant samples were measured. Dithiothreitol (Sigma)was added to these samples at 5 mM and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma) was then added at 11 mM and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. TEAB (Sigma) was added to dilute samples. Samples were then digested by trypsin (Promega) at 50:1 (protein trypsin)mass ratio overnight and 100:1 for 4 h. Subsequently, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and vacuumdried. The peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled based on the TMT kit (Thermo) instructions. TMT reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical) and added to peptides incubating for 2 h. Each individual subject was labeled with a unique reporter. Then the mixtures were pooled, desalted, and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins were identified using 1.3-fold change and the Wilcoxon-test p < 0.05 threshold. Subsequently, multiple bioinformatics tools were performed to analyze these proteins. UniProt-GOA was used to generate Gene Ontology (GO) annotation. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to analyze enriched pathways. For GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, WT proteins was applied to test differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. STRING database(v.10.5) was used for constructing protein–protein interaction(PPI) network. The minimum interaction score was 0.400 and the k-means clustering was applied. Further, Cytoscape(v.3.6.0) software was applied to visualize the network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Differential protein expression; simulated host environment medium; wt and △ydiv

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Rare and Uncommon Diseases, Department of Microbiology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Haihong Jia

### Lab Head
Dr Bingqing Li, Yingying Yue, Haihong Jia
Key Laboratory of Rare and Uncommon Diseases, Department of Microbiology, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences


