### Accession
PXD020841

### Title
Proteomics sequencing analysis revealed the pathogenesis of arterial dissection caused by hypertension

### Description
Aortic dissection (AD) is a devastating disease with rapid progression and high mortality, and hypertension is a leading cause for AD. The aim of this study was to compare the protein expression profiles of aortas from patients with and without AD, screen vital proteins and explore their potential roles to grasp a further understanding of the pathogenesis mechanism of AD. The results of Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) sequencing revealed the different protein expression profiles between AD and control groups. 131 proteins were significantly upregulated and 239 proteins were prominently downregulated in AD. Upon further enrichment analysis of differential proteins, we found that 5 signaling pathways changed significantly in AD such as glycolysis, ECM and the other three pathways. Moreover, PPI networks were constructed to locate nodal proteins that may be essential points for AD. Our observation demonstrates for the first time that the protein expression in AD was notably changed compared to the control. Our results present evidences that glycolysis and ECM signaling pathway may present a promising approach for the etiology of AD.

### Sample Protocol
The collected vascular tissues of AD patients were pulverized in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in an appropriate amount of protein lysates added. Sonicated the mixture on ice for 5 minutes to fully lyse. Centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C, took the supernatant, added 10 mM DTT at final concentration and reacted for 1 hour at 56°. Then added enough IAM and reacted at room temperature for 1hour in the dark. Pre-cooled acetone of 4 times volume at -20°C was added to precipitation at least 2 hour at -20°C, and centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C to collect the precipitation. After that, 1 ml pre-cooled acetone at -20°C was added to resuscitate and clean the precipitation. The precipitation was collected and dried by centrifugation at 4°C and 12000 g for 15 min. An appropriate amount of proteolysis solution (6 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, PH = 8.5) was added to dissolve the precipitate. The Bradford protein quantification kit was used to prepare a BSA standard protein solution, with a concentration gradient ranging from 0 - 0.5 μg·μL-1. BSA standard protein solution with different concentration gradients and solution with different dilution ratios were added into 96-well plates, and the volume was supplemented to 20 μL. Each gradient was repeated 3 times. 180 μL G250 staining solution was rapidly added and placed at room temperature for 5 min. Measure the absorbance of samples at 595 nm. Draw a standard curve with the absorbance of the standard protein solution and calculate the protein concentration of the test samples. 20μg protein samples were taken for 12% SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis, in which the conditions of concentrated gel electrophoresis were 80 V for 20 min, and the conditions of separation gel electrophoresis were 120 V for 90 min. After electrophoresis, we stained coomassie brilliant blue R-250 until the strip was clear. TMT - labeled mass - spectrometry  Took 120 μg of each protein sample, added protein solubilizing solution to make up the volume to 100 μL, added 3 μL of 1 μg · μL-1 trypsin and 500 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, mix and digest at 37 ° C overnight. Added equal volume of 1% formic acid, mixed and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. Took the supernatant and slowly passed it through the C18 desalting column, and then used 1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) for 3 consecutive times. Another 0.4 mL of eluent (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile) was added for consecutive elution for 2 times. The eluent sample was lyophilized after combined. Added 100 μL of 0.1 M TEAB buffer to re-dissolve, and another 41 μL of acetonitrile-dissolved TMT labeling reagent to be a mixture. The mixture was reacted by inversion at room temperature for 2 hours. After that, added the final concentration of 8% ammonia water to terminate the reaction and mix it with the equal volume of the labeled sample. Lyophilized them after desalination. Fraction separation We aimed to prepare the mobile phases include solution A (2% acetonitrile, 98% water, ammonia water adjusted to pH = 10) and solution B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, ammonia water adjusted to pH = 10). Dissolved and mixed lyophilized powder with solution A, and centrifuge at 12000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The system (L-3000 HPLC) and chromatographic column (Waters BEH C18, 4.6 x 250 mm,5 μm) were used. The column temperature was set to 50°C. Collected 1 tube every minute, combined into 10 fractions, and added 0.1% formic acid to dissolve each after lyophilization. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS)     Prepared the mobile phases include solution A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and solution B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 1μg of each supernatant was injected for LC / MS detection. Upgrade UHPLC system with the EASY-nLCTM 1200 system was used in this study. The pre-column (2 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm) and the analytical column (15 cm × 150 μm, 1.9 μm) were both self-made. The Q ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer and Nanospray Flex™ (ESI) ion source were used. The ion spray voltage was set to 2.3 kV and the ion transmission tube temperature was 320°C. The mass spectrometer adopted data-dependent acquisition mode, and the full spectrum scan range was m·z-1 350 - 1500. The first-order mass spectrometry resolution is set to 60,000 (200 m·z-1), C-trap maximum capacity is 3 × 106 and C-trap maximum injection time is 20 ms; select precursor ion of TOP 20 in full scan fragmentation using high energy collision cracking (HCD) method for secondary mass spectrometry detection. The resolution of the 6 standard secondary mass spectrometry was set to 15000 (200 m·z-1) (10 standard 45000, 200 m·z-1). The maximum C-trap capacity was 5 × 104, C-trap maximum injection time was 45 ms, peptide fragmentation collision energy is set to 32%, threshold intensity is set to 1.9 × 105 and dynamic exclusion range is set to 20 s. According to these sets, the generated mass spectrome

### Data Protocol
Protein functional annotation The analysis of GO functional significance enrichment showed the significantly enriched GO functional items in the differential proteins compared to all the identified protein backgrounds, thus indicating which biological functions were strongly correlated with the differential proteins. The analysis first mapped all the differential proteins to each term of the Gene Ontology database. Calculated the amount of proteins in each item and applied a hypergeometric test to find out the significantly enriched GO items in differential proteins compared with the background of all protein. The significant enrichment analysis method of KEGG Pathway was similar to the GO functional enrichment analysis. It was based on KEGG Pathway, and applied hypergeometric test to identify pathways that were significantly enriched in differential proteins compared with all identified protein backgrounds. It can be confirmed that the most important biochemical metabolic pathways and signal transduction pathways involved in differential proteins can be ascertain by Pathway significant enrichment. Finally, the statistical significance test FDR < 0.05 was used to determine the significantly rich KEGG pathways and GO thresholds associated with DEP. Protein-protein interaction Information on PPI of DEP in each selected KEGG pathway was obtained using the STRING database for interaction genes. Then, used Cytoscape software (version 3.5.1) to build the PPI network which can suggest key proteins involved in AD disease. Western Blot Extracted total protein of vascular tissues from patients. Protein samples were separated on a 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel and electro-transferred onto a PVDF membrane. After blocking with 5% skim milk for 2 hours, the membrane was incubated with the primary protein primary antibody and reacted at 4°C overnight. Then incubate the corresponding secondary antibody and react for 2 h at room temperature. The membrane was reacted with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagent (Thermo, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 5 minutes. Exposure detection was performed by EG instrument, and β-actin was used as a control for relative optical density analysis. Data analysis All data are expressed as mean (± SEM). Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA) software. The student t analysis was performed to compare the mean values and analyzed the results of two groups in western blotting. Followed by the analysis of variance. Two-tailed values P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aortic dissection; proteomics; signaling pathway; glycolysis; extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
1 Department of Cardiac Surgery, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China 2 Department of Toxicology, Fujian Center for Evaluation of New Drug, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China
Fujian Medical University

### Submitter
Xi Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-mei Li
1 Department of Cardiac Surgery, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China 2 Department of Toxicology, Fujian Center for Evaluation of New Drug, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China


