### Accession
PXD020648

### Title
HepG2 secretome tagged with the sugar analogs GalNAz and GalNAzMe

### Description
Chemically modified analogs of GalNAc, termed GalNAz or GalNAzMe, were incorporated in secreted glycoproteins. The compounds contain bioorthogonal, clickable functional groups that allowed for enrichment using biotin. Chemical glycoproteomics was performed after on-bead digestion and cleavage of glycopeptides from the solid support.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned supernatant from HepG2 cells fed with GalNAz or GAlNAzMe precursors was cconcentrated to 2 mL (3 kDa MWCO). Samples were treated with PNGase F (Promega, 5 μL of a 1:10 dilution in PBS) and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Then, azide-containing reaction mixtures were sequentially treated with 1200 μM BTTAA (stock solution 50 mM in 9:1 DMSO : water), 600 μM CuSO4 (stock solution 20 mM in water), 5 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM aminoguanidine chloride, and 100 μM DADPS Biotin Alkyne (Click Chemistry Tools, stock solution 10 mM in DMSO) for 3 h at r.t. Then, samples were transferred into 15 mL Falcon tubes and treated with 10 mL ice-cold methanol. Samples were left at -80 °C overnight, centrifuged at 3700 x g, 4 °C, 20 min. Supernatant was discarded, and pellets were washed with 5 mL methanol twice, with centrifugation each time. Supernatant was completely removed by air-drying, and samples were treated with 250 μL 0.1% RapiGest in PBS. Samples were sonicated (water bath) for 25 min, then centrifuged at 3700 x g for 5 min. Supernatant was saved, pellets were treated with 250 μL 6 M urea in PBS, sonicated and centrifuged, and supernatant was saved. The pellets were treated with 250 μL of PBS, sonicated and centrifuged again. RapiGest, urea and PBS supernatants were combined, and samples were diluted with PBS to 2 mL. Dimethylated Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Neutravidin Magnetic Beads (150 μL slurry = 75 μL settled resin) were washed with PBS twice in LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and added to the lysate (25, 26). Samples were incubated for 16 h at 4 °C. The beads were harvested and the supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed sequentially with 1% RapiGest in PBS (3x), 6 M urea in PBS (3x), and PBS (2x), and resuspended in PBS (200 μL). Beads were treated with 100 mM DTT in PBS (10 μL), and shaken for 30 min, at room temperature, 950 rpm. Then, 500 mM iodoacetamide in PBS (4 μL) was added and samples were shaken for another 30 min in the dark. Beads were harvested and washed with PBS and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in LC/MS-grade water (3x, “ABC buffer”). Beads were resuspended in ABC buffer (200 μL), treated with RapiGest to a final concentration of 0.05% (v/v), and LysC was added (500 ng in 3 μL of ABC buffer). Samples were shaken at 37 °C for 2-3 h, and another 500 ng LysC was added. The reactions were shaken overnight at 37 °C. The beads were harvested, washed with ABC (200 μL) and with LC-MS grade water (3x200 μL). Supernatants and washes were combined and centrifuged (18000 x g, 5 min, RT) and concentrated by SpeedVac which formed the peptide fraction to be analysed by mass spectrometry. Then, beads were treated with 150 μL of 0.1% aq. formic acid (FA, Optima grade, Thermo Fisher) and shaken for 30 min, at room temperature, 950 rpm. This step was repeated, beads were washed with 100 μL of water, all washes were combined and centrifuged (18000 x g, 5 min, room temperature), and finally concentrated by SpeedVac. Remaining beads were treated with 2% FA and subjected to the same washes as above. All samples were then resuspended with 25 ng trypsin in 100 μL of 50 mM ABC buffer and incubated for 6 h at 37 °C, 450 rpm. Samples were then dried by SpeedVac and desalted by Strata-X columns using 0.1% aq. FA as washing solution and 80% MeCN/water with 0.1% FA (v/v) as elution buffer. The eluted samples dried by SpeedVac, desalted and analyzed by LCMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific). HCD was run, and glycan-specific masses used to trigger ETD.

### Data Protocol
MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000 FWHM m/z 200, following HCD fragmentation with fixed collision energy of 28% after quadrupole isolation with an isolation window width of 2 m/z. The parameters used for the HCD MS2 scan were first mass 100 m/z, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 54 ms and the scan data was acquired in centroid mode. ETD fragmentation was only performed if precursors were within the precursor selection range m/z 300-1000 and if 2 of the following list of mass trigger ions were present in the HCD MS2 spectra +/- 0.1 m/z and above the relative intensity threshold of 10% (126.055, 138.0549, 144.0655, 168.0654, 186.076, 204.0855, 274.0921, 292.1027, 343.1617, 329.1461 m/z). ETD MS2 scans were recorded in the ion trap with rapid scan rate following quadrupole isolation with an isolation window width of 3 m/z. ETD activation used calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters, the automatic scan range mode was used with the first mass set to 100 m/z and parameters were set for the AGC target 1e4, maximum injection time 100 ms and scan data acquired in centroid mode. Data evaluation was performed with ByonicTM (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, USA). Data files were first searched against the Uniprot human proteome (downloaded June 26, 2016). Search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 Da for HCD MS2s, and 0.35 Da for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-term acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 3, rare max of 1. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR. Additionally, a cut-off value of Log Prob = 5 was set for any further analysis. Proteins that were found in these searches were entered into a “focused database” for glycopeptide searches. Then, the raw files were searched against these “focused databases” containing only those proteins found in the corresponding peptide samples. Search parameters for the glycopeptide analysis included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 0.1 Da for HCD MS2s, and 0.35 Da for ETD MS2s. Methionine oxidation (common 2), asparagine deamidation (common 2), and N-term acetylation (rare 1) were set as variable modifications with a total common max of 2, rare max of 1. O-glycans were also set as variable modifications (common 2), using a custom database, whereby HexNAc, HexNAc-NeuAc, HexNAc-Hex, HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc, and HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc2 were searched with an additional 139.0746 (GalNAzMe) or 125.0589 (GalNAz) to account for the chemical modifications. HCD was used to confirm that the peptides were glycosylated, as the modified sugars have signature ions present at 343.1617/325.1506 m/z (GalNAzMe) or 329.1461/311.1435 m/z (GalNAz). Following confirmation, ETD spectra were used for site-localisation of glycosylation sites. All spectra with these modifications were manually annotated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Mucin, Bioorthogonal, Glycosylation, Biotin, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute


