### Accession
PXD012715

### Title
BRD4 IP MS in leukemia -  MTHFD1 interaction with BRD4 links folate metabolism to transcriptional regulation

### Description
The histone acetyl-reader BRD4 is an important regulator of chromatin structure and transcription, yet factors modulating its activity have remained elusive. Here we describe two complementary screens for genetic and physical interactors of BRD4, which converge on the folate pathway enzyme MTHFD1. We show that a fraction of MTHFD1 resides in the nucleus, where it is recruited to distinct genomic loci by direct interaction with BRD4. Inhibition of either BRD4 or MTHFD1 results in similar changes in nuclear metabolite composition and gene expression, and pharmacologic inhibitors of the two pathways synergize to impair cancer cell viability in vitro and in vivo. Our finding that MTHFD1 and other metabolic enzymes are chromatin-associated suggests a direct role for nuclear metabolism in the control of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of nuclear cell extracts for proteomics  Nuclear extract was produced from fresh cells grown at 5 millions of cells/mL. Cells were collected by centrifugation, washed with PBS and resuspended in hypotonic buffer A (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche)). After ca. 3 minutes, cells were spun down and resuspended in buffer A and homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation in a microfuge for 10 minutes at 3300 rpm, washed with buffer A and homogenized in one volume of extraction buffer B (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 20 % glycerol, 420 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM DTT, 400 Units/ml DNase I, and protease inhibitor cocktail). Extraction was allowed to proceed under agitation for 30 minutes at 4 °C before the extract was clarified by centrifugation at 13000g. The extract was diluted 3:1 in buffer D (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4 (RT), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 0.6% NP40, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail), centrifuged again, and aliquots were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at ‐80°C.  Immunopurification (IP­MS) and nanoLC-MS analysis  Anti‐BRD4 (A301‐985A, Bethyl Labs) antibody (50 µg) was coupled to 100 µl AminoLink resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell lysate samples (5 mg) were incubated with prewashed immuno-resin on a shaker for 2 hours at 4 °C. Beads were washed in lysis buffer containing 0.4% Igepal-CA630 and lysis buffer without detergent followed by two washing steps with 150 mM NaCl. Samples were processed by on-bead digest with Lys-C and Glycine protease before they were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin.  The hereby generated peptides were measured on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark).  The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 350-1650, nominal resolution of 70 000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy 30%, isolation width of 2 and the target value was set to 5E4. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 s. Additionally, the underfill ratio was set to 20% resulting in an intensity threshold of 2E4. The peptide match feature and the exclude isotopes feature were enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the .RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot 2.2.07 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the human swissprot protein sequence database. The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic peptides. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±30 mmu. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. For calculation of protein areas Event Detector node and Precursor Ions Area Detector node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer, were used. The result was filtered to 1% FDR using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer.  Additional data processing of the triplicate runs including label-free quantification was performed in MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine applying the same search parameters as for Mascot database search. For subsequent statistical analysis Perseus software platform was used to create volcano plots, heat maps and hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
The histone acetyl reader bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is an important regulator of chromatin structure and transcription, yet factors modulating its activity have remained elusive. Here we describe two complementary screens for genetic and physical interactors of BRD4, which converge on the folate pathway enzyme MTHFD1 (methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, cyclohydrolase and formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase 1). We show that a fraction of MTHFD1 resides in the nucleus, where it is recruited to distinct genomic loci by direct interaction with BRD4. Inhibition of either BRD4 or MTHFD1 results in similar changes in nuclear metabolite composition and gene expression; pharmacological inhibitors of the two pathways synergize to impair cancer cell viability in vitro and in vivo. Our finding that MTHFD1 and other metabolic enzymes are chromatin associated suggests a direct role for nuclear metabolism in the control of gene expression.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Mthfd1, Complex, Brd4

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria


