### Accession
PXD002793

### Title
Tumor selective proteotoxicity of verteporfin inhibits colon cancer progression independent of YAP1

### Description
Verteporfin (VP) inhibts colon cancer growth in vivo and in cell lines by inducing high molecular weight oligomerization of proteins. The antitumor effect of VP is independent of its YAP inhibitor activity. Tumor hypoxia contributes partly to antitumor effect of VP by impairing clearance of VP-induced high molecular weight aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
VP-treated HCT-116 and SW480 cells were resolved on a SDS-PAGE and the proteins that are above 100KDa were sequenced using Mass-Spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec data were searched against Uniprot human protein data base using Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4) with the following search parameters:  Precursor and product ion tolerance window was set at 10 ppm and 0.8 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was considered a fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and ubiquitination of lysines were considered as dynamic modifications.  Percolator was used to filter the data at <1% False discovery rate. Proteins that are smaller than 60 KDa but identified in both cell lines by Mass spec were determined as protein oligomers.

### Publication Abstract
Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) is a transcriptional coactivator in the Hippo signaling pathway. Increased YAP1 activity promotes the growth of tumors, including that of colorectal cancer (CRC). Verteporfin, a drug that enhances phototherapy to treat neovascular macular degeneration, is an inhibitor of YAP1. We found that verteporfin inhibited tumor growth independently of its effects on YAP1 or the related protein TAZ in genetically or chemically induced mouse models of CRC, in patient-derived xenografts, and in enteroid models of CRC. Instead, verteporfin exhibited in vivo selectivity for killing tumor cells in part by impairing the global clearance of high-molecular weight oligomerized proteins, particularly p62 (a sequestrome involved in autophagy) and STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; a transcription factor). Verteporfin inhibited cytokine-induced STAT3 activity and cell proliferation and reduced the viability of cultured CRC cells. Although verteporfin accumulated to a greater extent in normal cells than in tumor cells in vivo, experiments with cultured cells indicated that the normal cells efficiently cleared verteporfin-induced protein oligomers through autophagic and proteasomal pathways. Culturing CRC cells under hypoxic or nutrient-deprived conditions (modeling a typical CRC microenvironment) impaired the clearance of protein oligomers and resulted in cell death, whereas culturing cells under normoxic or glucose-replete conditions protected cell viability and proliferation in the presence of verteporfin. Furthermore, verteporfin suppressed the proliferation of other cancer cell lines even in the absence of YAP1, suggesting that verteporfin may be effective against multiple types of solid cancers.

### Keywords
Human colon derived cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Associate Professor Molecular and Integrative physiology University of Michigan Ann Arbor MI 48109 USA

### Submitter
Sadeesh Ramakrishnan

### Lab Head
Dr Yatrik M. Shah
Associate Professor Molecular and Integrative physiology University of Michigan Ann Arbor MI 48109 USA


