### Accession
PXD012051

### Title
Candida utilis as a protein source for Atlantic salmon

### Description
Single cell proteins, such as Candida utilis, are known to have immunomodulating effects in the distal intestine (DI) of Atlantic salmon, whereas soybean meal (SBM) can cause soybean meal induce enteritis (SBMIE). Inflammatory or immunomodulatory stimuli at the local level in the intestine may alter the plasma protein profile of Atlantic salmon. These changes can be helpful tools in diagnosis for fish diseases and indicators for fish health. The present work aimed to identify local intestinal tissue responses and changes in plasma protein profiles of Atlantic salmon fed C. utilis yeast, SBM, or combined diets. Fish meal (FM) based diet was used as a control diet and the six experimental diets were: FM diet with 200 g/kg C. utilis  (FM200CU) and five diets containing 200 g/kg SBM together with 0 (SBM group), 25, 50, 100 or 200 g/kg C. utilis (SBM25CU, SBM50CU, SBM100CU and SBM200CU groups, respectively). Intestine morphology of fish fed FM200CU where not affected whereas SBM group presented changes characteristic of  SBMIE. Low inclusion of C. utilis in SBM diet showed a modulation of immune cell populations, but did not alleviate inflammatory symptom.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using four biological replicates per treatment of plasma taken at the end of the first feeding period (30 days) (FM (D1), SBM (D2), SBM200CU (D6) and FM200CU (D7),) . Frozen plasma (−80 ◦C) were thawed and diluted to 40 µg of total protein in PBS, and the pH was adjusted to 8 by adding ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were then subjected to overnight incubation at 37◦C. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile and 5 µL analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-UHPLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile.  An Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length) (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used. A ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with a solvent gradient of 4–35% Ain 100 min, to 50% A in 20 min and then to 80% A in 3 min.. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400 to 2000) were acquired with the resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 after accumulation to a target of 105 charges. The maximum allowed ion accumulation  were 60 ms. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to the ten most intense ions, depending on signal intensity (intensity threshold 1.74), for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional induced dissociation (HCD) at a target value of 105 charges, NCE 28, and a resolution R = 17,500. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. The isolation window was m/z = 2 without offset. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode. The proteomic analysis was performed by the Proteomic core facility of University of Oslo.

### Data Protocol
Row-wise normalization was applied to provide Gaussian-like distributions for adjusting the differences among protein data. Further, data transformation and scaling are two different approaches to make protein data more comparable. Protein raw data transferred to log normalization and then performed on autoscaled data (mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable). After autoscaling normalization, box plots have nearly same mean, standard deviation, and their distribution better matches a Gaussian curve. Venn diagram was performed to classify the proteins that are uniquely present in one diet and between several combinations of diets. Univariate ANOVA analyses followed by Fisher’s least significant difference method (Fisher’s LSD). Spearman's correlation analysis, multivatiate statistical analysis and data modeling were performed in R, using R package MetaboAnalystR. A series of principal component analysis (PCA) analysis was performed using the prcomp package in R. PCA was used as an unsupervised method in order to find the directions of maximum covariance among FM, FM200CU, SBM and SBM200CU diets. In addition, a series of Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) regression was performed using the plsr function provided by R pls package. The classiﬁcation and cross-validation were performed using the corresponding wrapper function by the caret package in R. Briefly, to define the optimal number of PCs (principal components), “7-fold cross-validation” (CV) was applied. Using CV, the predictive power of the model was verified. Two parameters were calculated for evaluating the models: R2 (goodness of fit) and Q2 (goodness of prediction). A model with Q2>0.5 was considered good, Q2>0.9 excellent. As cross-validation only assesses the predictive power without a statistical validation, the performance of PLS-DA models was also validated by a permutation test (200 times). To help interpretation of results from PLS-DA, we considered the variable importance in the projection (VIP) scores. This allowed visualization of protein influence (including prediction performance) on the model and identified the best descriptors of the differences among the four conditions. The VIP score is a weighted sum of squares of the PLS loading weights taking into account the amount of explained Y-variation in each dimension. VIP scores “greater than 1” rule is generally used as a criterion to identify the most significant variables. Then, the PCA and PLS-DA analyses were re-run only with VIP proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Microbial ingredients such as Candida utilis yeast are known to be functional protein sources with immunomodulating effects whereas soybean meal causes soybean meal-induced enteritis in the distal intestine of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Inflammatory or immunomodulatory stimuli at the local level in the intestine may alter the plasma proteome profile of Atlantic salmon. These deviations can be helpful indicators for fish health and, therefore potential tools in the diagnosis of fish diseases. The present work aimed to identify local intestinal tissue responses and changes in plasma protein profiles of Atlantic salmon fed inactive dry Candida utilis yeast biomass, soybean meal, or combination of soybean meal based diet with various inclusion levels of Candida utilis. A fishmeal based diet was used as control diet. Inclusion of Candida utilis yeast to a fishmeal based diet did not alter the morphology, immune cell population or gene expression of the distal intestine. Lower levels of Candida utilis combined with soybean meal modulated immune cell populations in the distal intestine and reduced the severity of soybean meal-induced enteritis, while higher inclusion levels of Candida utilis were less effective. Changes in the plasma proteomic profile revealed differences between the diets but did not indicate any specific proteins that could be a marker for health or disease. The results suggest that Candida utilis does not alter intestinal morphology or induce major changes in plasma proteome, and thus could be a high-quality alternative protein source with potential functional properties in diets for Atlantic salmon.

### Keywords
Histology, Plasma proteome, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of BIOVIT, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway
Norwegian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Leidy Lagos

### Lab Head
Dr Øverland, Margareth
Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of BIOVIT, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway


