### Accession
PXD007574

### Title
Meningeal γδ T cells producing IL-17 control synaptic plasticity and cognitive behaviour

### Description
The conventional notion of “immune privilege” of the brain has been revised to accommodate its infiltration, at steady state, by immune cells that participate in normal neurophysiology (Louveau, Trends Immunol 2015; Kipnis science 2016; Filiano, Nat Rev Neurosciences 2017). Surprisingly, such neuroimmune functions have been linked to “pro-inflammatory” cytokines like IL-4 or IFN-α, shown to control behavioural and social cognition (Derecki, JEM 2010; Filiano, Nature 2016). Here we identify a pro-cognitive role for IL-17 in short-term memory that derives from a previously unknown meningeal-resident γδ T cell subset. This was mostly composed of foetal thymic-derived Vγ6+ T cells, found in the meninges at birth and persisting throughout life, where they were strikingly polarized towards IL-17 production. In fact, γδ T cells were the overwhelming source of meningeal IL-17, whereas IFN-γ was mostly provided by T cells. To assess whether the constitutive production of IL-17 by γδ T cells influenced the cognitive performance of mice, we tested TCRδ-/-, IL-17-/- and respective WT littermate control mice in classical learning paradigms. We observed that mice deficient either for γδ T cells or IL-17 displayed impaired short-term memory in the Y maze paradigm, while retaining normal long-term spatial memory in the Morris water maze. A detailed proteomics analysis of the hippocampus provided mechanistic insight into reduced plasticity of the glutamatergic synapses in the absence of IL-17, which associated with impaired Long Term Potentiation (LTP). Conversely, IL-17 enhanced glial cell production of Brain Derived Neurotropic Factor (BDNF), whose exogenous provision rescued the LTP defect of IL-17-/- animals. Altogether, our data demonstrate that foetal-derived γδ T cells populate the brain meninges where they regulate synaptic plasticity and short-term memory through a non-inflammatory IL-17-dependent mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
IL-17−/− and WT controls were sacrificed immediately after the Y-maze training by cervical dislocation. The hippocampi were dissected, homogenized by sonication in TEAB buffer, frozen in liquid nitrogen and were kept at -80 °C until further processing. Samples were thawed on ice and homogenized twice by using ultrasonication with a 2 mm tip and 30s cycles and pulses of 1s on ice, followed by a centrifugation step for 5min at 5,000xg at 4°C. Roughly 10% of each homogenized sample was pooled per group. All individual and pooled samples were subjected to an ultracentrifugation step for 1h at 144,000xg at 4°C, giving rise to a soluble and a membrane-enriched fraction for each sample. These fractions were precipitated with 4 parts cold methanol and kept at -80 °C for at least 20 min prior to centrifugation at 20,000xg at 4°C for 20min. After precipitation, the protein pellet was suspended in 2x Laemmli Buffer (5% glycerol, 1.7% SDS, 100 mM DTT and bromophenol blue in 50 mM Tris Buffer at pH 6.8). Total protein content was assessed with the commercial kit 2D Quant Kit. Samples were analyzed by short GeLC – MS. Briefly, 30 µg of protein from each pooled sample fraction, and 50 µg of protein from each individual sample soluble fraction were denatured for 5min at 95°C and alkylated with acrylamide, then partially run at 110V in a 4–20% Mini-Protean TGX Pre-cast Gel, Bio-Rad. After, proteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue, and each lane was sliced in 3 fractions of similar size. The gel pieces were destained using a 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by a washing step with water, the gel pieces were shaken in a thermomixer at 1050rpm for 15 min between steps. The gel pieces were dehydrated on Concentrator Plus. To each gel band 75 µL of trypsin (0.01 µg/µL solution in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added and left for 15 min at 4°C to rehydrate. After this period 75µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and in-gel digestion was performed overnight at RT. After digestion, the excess solution from gel pieces was collected to a low binding microcentrifuge tube (LoBind, Eppendorf) and peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential addition of 3 solutions of increasing percentage of ACN (30%, 50%, 98%) in 1% FA. After the addition of each solution, the gel pieces were shaken in a thermomixer at 1200 rpm for 15 min and the solution was collected to the tube containing the previous fraction. The peptides from each fraction of each individual sample fraction were pooled together for SWATH analysis; the peptides from the pooled sample fractions were kept separated in the three fraction of the digestion procedure. All samples were subjected to SPE with C18 sorbent. Samples were analyzed on a triple TOF™ 5600 System operated by Analyst TF 1.7 (ABSciex®, Framingham, MA) operating in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each pooled sample fraction; followed by SWATH acquisition of the soluble fraction of each individual sample. Peptides were resolved by LC (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent) on a ChromXP™ C18CL reverse phase column (300 µm ID ×x 15 cm length, 3 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent) at 5µl/min, and eluted into the mass spectrometer in a 45 minutes gradient and a 65 minutes total run (mobile phase A was H2O in 0.1% FA and mobile phase B (MPB) was ACN in 0.1% FA; 5% of MPB for the first 2 minutes; followed by a linear gradient from 10% to 30% MPB until minute 45 and one minute to reach 35%; the last minutes of the run reached 98% MPB, and then 5% MPB for reequilibration), using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray Source, ABSciex). Pooled mixtures were analyzed in IDA mode, where the MS was set for scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum of 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000cps – to maintain a cycle time of 3.3s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 - +5 and counts above a threshold of 10cps were isolated for fragmentation and 1 MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25s. Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For the SWATH setup the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode. The setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analysed, to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of this batch of samples. A set of 60 windows of variable width was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 200 ms survey scan was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration, and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms from the precursors ranging from 350 to 1250 m/z resulting in a cycle time of 3.25s. The collision energy for each window was determined for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable CES according to the window.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and library generation were performed with ProteinPilot software (v5.0, ABSciex), using the following parameters: search against a database composed by Mus musculus from SwissProt (downloaded in July 2016), using trypsin digestion and acrylamide as alkylating agent. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by ProteinPilot™, was used to assess the quality of identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was created by processing data from all IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. SWATH data processing was performed using SWATH™ processing plug-in for PeakView™ (v2.0.01, ABSciex®). Briefly, peptides were selected automatically from the library using the following criteria: unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA, estimated by Protein Pilot™; and peptides with biological modifications and/or shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH™ quantitation was attempted for all proteins considered as positive identifications. Retention time was adjusted for each sample using peptides common to all samples and spanning the entire chromatographic run. Peptides were confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Target fragment ions, up to five, were automatically selected and peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert et al.. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least 3 replicates were retained. Peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across experiments, using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 5 min and 100 ppm XIC width. Protein levels were estimated by summing all peptide transitions for a given protein and were normalized to the total intensity of the sample.

### Publication Abstract
The notion of "immune privilege" of the brain has been revised to accommodate its infiltration, at steady state, by immune cells that participate in normal neurophysiology. However, the immune mechanisms that regulate learning and memory remain poorly understood. Here, we show that noninflammatory interleukin-17 (IL-17) derived from a previously unknown fetal-derived meningeal-resident &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cell subset promotes cognition. When tested in classical spatial learning paradigms, mice lacking &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells or IL-17 displayed deficient short-term memory while retaining long-term memory. The plasticity of glutamatergic synapses was reduced in the absence of IL-17, resulting in impaired long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Conversely, IL-17 enhanced glial cell production of brain-derived neurotropic factor, whose exogenous provision rescued the synaptic and behavioral phenotypes of IL-17-deficient animals. Together, our work provides previously unknown clues on the mechanisms that regulate short-term versus long-term memory and on the evolutionary and functional link between the immune and nervous systems.

### Keywords
Il-17, Γδ t cells, Swath

### Affiliations
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology


