### Accession
PXD024150

### Title
Proteomic analysis of triple negative mouse breast cancer isografts after electro-hyperthermia treatment

### Description
Modulated electro-hyperthermia (mEHT) is a selective cancer treatment used in human oncology complementing other therapies. During mEHT, a focused electromagnetic field (EMF) is generated within the tumor, by elevated oxidative glycolysis (Warburg effect) and conductivity of the tumor. The EMF induce cell death by thermal and non-thermal effects. Here we investigated an aggressive, therapy resistant triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) model. 4T1/4T07 isografts inoculated orthotopically into female BALB/c mice were treated with mEHT 3-5 times. mEHT induced the upregulation of the stress related Hsp70 and cleaved caspase-3 proteins, resulting in effective inhibition of tumor growth and proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Five treated (samples 10, 12, 18, 20, 27) and five control (nontreated) (samples 6, 7, 11, 16, 26) tumor samples were processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Frozen tissues were cut into pieces of about 30 mg on dry ice to prevent thawing. 8 uL of lysis buffer/mg of tissue was added to each piece. The lysis buffer contained 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. The tissue was homogenized by Dounce homogenizer, and then repeatedly passed through a 0.7 x 38 mm syringe needle for 20 times for further homogenization. The samples were then gently shaken for 30 min on ice. After centrifugation (16,000 g, 10 min), the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by the Bradford assay and 150 ug of total protein from each sample was incubated with loading buffer (10 mM Tris pH 6.8; 7.8% glycerol, 0.2% SDS, 0.01% Bromphenol blue containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) at 95 C for 5 min. The samples were stored at 20C until further processing. For the MS analysis, 150 ug of total protein from each sample was separated on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and each of the protein lanes was cut into six bands and destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile. The gel pieces were washed with acetonitrile, vacuum dried and rehydrated in reducing solution (10 mM DTT, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After 45-min incubation at 56 C, solution was exchanged to alkylating solution (55 mM iodoacetamide, 25 mM ammonium bicarbocate) and samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. The gel pieces were washed with acetonitrile and vacuum dried before rehydrating in 80 uL of trypsinization buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 1 ug of sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsine per sample. After overnight incubation at 37 C, the trypsin solution was collected and remaining peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using extraction solution (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid). Trypsin solution was added to extraction solution and concentrated by vacuum drying to a final volume of about 20 uL. LC-MS/MS analysis was done using an EASY-nanoLC II HPLC unit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples containing 0.1% FA were loaded onto a C18 trapping column (Proxeon Easy-column, Thermo Fischer Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) and separated on a C18 PicoFrit Aquasil analytical column (New Objective, Inc., Woburn, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted using a 5–40% (v/v) 90 min linear gradient of acetonitrile in a 0.1% formic acid solution at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The full MS mass spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the mass range of 300 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 30,000. The MS/MS spectra were obtained by HCD fragmentation of the nine most intense MS precursor ions and recorded at a resolution of 7500. Only the precursor ions with assigned charge states (> 1) were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion was set to repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30 s, and exclusion duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant proteomics software (version 1.6.0.13; Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for database search and quantification by lsbel free quantification. Database search was performed against a Mus musculus Uniprot database (database date 2.11.2020, 17,048 entries). For the database searches methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+45.011 Da) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin cleavage at arginine and lysine residues was used as enzyme specificity. For database search one missed cleavage was allowed. In addition, precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A reversed database search was performed and the false discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Relative quantification of identified proteins was performed by label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Breast cancer, Orbitrap, Stress response

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefen Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr prof. dr. Marko Fonović
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefen Institute, Jamova cesta 39, 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia


