### Accession
PXD043719

### Title
Cullin-associated and neddylation-dissociated protein 1 (CAND1) alleviates NAFLD by reducing ubiquitinated degradation of ACAA2

### Description
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disorder with high morbidity and mortality. The current study aims to explore the role of Cullin-associated and neddylation-dissociated protein 1 (CAND1) in the development of NAFLD and the underlying mechanisms. CAND1 is reduced in the liver of NAFLD male patients and high fat diet (HFD)-fed male mice. CAND1 alleviates palmitate (PA) induced lipid accumulation in vitro. Hepatocyte-specific knockout of CAND1 exacerbates HFD-induced liver injury in HFD-fed male mice, while hepatocyte-specific knockin of CAND1 ameliorates these pathological changes. Mechanistically, deficiency of CAND1 enhances the assembly of Cullin1, F-box only protein 42 (FBXO42) and acetyl-CoA acyltransferase 2 (ACAA2) complexes, and thus promotes the ubiquitinated degradation of ACAA2. ACAA2 overexpression abolishes the exacerbated effects of CAND1 deficiency on NAFLD. Additionally, androgen receptor binds to the -187 to -2000 promoter region of CAND1. Collectively, CAND1 mitigates NAFLD by inhibiting Cullin1/FBXO42 mediated ACAA2 degradation

### Sample Protocol
L02 hepatocytes were transfected with Si-CAND1 using X-treme gene siRNA transfection reagent. After treatment with PA (0.4 mM) for 24 h, two groups of cell samples were lysed. Then, protein extraction and quantitative mass spectrometry; protein Trypsin digestion; mass spectrometry. Each sample was separated by capillary HPLC using a nanoliter flow rate HPLC liquid phase system. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with 95% liquid A. Each sample was separated by capillary HPLC and analyzed by mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Peotein expression was normalized by the median average protein ratio for mixes of different labled samples. FC>1.5 or FC<0.667 was set as the threshold to identify significantly expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disorder with high morbidity and mortality. The current study aims to explore the role of Cullin-associated and neddylation-dissociated protein 1 (CAND1) in the development of NAFLD and the underlying mechanisms. CAND1 is reduced in the liver of NAFLD male patients and high fat diet (HFD)-fed male mice. CAND1 alleviates palmitate (PA) induced lipid accumulation in vitro. Hepatocyte-specific knockout of CAND1 exacerbates HFD-induced liver injury in HFD-fed male mice, while hepatocyte-specific knockin of CAND1 ameliorates these pathological changes. Mechanistically, deficiency of CAND1 enhances the assembly of Cullin1, F-box only protein 42 (FBXO42) and acetyl-CoA acyltransferase 2 (ACAA2) complexes, and thus promotes the ubiquitinated degradation of ACAA2. ACAA2 overexpression abolishes the exacerbated effects of CAND1 deficiency on NAFLD. Additionally, androgen receptor binds to the -187 to -2000 promoter region of CAND1. Collectively, CAND1 mitigates NAFLD by inhibiting Cullin1/FBXO42 mediated ACAA2 degradation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, L02 cell

### Affiliations
1. Department of Pharmacology (National Key Laboratory of Frigid Zone Cardiovascular Disease, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research,
Ministry of Education), College of Pharmacy, Harbin Medical University, Harbin
1. Department of Pharmacology (National Key Laboratory of Frigid Zone Cardiovascular Disease, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research, Ministry of Education), College of Pharmacy, Harbin Medical University

### Submitter
Huang Xiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang Huang
1. Department of Pharmacology (National Key Laboratory of Frigid Zone Cardiovascular Disease, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research, Ministry of Education), College of Pharmacy, Harbin Medical University


