### Accession
PXD037766

### Title
Synchro-PASEF slices peptide precursors enabling specific fragment extraction and interference removal in data independent acquisition

### Description
Data independent acquisition methods have become increasingly popular in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics because they enable parallel and continuous acquisition of fragment spectra. However, these advantages come with the challenge of correctly reconstructing the precursor-fragment relationship in these highly multiplexed spectra for reliable identification and quantification.  Here we introduce a scan mode for the combination of trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) with parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF) that naturally and continuously follows the ion cloud in ion mobility and peptide mass dimensions as opposed to the step functions we employed before. Termed synchro-PASEF, it increases fragment yield several fold at sub-second cycle times. The quadrupole selection window moves synchronously through the mass and ion mobility range, deconvoluting the DIA spectra and defining precursor-quadrupole relationships. In this process, the quadrupole slices through the peptide precursors, which separates fragment ion signals of each precursor into adjacent synchro-PASEF scans. This precisely defines precursor – fragment relationship in ion mobility and mass dimensions. Importantly, the two parts of the fragment ion transitions in synchro-PASEF provide a further dimension of specificity via a lock and key mechanism. This is especially advantageous for quantification, where signals from interfering precursors in the dia selection window only affect the top or bottom part of the fragment ion, allowing them to be filtered out. In this paper, we establish the defining features of synchro-PASEF and explore its potential for proteomics analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The complex proteome mixture in our experiments was composed of HeLa S3 cells (ATCC). Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Life Technologies Ltd., UK) supplemented with 20 mM glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. The sample preparation was performed following the in-stage tip protocol. After washing the cells in PBS and celllysis, the proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (WAKO) (1:100, enzyme/protein, w/w) in one step. The peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA/2% ACN and 200 ng digest were loaded onto Evotips. The Evotips were prepared by activation with 1-Propanol, washing with 0.1% FA/99.9% ACN and equilibrating with 0.1% FA. After loading the samples, tips were washed once with 0.1% FA. The simple proteome mixture was composed in equal amounts of the purified and predigested tryptic standard proteins enolase, phosphorylase b, alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), and bovine serum albumin (BSA) (all purchased from Waters GmbH). The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, and either 200 or 400 fmol (see above) were loaded onto Evotips.  LC analysis The Evosep One liquid chromatography system separated peptide mixtures at various throughputs using standardized gradients with 0.1% FA and 0.1% FA/100% ACN as the mobile phases. The 60 and 100 samples per day (SPD) throughputs were measured with an 8 cm × 150 um reverse-phase column packed with 1.5 um C18-beads (Bruker Daltonics) andcombined with a fused silica 10 µm ID emitter (Bruker Daltonics). For measuring 200 and 300 SPD, we connected the same emitter with a 3 cm × 150 um reverse-phase column packed with 1.9 um C18-beads (Bruker Daltonics). In both cases, the emitter was operated inside a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive spray source, Bruker Daltonics).  MS analysis The Evosep LC system was coupled with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) to acquire mainly single runs in synchro-PASEF mode and for comparison in dda- and dia-PASEF mode.  dda-PASEF was acquired with four PASEF scans per top-N acquisition cycle, an intensity threshold of 2,500 arbitrary units (a.u.), and a target value of 20,000 a.u. for precursor selection. Precursors that reached this target value were excluded for 0.4 min, which allows resequencing in simple mixtures, as shown below. Singly charged precursors were filtered out based on their m/z-ion mobility position, and precursors with a mass below 700 Da were isolated with 2 Th and otherwise with 3 Th. For dia-PASEF, we used a method generated with our python tool py_diAID. The method covers an m/z-range from 300 to 1200 in twelve dia-PASEF scans with two isolation windows per dia-PASEF scan resulting in a cycle time of 1.4 s. Additionally, we optimized three synchro-PASEF methods based on the tryptic HeLa reference library introduced in our optimal dia-PASEF studies. The first method consists of four 25 Th isolation windows with a cycle time of 0.56 s and a second method of seven 15 Th windows (0.9 s cycle time). The third method had two 25 Th, one 35 Th, and one 50 Th isolation window (cycle time 0.56 s). The calculated precursor coverages and kernel density plots depicting a precursor ion cloud was based on this reference library, too.  If not stated otherwise, we used 100 ms to accumulate and elute ions in the TIMS tunnel. The m/z-range was acquired from 100 to 1700 and the ion mobility range from 1.3 to 0.7 Vs cm-2 calibrated with Agilent ESI Tuning Mix ions (m/z, 1/K0: 622.02, 0.98 Vs cm-2, 922.01, 1.19 Vs cm-2, 1221.99, 1.38 Vs cm-2). Experiments without collision energy were measured at a constant collision energy of 10 eV. For experiments with collision energy, the energy was linearly decreased from 59 eV at ion mobility of 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20 eV at 0.6 Vs cm-2.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by hand and visually inspected with our python tools AlphaTims and AlphaViz. The MaxQuant evidence output table (Version 1.6.17.0) from a single HeLa dda-PASEF run was the basis for calculating the percentage of precursor. We used the reviewed human proteome (Uniprot, Nov 2021, 20,360 entries without isoforms) and default settings for the analysis. This comprises a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, two missed cleavages, the cleavage pattern from trypsin, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation as variable modifications. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the main search, and known contaminations were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) methods have become increasingly popular in mass spectrometry-based proteomics because they enable continuous acquisition of fragment spectra for all precursors simultaneously. However, these advantages come with the challenge of correctly reconstructing the precursor-fragment relationships in these highly convoluted spectra for reliable identification and quantification. Here, we introduce a scan mode for the combination of trapped ion mobility spectrometry with parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) that seamlessly and continuously follows the natural shape of the ion cloud in ion mobility and peptide precursor mass dimensions. Termed synchro-PASEF, it increases the detected fragment ion current several-fold at sub-second cycle times. Consecutive quadrupole selection windows move synchronously through the mass and ion mobility range. In this process, the quadrupole slices through the peptide precursors, which separates fragment ion signals of each precursor into adjacent synchro-PASEF scans. This precisely defines precursor-fragment relationships in ion mobility and mass dimensions and effectively deconvolutes the DIA fragment space. Importantly, the partitioned parts of the fragment ion transitions provide a further dimension of specificity via a lock-and-key mechanism. This is also advantageous for quantification, where signals from interfering precursors in the DIA selection window do not affect all partitions of the fragment ion, allowing to retain only the specific parts for quantification. Overall, we establish the defining features of synchro-PASEF and explore its potential for proteomic analyses.

### Keywords
Rapid analysis, Pasef, Tof, Scan mode, Tims, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


