### Accession
PXD031106

### Title
Detection of putative PKA target phosphorylation sites in Atg5flox:CamKII-Cre wildtype and knockout mice brain tissue

### Description
The experiment was performed to identify PKA phosphorylation substrates in wildtype and autophagy-deficient brains. Therefore, hippocampus and cortex of wildtype and conditional knockout mice were isolated and sliced. The brain slices were incubated with DMSO or Forskolin, a cAMP elevating agent, to induce PKA activity. Samples were measured by LC-MS/MS and were used to quantify proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes.

### Sample Protocol
Brains were isolated from wildtype and knockout mice and 400µm thick sections were prepared. The sections were washed with HBSS, transferred into media, and placed in the incubator for 1 hour. Afterwards, they were treated with 50µM Forskolin for 15 min before being washed with ice-cold PBS for albumin removal. Slices were homogenized in a tissue grinder, sonicated, and subsequently cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentration was determined for each lysate and 1 mg protein of each sample taken for the experiment. The samples were incubated in 5 mM TCEP, 27.5 mM CAA and LysC, in an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 for 3 hours. Afterwards, the samples were diluted to a concentration of 2 M Urea using 50 mM 50mM ammonium bicarbonat buffer and digested in Trypsin (1:100 enzyme to substrate ratio) over night at room temperature. On the upcoming day, samples were acidified, desalted and phosphopeptides were enriched using commercially available TiO2 spin tips. Phosphopeptides and proteomes were measured on Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse with a FAIMS Pro interface coupled to a Thermo EASY-nLC system. All samples were measured in 90min gradients with two FAIMS CVs (-45 V and -65V).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were demultiplexed for different FAIMS CVs using the Coons lab tool "FAIMs to Mzxml generator". Mzxml files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 using a Uniprot mouse protein database (release October 18, 2020). Default settings were used plus: enzyme: Trypsin/P, p(STY) enabled as variable modification, match between runs were enabled, unmodified counterpart peptides were not discarded. The resulting MaxQuant output was further analyzed in Perseus 1.6.14.0 and InstantClue 0.10.10.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy provides nutrients during starvation and eliminates detrimental cellular components. However, accumulating evidence indicates that autophagy is not merely a housekeeping process. Here, by combining mouse models of neuron-specific ATG5 deficiency in either excitatory or inhibitory neurons with quantitative proteomics, high-content microscopy, and live-imaging approaches, we show that autophagy protein ATG5 functions in neurons to regulate cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of a synapse-confined proteome. This function of ATG5 is independent of bulk turnover of synaptic proteins and requires the targeting of PKA inhibitory R1 subunits to autophagosomes. Neuronal loss of ATG5 causes synaptic accumulation of PKA-R1, which sequesters the PKA catalytic subunit and diminishes cAMP/PKA-dependent phosphorylation of postsynaptic cytoskeletal proteins that mediate AMPAR trafficking. Furthermore, ATG5 deletion in glutamatergic neurons augments AMPAR-dependent excitatory neurotransmission and causes the appearance of spontaneous recurrent seizures in mice. Our findings identify a novel role of autophagy in regulating PKA signaling at glutamatergic synapses and suggest the PKA as a target for restoration of synaptic function in neurodegenerative conditions with autophagy dysfunction.

### Keywords
Pka signalling, Forskolin, Brain slices, Autophagy-deficiency

### Affiliations
CECAD Excellence Center & Center for Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Germany
University of Cologne, Department of Biology, Institute for Genetics

### Submitter
Frederik Tellkamp

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia L Kononenko
CECAD Excellence Center & Center for Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Germany


