### Accession
PXD044750

### Title
Mapping Interactions of Calmodulin and nNOS by CXL-MS

### Description
Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) is a self-sufficient homodimeric cytochrome P450-like enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of L-arginine to nitric oxide in the presence of NADPH and molecular oxygen. The binding of calmodulin (CaM) to a linker region between the FAD/FMN containing reductase domain and the heme containing oxygenase domain, greatly enhances electron transfer reactions allowing reduction of the heme and NO synthesis. Due to the dynamic nature of the nNOS reductase domain and the overall low resolution of full-length nNOS structures, the exact nature of the CaM-bound active complex during heme reduction is still unresolved. Interestingly, hydrogen-deuterium exchange and mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) studies on iNOS, but not nNOS, directly revealed interactions of the FMN-domain and CaM with the oxygenase domain. To further address this unexpected finding with nNOS, we utilized covalent crosslinking and mass spectrometry (CXL-MS) to examine interactions of CaM with full- length nNOS. Specifically, MS-cleavable bifunctional crosslinker disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea was used to identify thirteen unique crosslinks between CaM and nNOS as well as 61 crosslinks within the nNOS. Detailed analysis of the crosslinks provide evidence for CaM interaction with the oxygenase and reductase domain residues as well as interactions of the FMN-domain with the oxygenase dimer. Crosslink-guided docking studies reveal a conformation of nNOS that brings the FMN within 15 Å to the heme and provides further support for a more compact conformation of CaM-bound nNOS than previously observed in EM-derived structures. These studies also point to the utility of CXL-MS to capture transient dynamic conformations that may not be captured by HDX-MS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Purified nNOS (2 μM) was mixed with calmodulin (1.3 mg/ml), 10 μM CaCl2, 10 μM tetrahydrobiopterin, and 0.1 mM NaCl in total volume of 10 μl of HEPES, pH 7.35 for 5 minutes at 4°C. The mixture was treated with the desired amount of DSBU, which was dissolved in anhydrous DMSO, at room temperature with rotation. The DMSO concentration was 10% (v/v) of the total reaction mixture. Reactions were quenched at the appropriate times with 2 μl of 0.5 M ammonium bicarbonate and gently mixed for 5 minutes at 4°C before addition of an equal volume of 2x Laemmli Sample Buffer containing 10% (v/v) 2-mercapotethanol. Samples were boiled for 5 minutes, and aliquots (15 μl) were submitted to SDS-PAGE on 4-15% gradient gels run for 45 minutes at 50 mAmps/gel. Gels were Coomassie stained for 1 hour with ProteinSafe Coomassie Stain and destained in MilliQ water. Gels were imaged with a LI-COR Odyssey Fc and bands corresponding to nNOS monomer and dimer were quantified by densitometric analysis with the use of ImageStudio software (version 5.2). Duplicate protein bands corresponding to CaM-bound nNOS homodimer were submitted for in-gel trypsinolysis and subsequent analysis on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS at the University of Michigan Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics Resource Facility.

### Data Protocol
Peptide assignments were performed using MeroX (version 2.0) to specifically search for peptides containing the signature doublet that DSBU produces upon fragmentation. MS datasets were analyzed with primary and secondary fragment mass deviations of 10 and 50 ppm, respectively, with mass limits of 600-6000 Da and s/n ratio of 1.5. Score cut-offs calculated for a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01% were applied as recommended in the literature [Iacobucci et al., 2019; Iacobucci & Sinz, 2017]. The MS/MS spectra were also manually checked, as another layer of quality control, using MeroX.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) is a homodimeric cytochrome P450-like enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of L-arginine to nitric oxide in the presence of NADPH and molecular oxygen. The binding of calmodulin (CaM) to a linker region between the FAD/FMN-containing reductase domain, and the heme-containing oxygenase domain is needed for electron transfer reactions, reduction of the heme, and NO synthesis. Due to the dynamic nature of the reductase domain and low resolution of available full-length structures, the exact conformation of the CaM-bound active complex during heme reduction is still unresolved. Interestingly, hydrogen-deuterium exchange and mass spectrometry studies revealed interactions of the FMN domain and CaM with the oxygenase domain for iNOS, but not nNOS. This finding prompted us to utilize covalent crosslinking and mass spectrometry to clarify interactions of CaM with nNOS. Specifically, MS-cleavable bifunctional crosslinker disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea was used to identify thirteen unique crosslinks between CaM and nNOS as well as 61 crosslinks within the nNOS. The crosslinks provided evidence for CaM interaction with the oxygenase and reductase domain residues as well as interactions of the FMN domain with the oxygenase dimer. Cryo-EM studies, which gave a high-resolution model of the oxygenase domain, along with crosslink-guided docking provided a model of nNOS that brings the FMN within 15&#xa0;&#xc5; of the heme in support for a more compact conformation than previously observed. These studies also point to the utility of covalent crosslinking and mass spectrometry in capturing transient dynamic conformations that may not be captured by hydrogen-deuterium exchange and mass spectrometry experiments.

### Keywords
Neuronal nitric oxide synthase, Crosslinking, Cxl-ms

### Affiliations
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Dana Felker

### Lab Head
Dr Yoichi Osawa
Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan


