### Accession
PXD040883

### Title
Profiling of Serum N-glycosylation in Non-small-cell Lung Cancer

### Description
Aberrant serum N-glycan profiles have been observed in multiple cancers including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), yet the potential of N-glycans in the early diagnosis of NSCLC remains to be determined. Here, serum N-glycan profiles of 275 NSCLC patients and 309 healthy controls were characterized by MALDI-TOF-MS. The levels of serum N-glycans and N-glycosylation patterns were compared between NSCLC and control groups. In addition, a panel of N-glycan biomarkers for NSCLC diagnosis was established and validated using machine learning algorithms. As a result, a total of 54 N-glycan structures were identified in human serum. Compared with healthy controls, 29 serum N-glycans were up- or down-regulated in NSCLC patients. N-glycan abundance in different histological types or clinical stages of NSCLC presented differentiated changes. Furthermore, an optimal biomarker panel of 8 N-glycans was constructed based on logistic regression, with an AUC of 0.86 in the validation set. Notably, this model also showed a desirable capacity in distinguishing early-stage patients from healthy controls (AUC = 0.88). In conclusion, our work highlights the abnormal N-glycan profiles in NSCLC and provides supports for the promising potential of N-glycan panels in clinical NSCLC detection.

### Sample Protocol
Serum isolation, N-glycan release, derivatization, purification, MALDI MS analysis, data processing, statistical analysis.

### Data Protocol
MALDI-TOF-MS data were exported as text files for following processing. The m/z values were applied to generate target glycan structures with GlycoWorkBench (Ceroni et al., 2008). Glycan compositions were abbreviated as follows: hexose (H), N-acetylhexosamine (N), N-acetylneuraminic acid (S), and fucose (F). The exported MS files were analyzed using MassyTools (version 0.1.6.3) (Jansen et al., 2015). Specifically, internal calibration was firstly performed using three glycan peaks of known composition (H5N4S1, H5N4F1S1 and H5N4S2). Mass spectra presenting a signal-to-noise ratio of 3 or above for the calibration analytes with a mass accuracy between -25 and 25 ppm were included for further analysis. The acquired peaks for each sample were averaged over three spectra. Batch correction was further performed with ComBat algorithm. Normality was tested by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Chi-square test was used to compare categorical variables, while Students’ t test or Mann-Whitney U test was employed to compare continuous variables in two groups. For multiple comparison, ANOVA or Kruskal-Wallis test followed by a Turkey’s or Bonferroni-Dunn multiple comparison test was performed. Benjamini-Hochberg method was employed to control the false discovery rate (FDR, type 1 error) in multiple testing (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). Correlation was analyzed using Spearman correlation analysis. A two-sided P value or FDR (adjusted P value) of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. For the establishment of the diagnostic model, four ML algorithms including decision tree (DT), random forest (RF), support vector machine (SVM) and logistic regression (LR) were tested respectively through the Deepwise DxAI platform (http://dxonline.deepwise.com). Features were filtered using Lasso regression via package “glmnet” within R version 4.0.2 software. Participants were randomly divided into a training set (70%, 192 cases and 216 controls) and a validation set (30%, 82 cases and 93 controls). Area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, as well as positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) were assessed to evaluate the performance of the models. SPSS 25.0 (IBM Corporation, NY, USA), GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad, CA, USA) and R version 4.0.2 were used for statistical analysis and visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant serum N-glycan profiles have been observed in multiple cancers including non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), yet the potential of N-glycans in the early diagnosis of NSCLC remains to be determined. In this study, serum N-glycan profiles of 275 NSCLC patients and 309 healthy controls were characterized by MALDI-TOF-MS. The levels of serum N-glycans and N-glycosylation patterns were compared between NSCLC and control groups. In addition, a panel of N-glycan biomarkers for NSCLC diagnosis was established and validated using machine learning algorithms. As a result, a total of 54 N-glycan structures were identified in human serum. Compared with healthy controls, 29 serum N-glycans were increased or decreased in NSCLC patients. N-glycan abundance in different histological types or clinical stages of NSCLC presented differentiated changes. Furthermore, an optimal biomarker panel of eight N-glycans was constructed based on logistic regression, with an AUC of 0.86 in the validation set. Notably, this model also showed a desirable capacity in distinguishing early-stage patients from healthy controls (AUC&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.88). In conclusion, our work highlights the abnormal N-glycan profiles in NSCLC and provides supports potential application of N-glycan biomarker panel in clinical NSCLC detection.

### Keywords
Human, Maldi-tof-ms, Lung, Serum

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Liming Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Liming Cheng
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


