### Accession
PXD030546

### Title
Sex estimation of an Epigravettian (ca. 13 ka) infant through LC-MS anlysis of tooth enamel

### Description
Amelogenin peptides have been used to estimate the sex of an Epigravettian (ca 13 ka) infant from Northeastern Italy.

### Sample Protocol
Owing to the dimorphic features of specific amelogenin isoforms, proteomics is currently revolutionizing the way of sexing ancient teeth. A small fragment (ca. 1 mg) of enamel, left from histological sectioning, was washed in an ultrasonic bath with MilliQ water and digested through 1.2 M HCl (Suprapur). The dissolved specimen was purified and desalted through HyperSep SpinTips (Thermo Scientific) with C18 functionalized silica, following the protocol described in Lugli et al. 2019 (Sci Rep). Subsequent LC-MS analyses were performed at the Centro Interdipartimentale Grandi Strumenti of the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia by means of a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a Thermo high-resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The resulting ion chromatogram was manually inspected using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific), looking for specific amelogenin peptides (Lugli et al., 2019; Stewart et al., 2017). The ICIS algorithm was employed for automatic peak detection. Mascot searches were performed against SwissProt (constrained to Homo sapiens) and cRAP for contaminants. No proteolytic enzyme was selected, deamidated asparagines/glutamine (NQ), oxidated methionine (M) and phosphorylation (ST) were set as variable modifications in the search parameters. Mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for the precursor ions (peak detection mismatch #13C = 1) and 0.05 Da for the product ions. An automatic decoy database search was used to estimate the false discovery rate; probability threshold was trimmed to get a FDR < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
CRISPR-Cas12a systems are becoming an attractive genome editing tool for cell engineering due to their broader editing capabilities compared to CRISPR-Cas9 counterparts. As opposed to Cas9, the Cas12a endonucleases are characterized by a lack of trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA), which reduces the complexity of the editing system and simultaneously makes CRISPR RNA (crRNA) engineering a promising approach toward further improving and modulating editing activity of the CRISPR-Cas12a systems. Here, we design and validate sixteen types of structurally engineered Cas12a crRNAs targeting various immunologically relevant loci in-vitro and in-cellulo. We show that all our structural modifications in the loop region, ranging from engineered breaks (STAR-crRNAs) to large gaps (Gap-crRNAs), as well as nucleotide substitutions, enable gene-cutting in the presence of various Cas12a nucleases. Moreover, we observe similar insertion rates of short HDR templates using the engineered crRNAs compared to the wild-type crRNAs, further demonstrating that the introduced modifications in the loop region led to comparable genome editing efficiencies. In conclusion, we show that Cas12a nucleases can broadly utilize structurally engineered crRNAs with breaks or gaps in the otherwise highly-conserved loop region, which could further facilitate a wide range of genome editing applications.

### Keywords
Amelogenin; dental enamel; paleoproteomics; chromatograms

### Affiliations
Department of Cultural Heritage - University of Bologna

### Submitter
Federico Lugli

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Lugli
Department of Cultural Heritage - University of Bologna


