### Accession
PXD045836

### Title
Myeloid-derived grancalcin instigates obesity-induced insulin resistance and metabolic inflammation

### Description
The crosstalk between the bone and adipose tissue orchestrates the metabolic homeostasis, but the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Herein, we find that GCA+(grancalcin) immune cells accumulate in the bone marrow and release a sufficient amount of GCA into circulation during obesity. Genetic deletion of Gca in myeloid cells attenuates metabolic dysfunction in obese male mice, whereas injection of recombinant GCA into male mice cause adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance. Mechanistically, we found that GCA binds to the Prohibitin-2 (PHB2) receptor on adipocytes and activates the innate and adaptive immune response of adipocytes via the PAK1-NF-κB signaling pathway, thus provoking the infiltration of inflammatory immune cells. Moreover, GCA-neutralizing antibodies improve adipose tissue inflammation and insulin sensitivity in obese male mice. Together, these observations uncover a novel mechanism whereby bone marrow factor GCA initiates adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance, implicating GCA could be a potential target to treat metainflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation, 1% phosphatase inhibitor for phosphorylation). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Grancalcin; insulin resistance; metabolic inflammation

### Affiliations
xiangya hospital
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University

### Submitter
Su Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Xianghang Luo
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University


