### Accession
PXD008015

### Title
Dual-compartment shotgun proteomics unravel thermal stress responses in reef-calcifiers and their photosymbionts

### Description
The proliferation of coral reef organisms, such as the key ecological engineers and carbonate producers’ large benthic foraminifera (LBF), greatly relies on the mutual association with photosymbiotic algae. With respect to global change impacts such as ocean warming, evaluating stress and acclimatization responses is highly important, but probing proteins and partitioning host and symbionts are major obstacles for studying LBF. We therefore applied a label-free quantitative proteomics approach to LBF holobionts in order to detect changes in the relative abundances of proteins in response to different thermal-stress scenarios. Subsequent identification allowed for the partial assignment of 1,618 proteins to either foraminiferal host or endosymbiotic diatoms. While single and episodic thermal-stress events only induced minor metabolic impacts, chronic thermal stress diminished photosynthesis-related proteins among the symbionts. Stress response and proteolysis-related proteins increased in abundance, illustrating the extent of damage. In contrast to the symbionts, host homeostasis was maintained through extensive repair mechanisms and high protein turnover. Metabolic pathways were adjusted to the symbiont loss by using alternative energy resources. However, linking proteome to physiological data revealed that resource redistribution impairs growth and certainly other functions that could disturb carbonate production. We show how compartment partitioning can give insights into interactions and stress response mechanisms in photosymbiotic reef-calcifiers.

### Sample Protocol
Eight specimens per experimental condition and biological replicate were pooled,lysed and tryptically digested. Aliquots of each sample corresponding to ~1 µg of tryptic digest were analyzed on a nano-LC-MS system in order to compensate for systematic errors derived e.g. from the protein concentration estimation. Thus, the sample amounts were corrected based on the alignment of total ion chromatograms (TICs) to warrant identical starting material prior to actual LC-MS analysis. After normalization of amounts, all twelve samples (1 µg each)were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific), resulting in a dataset of 12 MS/MS runs. The samples were analyzed in randomized order to minimize systematic errors.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis for label free quantification was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software (version 3.0.6039.34628) from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) and the statistical software R, version 3.3.143. Biological triplicates from all treatments at the end of the experiment were compared to the start condition, and for further insights, biological triplicates of single, episodic and chronic stress treatments were compared to the control. Raw MS data was imported into Progenesis and aligned to one automatically selected LC-MS reference file. After peak picking, MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists and identification of proteins and peptides was performed by the PEAKS Studio software suite, version 7.5, de novo to SPIDER. Searches were performed in a decoy-fusion manner against a concatenated database comprising publicly available protein and nucleotide sequences of foraminifera as well as diatoms (Bacillariophyta) from the NCBI database by 2016/03/15. Protein sequence databases were used as such, while nucleotide sequences were translated in all 6 reading frames prior to concatenation. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Enzyme specificity was set as fully tryptic, with the allowance of 2 missed cleavages. For de novo and DB search, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. A maximum number of two variable modifications per peptide was allowed for de novo and DB search, while for the PTM search all common modifications were allowed (485 in total) and the maximum number was set to 3 per peptide. Minimum de novo ALC for both PTM and SPIDER homology search was set to 15%. Peptide-level FDR was limited to 1% and proteins had to be identified with at least 1 unique peptide in order to be reported. Identifications meeting these criteria were re-imported into Progenesis to calculate the normalized abundances on the peptide-level. Amino acid sequences of all proteins identified in the database search were uploaded in .fasta file format to the CD-HIT suite web server of the Weizhong Li Lab in order to generate cluster of homologous protein sequences. Sequence identity cut-off was set to 0.7 and minimum alignment coverage for the longer sequence was set to 0.0. All other parameters were left as default. Normalized abundance-values of the peptides were used to calculate protein cluster abundance. Only peptides unique to a given protein cluster were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The proliferation of key marine ecological engineers and carbonate producers often relies on their association with photosymbiotic algae. Evaluating stress responses of these organisms is important to predict their fate under future climate projections. Physiological approaches are limited in their ability to resolve the involved molecular mechanisms and attribute stress effects to the host or symbiont, while probing and partitioning of proteins cannot be applied in organisms where the host and symbiont are small and cannot be physically separated. Here we apply a label-free quantitative proteomics approach to detect changes of proteome composition in the diatom-bearing benthic foraminifera Amphistegina gibbosa experimentally exposed to three thermal-stress scenarios. We developed a workflow for protein extraction from less than ten specimens and simultaneously analysed host and symbiont proteomes. Despite little genomic data for the host, 1,618 proteins could be partially assembled and assigned. The proteomes revealed identical pattern of stress response among stress scenarios as that indicated by physiological measurements, but allowed identification of compartment-specific stress reactions. In the symbiont, stress-response and proteolysis-related proteins were up regulated while photosynthesis-related proteins declined. In contrast, host homeostasis was maintained through chaperone up-regulation associated with elevated proteosynthesis and proteolysis, and the host metabolism shifted to heterotrophy.

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Lc-msms, Large benthic foraminifera, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund, Germany


