### Accession
PXD029090

### Title
Membrane vesicles of Pectobacterium as an underappreciated protein secretion system

### Description
Pectobacterium are Gram-negative rods of the family Pectobacteriaceae. They are the causative agent of soft rot diseases of crops and ornamental plants. However, their virulence mechanisms are not yet fully elucidated. Membrane vesicles (MVs) are universally released by bacteria and are be-lieved to play an important role in pathogenicity, and survival of bacteria in the environment. Our study investigates the role of MVs in the virulence of Pectobacterium. The results indicate that the morphology and yields of MVs depend on medium composition. In polygalacturonic acid (PGA) supplemented media, Pectobacterium produce MVs of a larger size (100-300 nm) apart of vesicles below 100 nm. Proteomic analyses revealed the presence of pectate degrading enzymes in MVs. The pectate plate test and enzymatic assay proved that those enzymes are active and able to de-grade pectates. What is more, pathogenicity test indicated that MVs derived from Pectobacterium were able to induce maceration of Zantedeschia sp. leaves. We also show that MVs of β-lactamase producing strains were able to suppress ampicillin activity and permit the growth of susceptible bacteria. Those findings indicate that MVs of Pectobacterium play an important role in host-pathogen interactions and niche competition with other bacteria. Our research also sheds some light on the mechanism of MVs production. We demonstrate that Pectobacterium strains, which overexpress the green fluorescence protein (GFP), produce more MVs than wild type strains. Moreover, proteomic analysis revealed that GFP was present in MVs. Therefore, we demonstrate that protein sequestration into MVs is not limited strictly to periplasmic proteins and is a common occurrence. Our research highlights the importance of MVs production as a mechanism of cargo delivery in Pectobacterium and an alternative secretion system.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on the isolated MVs samples of the wild-type and GFP-tagged strains of P. zantedeschiae 9M according to the multi-enzyme digestion filter assisted sample preparation (MED-FASP) protocol. The strains were grown in the M63 medium supplemented with 0.2% glycerol 0.4% PGA. P. zantedeschiae 9M strain was additionally grown in the M63 medium supplemented with 0.2% glycerol and 10% potato extract. In each case, MVs were isolated from three independent cultures and then pooled into one sample for the analysis. The analyses were performed as described previously. Briefly, the sample was treated with lysate buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.05 M DTT, and the lysate was mixed and incubated at 95°C for 10 min. Then, after cool-ing, due to the low protein concentration, it was completely transferred to a 10 kDa mem-brane (Microcon, Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and treated according to the MED-FASP protocol. Digestion was carried out in the sequence of enzymes: LysC, trypsin, and chy-motrypsin. Prior to MS/MS analysis, the sample was purified using StageTips C18 ac-cording to the protocol described, and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator to a volume of 30 ml. LC-ESI MS/MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ with a DuoSpray Ion Source (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). All chromato-graphic separations were performed on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm), and the injection was 5 µl. The chromatographic gradient for each MS run was 11–42.5% B (solvent A 99.9% aqueous solution 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 99.9% acetoni-trile 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min. The analysis was controlled by the Analyst software (Analyst TF 1.7.1). MS analysis was conducted in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with precursor ion scan in the range 400-1200 m/z, followed by fragment ion scans in the range 100-1800 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.6a software against the Uniprot Pectobacterium database (version from 25.01.21) concatenated with the sequence of GFP protein from Aequorea victoria. The specific parameters were: 1% FDR on PSM and protein level, enzymes specified for each sample, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modi-fication, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation as variable modi-fications. Proteins were considered significant when a score level was greater than 90, and the number of matched peptides was more than 3. The identified proteins were searched against the UniProt (www.pir.uniprot.org) database. Subcellular locations of the proteins were determined using a PSORTb v3.0.2 software (https://www.psort.org). Venn diagram was created using the InteractiVenn web-based software (www.interactivenn.net)

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria of genus <i>Pectobacterium</i> are Gram-negative rods of the family <i>Pectobacteriaceae</i>. They are the causative agent of soft rot diseases of crops and ornamental plants. However, their virulence mechanisms are not yet fully elucidated. Membrane vesicles (MVs) are universally released by bacteria and are believed to play an important role in the pathogenicity and survival of bacteria in the environment. Our study investigates the role of MVs in the virulence of <i>Pectobacterium</i>. The results indicate that the morphology and MVs production depend on growth medium composition. In polygalacturonic acid (PGA) supplemented media, <i>Pectobacterium</i> produces large MVs (100-300 nm) and small vesicles below 100 nm. Proteomic analyses revealed the presence of pectate degrading enzymes in the MVs. The pectate plate test and enzymatic assay proved that those enzymes are active and able to degrade pectates. What is more, the pathogenicity test indicated that the MVs derived from <i>Pectobacterium</i> were able to induce maceration of <i>Zantedeschia</i> sp. leaves. We also show that the MVs of &#x3b2;-lactamase producing strains were able to suppress ampicillin activity and permit the growth of susceptible bacteria. Those findings indicate that the MVs of <i>Pectobacterium</i> play an important role in host-pathogen interactions and niche competition with other bacteria. Our research also sheds some light on the mechanism of MVs production. We demonstrate that the MVs production in <i>Pectobacterium</i> strains, which overexpress a green fluorescence protein (GFP), is higher than in wild-type strains. Moreover, proteomic analysis revealed that the GFP was present in the MVs. Therefore, it is possible that protein sequestration into MVs might not be strictly limited to periplasmic proteins. Our research highlights the importance of MVs production as a mechanism of cargo delivery in <i>Pectobacterium</i> and an effective secretion system.

### Keywords
Bacterial membrane vesicles; pectobacterium; proteomic analysis; plant pathogens; bacterial virulence

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Universuty of Gdansk, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry


