### Accession
PXD008750

### Title
Proteogenomic Analysis of Medulloblastoma

### Description
In order to investigate medulloblastoma biology via its proteome, we undertook a super-SILAC quantitative proteomics survey using 41 clinical tissue samples spanning the 4 genomic subgroups and control cerebellum

### Sample Protocol
We created a pooled super-SILAC reference atlas, termed the Labeled Atlas of Medulloblastoma Proteins (LAMP), by combining in equal amounts isotopically labeled proteins from 8 primary and established cell lines chosen to represent the breadth of medulloblastoma across the 4 genomic subgroups (DAOY, D556, D283, R026, R032, R060, MB002, and MB004). Briefly, cell lines whose protein complements are judged to match the tumor of interest are passaged in growth media that has been depleted of lysine and arginine. To this media was added lysine and arginine incorporating 6 carbon isotopes (13C6). The proteins made by these cells incorporate the isotopic amino acids creating a predictable mass increase. Serial aliquots were tested over time until isotopically labeled proteins exceeded 95% of the total. Mass spectrometry of the LAMP itself identified 4903 proteins.  We spiked the LAMP at a ratio of 1:1 based upon BCA protein quantitation into protein lysates from 36 medulloblastoma tumors and 5 control cerebellum samples. Each sample was run in triplicate using 1-D SDS PAGE fractionation, cut into 32 bands and in-gel trypsin digested. Concentrated peptides from each band were injected via an autosampler (6uL) and loaded onto a Symmetry C18 trap column (5mm, 300 um i.d. x 23 mm, Waters) for 10 min at a flow rate of 10 uL/min, 100% A. The mobile phases consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% acetonitrile (B).The sample was subsequently separated by a C18 reverse-phase column (3 um, 200A, 100 mm x 15 cm, Magic C18, Michrom Bioresources) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an Eksigent nano-hplc system (Dublin, CA). A 65 minute linear gradient from 5 to 60% B was employed. Eluted peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via Michrom Bioresources CaptiveSpray. The spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the heated capillary at 200 °C. The LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (ThermoFisherScientific) was operated in data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion in which one cycle of experiments consisted of a full-MS in the Orbitrap (300-2000 m/z) survey scan in profile mode, resolution 30,000 and five subsequent MS/MS scans in the LTQ of the most intense peaks in centroid mode using collision-induced dissociation with the collision gas (helium) and normalized collision energy value set at 35%

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification we used MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 software developed by Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry (http://www.biochem.mpg.de/5111795/maxquant). Mass spectral data were uploaded into MaxQuant software. Files from each lane were searched against the forward and reverse Uniprot human database (UniProt release 2016_05 with 20,201 entries) for partially tryptic peptides allowing one missed cleavage, and possible modification of oxidized methionine (15.99492 Da) and heavy arginine (6.0201 Da) and heavy lysine (8.0142 Da). Mass tolerances were set at +/- 20 ppm for first peptide search and +/- 4.5 ppm for main peptide search, with intensity threshold of 500. Data were filtered based on a 5% protein false discovery rate. All the bands from each lane were summed as one sample in the analysis

### Publication Abstract
Genomic characterization has begun to redefine diagnostic classifications of cancers. However, it remains a challenge to infer disease phenotypes from genomic alterations alone. To help realize the promise of genomics, we have performed a quantitative proteomics investigation using Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) and 41 tissue samples spanning the 4 genomically based subgroups of medulloblastoma and control cerebellum. We have identified and quantitated thousands of proteins across these groups and find that we are able to recapitulate the genomic subgroups based upon subgroup restricted and differentially abundant proteins while also identifying subgroup specific protein isoforms. Integrating our proteomic measurements with genomic data, we calculate a poor correlation between mRNA and protein abundance. Using EPIC 850&#xa0;k methylation array data on the same tissues, we also investigate the influence of copy number alterations and DNA methylation on the proteome in an attempt to characterize the impact of these genetic features on the proteome. Reciprocally, we are able to use the proteome to identify which genomic alterations result in altered protein abundance and thus are most likely to impact biology. Finally, we are able to assemble protein-based pathways yielding potential avenues for clinical intervention. From these, we validate the EIF4F cap-dependent translation pathway as a novel druggable pathway in medulloblastoma. Thus, quantitative proteomics complements genomic platforms to yield a more complete understanding of functional tumor biology and identify novel therapeutic targets for medulloblastoma.

### Keywords
Brain tumor, Human, Pediatrics, Medulloblastoma, Silac

### Affiliations
Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children’s Research Institute, Children’s National Health System

### Submitter
Samuel Rivero-Hinojosa

### Lab Head
Dr Brian R. Rood
Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children’s Research Institute, Children’s National Health System


