### Accession
PXD015049

### Title
Proteomic landscape of atypical antipsychotics clinical response in blood  plasma from schizophrenia patients

### Description
Antipsychotics are the main line of treatment for schizophrenia, despite being  effective only in about 50% of patients. Additionally, serious side effects may  cause medication drop-out, aggravated by a lack of understanding about how  these drugs act at molecular level. As proteomics is a suitable tool for  studying multifactorial disorders, the main goal was to unravel signaling  pathways in blood plasma associated with a positive treatment outcome for the  atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone. Blood plasma was collected  from schizophrenia patients six weeks after treatment (T6), and patients were  classified as good or poor responders to olanzapine or risperidone, and then  samples were compared to each patient's baseline (T0). All samples were  analyzed using label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics. Samples were  depleted of the 14 most abundant proteins in plasma, were digested, and then  submitted to M-Class two-dimensional nano-liquid chromatography, coupled online  to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Data was obtained in MSE mode (data- independent acquisition) in combination with ion-mobility (HDMSE). The proteins  found to be differentially abundant in good responders compared to poor  responders for risperidone and olanzapine were functionally analyzed in silico  using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis and were found to be mostly involved with  immune system functions. This data can contribute to better understand the  biochemical signaling peripherally triggered by antipsychotic medication, and  can eventually be used to help improve treatment outcome by predicting patient  response as well as through the development of new medication or a combination  of drugs that act on the immune system to reduce the duration of poor response  periods in patients suffering with schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were injected into a 2D-RP/RP Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters  Corporation, Milford, MA), coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer  (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded onto an M- Class BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 5 µm, 300 µm X 50 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford,  MA) for first-dimension chromatography, which was performed through five  discontinuous steps of acetonitrile (11%, 14%, 17%, 20%, and 50%) at high-pH  fractionation for 10 min at a flow rate of 2 µL/min. After each step, peptide  loads were carried to second-dimension separation in a nanoACQUITY UPLC HSS T3  Column (1.8 µm, 75 µm X 150 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Peptides  trapped in the second dimension were eluted with an acetonitrile gradient from  7% to 40% (v/v) over 29 minutes at a flow rate of 0.5 L/min, directly into a  Synapt G2-Si. The mass spectrometer measured in MSE mode, acquiring data while switching  between low and high energy, with no selection window and a continuous ion  current. The injections were performed by nano-electrospray ionization in  positive ion mode nanoESI (+) using a NanoLock Spray (Waters, Manchester, UK)  ionization source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using dedicated algorithms and were searched against  the UniProt reviewed human proteomic database (January 2019; 20,402 entries).  For spectral processing and database searching, we used the Progenesis QI for  Proteomics (QIP) software package with Apex3D, Peptide 3D, and Ion Accounting  Informatics (Waters). Progenesis QIP starts with LC-MS data loading, 150 counts  marked the low-energy threshold, 50.0 counts for the elevated energy threshold,  and 750 counts for the intensity threshold. Then alignment and peak detection  were performed, which creates a list of peptide ions of interest (hereafter  referred to as simply peptides) that are explored within Peptide Ion Stats by  multivariate statistical methods. The final step determines protein identity  with an ion-accounting algorithm within Progenesis QIP (Li et al., 2009) The  following parameters were considered to identify peptides: 1) Digestion by  trypsin with at most two missed cleavages; 2) variable oxidation (M) and fixed  modification by carbamidomethyl (C); 3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%  across all conditions, calculated by a reverse database created on-the-fly by  Progenesis QIP; 4) a mass error of less than 20 ppm. Identifications that did  not satisfy these criteria were rejected. Also, as a default parameter, protein  grouping was applied, which hides proteins whose peptides are a subset of other  proteins. Keratins were removed from our data

### Publication Abstract
Antipsychotics are the main line of treatment for schizophrenia. Even though there are significant rates of medication drop out due to side effects and limited response of approximately 50% of patients. This is likely due to incomplete knowledge in how these drugs act at the molecular level. To improve treatment efficacy during the critical early stages of schizophrenia, we aimed to identify molecular signatures at baseline (T0) for prediction of a positive response to the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone after 6&#xa0;weeks (T6) treatment. Blood plasma samples were processed and analyzed by label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics using two-dimensional nano-liquid chromatography, coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Data were obtained in MS<sup>E</sup> mode (data-independent acquisition) in combination with ion-mobility (HDMS<sup>E</sup>). We were able to identify a potential panel of proteins that might predict a positive outcome to olanzapine and risperidone treatment. The proteins found to be differentially abundant between T0 and T6 in good responders compared to poor responders were analyzed in silico for enrichment pathways and found to be mostly involved with immune system functions. This data can contribute to better understand the biochemical signaling mechanisms peripherally triggered by antipsychotic medication and eventually used to develop surrogate biomarker tests to help improve treatment outcomes and guide development of new treatment approaches. SIGNIFICANCE: The application of proteomics to the study of the atypical antipsychotic effects on the blood plasma proteome from schizophrenia patients could help in the search for new targets to improve the current therapies, as well as in the development of new therapeutic strategies. In this original article, we provided clues that atypical antipsychotics might be associated with good response by modulating proteins that play a role in inflammation and/or immune system pathways. In addition, the proteins with differential abundance found in the comparison between good and poor responders at the baseline might compose a signature for prediction of response effectiveness.

### Keywords
Antipsychotics, Olanzapine, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Risperidone, Mass spectrometry, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Neuroproteomic, Biology Institute, Brazil
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP)

### Submitter
Sheila Garcia-Rosa

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Dept. of Biochemistry, Laboratory of Neuroproteomic, Biology Institute, Brazil


