### Accession
PXD027502

### Title
: GRAMD1C regulates autophagy initiation and mitochondrial bioenergetics through ER-Mitochondria cholesterol transport

### Description
During autophagy, cytosolic cargo is sequestered into double-membrane vesicles called autophagosomes. The origin and identity of the membranes that form the autophagosome remain to be fully characterized. Here, we investigated the role of cholesterol in starvation-induced autophagy and identify a role for the ER-localized cholesterol transport protein GRAMD1C in the regulation of autophagy and mitochondrial function. We demonstrate that cholesterol depletion leads to a rapid induction of autophagy, possibly caused by a corresponding increased abundance of curved autophagy membranes. We further show that GRAMD1C is a negative regulator of starvation-induced autophagy. Similar to its yeast orthologue, GRAMD1C is recruited to mitochondria through its GRAM domain. Additionally, we find that GRAMD1C depletion leads to increased mitochondrial cholesterol accumulation and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Finally, we demonstrate that expression of GRAM family genes is linked to clear cell renal carcinoma survival, highlighting the pathophysiological relevance of cholesterol transport proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For the GRAMD1C interactome : U2OS cells expressing EGFP, GRAMD1C-EGFP or GRAMD1C (delta-GRAM)-EGFP were lysed with NP40 lysis buffer prior to immnoprecipitation with GFP-Trap agarose (Chromotek). The beads were then washed with wash buffer (10 mM TRIS/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP50). For the GRAMD1C knockdown : U2OS cells were treated with siNC or siGRAMD1C for 72 hours prior to lysis using NP40 lysis buffer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS analyses were submitted to MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 software (cox and mann, 2008.,) for peptide/protein identification. Parameters were set as follow: Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and PTY; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to one, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The Uniprot human database was used. Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cholesterol transport, Er-mitochondria, Ms, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Proteomics core facility, Olso University hospital,  Norway

### Submitter
Sachin  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Simonsen
Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway


