### Accession
PXD002117

### Title
The quantitative proteome of a human cell line

### Description
The generation of mathematical models of biological processes, the simulation of these processes under different conditions, and the comparison and integration of multiple data sets are explicit goals of systems biology that require the knowledge of the absolute quantity of the system's components. To date, systematic estimates of cellular protein concentrations have been exceptionally scarce. Here, we provide a quantitative description of the proteome of a commonly used human cell line in two functional states, interphase and mitosis. We show that these human cultured cells express at least ∼10 000 proteins and that the quantified proteins span a concentration range of seven orders of magnitude up to 20 000 000 copies per cell. We discuss how protein abundance is linked to function and evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 20 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (1/100, w/w). AQUA peptides were spiked into the sample at this stage, if applicable. The peptides were cleaned up by C18 reversed‐phase spin columns according to the manufacturer's instructions (Harvard Apparatus). The peptides were separated on pH 3–10 IPG strips (GE Healthcare) with a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The set‐up of the μRPLC‐MS system

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML and mgf. MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT against a decoy database (consisting of forward and reverse protein sequences).

### Publication Abstract
The generation of mathematical models of biological processes, the simulation of these processes under different conditions, and the comparison and integration of multiple data sets are explicit goals of systems biology that require the knowledge of the absolute quantity of the system's components. To date, systematic estimates of cellular protein concentrations have been exceptionally scarce. Here, we provide a quantitative description of the proteome of a commonly used human cell line in two functional states, interphase and mitosis. We show that these human cultured cells express at least -10 000 proteins and that the quantified proteins span a concentration range of seven orders of magnitude up to 20 000 000 copies per cell. We discuss how protein abundance is linked to function and evolution.

### Keywords
Nuclear pore complex, U2os, Absolute quantification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel


