### Accession
PXD004158

### Title
Interaction between bovine IL-1-stimulated cartilage and human serum, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Joint diseases are often characterized by inflammatory processes resulting in pathological changes in joint tissues, including cartilage degradation and release of components to the synovial fluid. The complement system plays a central role in promoting the inflammation. Since several cartilage proteins are known to interact with complement, causing either activation or inhibition of the system, we aimed to investigate these interactions comprehensively. Bovine cartilage explants were cultured with interleukin-1alpha (IL-1a) to induce cartilage degradation, followed by incubation with human serum to allow interactions with complement. Label-free selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry (MS) was then used to specifically quantify complement proteins interacting with the cartilage explant. In parallel, the time-dependent degradation of cartilage was detected using tandem MS (MS/MS). Complement proteins resulting from activation of the classical and alternative pathway as well as the terminal pathway were detected on IL-1a stimulated cartilage at time points when clear alterations in the extracellular matrix composition had occurred. To confirm SRM results indicating complement activation, increased levels of the complement activation product C4d were detected by ELISA in serum after incubation with IL-1a stimulated cartilage. Further, typical activated (cleaved) C3 fragments were detected by western blotting of urea extracts of IL-1a stimulated cartilage. No complement activation was triggered by cartilage cultured in the absence of IL-1a. Components released from IL-1a stimulated cartilage during culture had an inhibitory effect on complement activation. These were released after a longer incubation period with IL-1a and may represent a feedback reaction to cartilage-triggered complement activation observed after a shorter incubation period.

### Sample Protocol
Culturing of cartilage explants - Fresh adult bovine nasal cartilage septa were collected from a local butchery. Perichondrium was removed from cartilage, and pieces of 2 mm in diameter where cut out with a sterile dermal biopsy punch tool. Cartilage pieces were washed, weighed and immediately placed in 96-well plate (NUNCLON) containing 200microL serum-free DMEM (high glucose, no phenol red, Life technologies), supplemented with 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium-sodium pyruvate (Life technologies), 0.1 mM MEM nonessential amino acids, 100 U/ml penicillin G, 100 microg/ml streptomycin, 0.25 microg/ml amphotericin B and 20 microg/ml ascorbic acid. Explants were precultured for 24 h in an incubator maintaining 5% CO2 and 37C. Thereafter (day 0), cartilage explants were cultured in new media in the presence or absence of 10 ng/ml recombinant Human IL-1alpha/IL-1F1 (200-LA-002, R and D), which were collected and replenished every three days. Cartilage explants were collected at day 0, 6, 9, 12, 15 and stored frozen for later use. In a separate culture, cartilage explants were collected at day 0, 1, 3, 6, 9. Incubation of cartilage with serum and trypsin digestion - Normal human serum (NHS) was prepared as previously described. Cartilage explants, collected after culture with or without IL-1a for different number of days, were washed 3 times with 200 microL Hepes++ buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.35, 120 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2). Fifty microL of 30% NHS was added to each explant and incubated for 1h at 37C. NHS samples were collected, 20 mM EDTA added and stored at -80C for later detection of complement activation products. Cartilage explants were washed 5 times with Hepes++ and denatured with 30 microL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature, reduced in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride for 30 min at 37C and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. Aliquots of supernatants were removed for analysis of complement activation products. Supernatants (18 microL) remaining together with the cartilage explants were diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach a urea concentration below 1.6 M and digested overnight with trypsin (2 microg/sample, Sequence grade modified trypsin, V5113, Promega) at 37C. The digests were collected from cartilage and further digested with additional 2 microg trypsin for 6 hours at 37C. Finally, 2% formic acid was added to stop digestion and obtain pH 3. The experiment was performed in triplicates. Peptide clean-up on C18 spin columns - Samples were desalted and cleaned-up using Macro SpinColumns Silica C18 (74-4101, Harvard apparatus). Briefly, columns were washed with methanol, and equilibrated with 2 % acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2 % formic acid (FA)). Samples were immobilized, followed by column wash with the equilibration buffer and elution with 50% ACN in 0.2% FA. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac and dissolved in equilibration buffer, sonicated for 5 min in a water bath and transferred to MS vials. LC-MS/MS analysis - Tandem MS was performed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument interfaced with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using Acclaim PepMap (C18, 3microm, 100Å, 75microm x 2 cm) as precolumn followed by EASY-Spray PepMap (C18, 2microm, 100Å, ID: 75microm*25 cm) (Thermo Scientific). A one-hour linear gradient was run from 5% to 30% ACN in aqueous 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The resolution of MS and MS/MS scans were 70 000 and 17 500 at 200 m/z, respectively. The 15 most abundant ions found in the MS scan were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation. Only ions with one charge or more were screened and the dynamic exclusion window was set to 20 s. A value above 1.7e4 was required for MS precursors to trigger further MS/MS scans. The ion accumulation time was 100 ms and 60 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively, with automatic gain control set to 1e6.

### Data Protocol
The Q Exactive MS/MS raw data were converted to mzml with msconvert and analysed using tools from the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v 4.7 POLAR CORTEX rev 0, Build 201403121010) . In short, X!Tandem (2013.06.15.1-LabKey,Insilicos,ISB) was used to search the data against a local protein reference database, that was constructed from UniprotKB entries (20150518) of Homo sapiens (Reviewed, UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot, 20210 sequences) and Bos taurus (Reviewed, UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot, 5993 sequences and Unreviewed, UniprotKB/TrEMBL, 25885 sequences). The database also contained the sequences in reversed order. In searches, the mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions was 20 and 50 ppm, respectively. Fixed modifications were cysteine alkylation and variable modifications were methionine oxidation and hydroxyproline. The enzyme specificity was trypsin and maximally 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. PeptideProphet, iProphet, ProteinProphet were used for statistical validation and probability assignments of identified  peptides and proteins, followed by further processing with Abacus, with an approximate false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Joint diseases are often characterized by inflammatory processes that result in pathological changes in joint tissues, including cartilage degradation and release of components into the synovial fluid. The complement system plays a central role in promoting the inflammation. Because several cartilage proteins are known to interact with complement, causing either activation or inhibition of the system, we aimed to investigate these interactions comprehensively. Bovine cartilage explants were cultured with IL-1&#x3b1; to induce cartilage degradation, followed by incubation with human serum. Label-free selected reaction monitoring mass spectrometry was used to specifically quantify complement proteins interacting with the cartilage explant. In parallel, the time-dependent degradation of cartilage was detected using mass spectrometry analysis (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry). Complement proteins resulting from activation of the classical, alternative, and terminal pathways were detected on IL-1&#x3b1;-stimulated cartilage at time points when clear alterations in extracellular matrix composition had occurred. Increased levels of the complement activation product C4d, as detected by ELISA in serum after incubation with IL-1&#x3b1;-stimulated cartilage, confirmed the selected reaction monitoring results indicating complement activation. Further, typical activated (cleaved) C3 fragments were detected by Western blotting in extracts of IL-1&#x3b1;-stimulated cartilage. No complement activation was triggered by cartilage cultured in the absence of IL-1&#x3b1;. Components released from IL-1&#x3b1;-stimulated cartilage during culture had an inhibitory effect on complement activation. These were released after a longer incubation period with IL-1&#x3b1; and may represent a feedback reaction to cartilage-triggered complement activation observed after a shorter incubation period.

### Keywords
Human serum, Bovine cartilage, Il-1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Division of Medical Protein Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Camilla Melin Fürst

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Maria Blom
Division of Medical Protein Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Sweden


