### Accession
PXD015328

### Title
Lentimonas catalyze the degradation of complex sulfated fucans in the ocean

### Description
Brown algae synthesize various polysaccharides that are ultimately catabolized by marine heterotrophic bacteria. Complex cell wall polysaccharides such as sulfated fucans are considered recalcitrant to microbial degradation and their pathways remain elusive. The branched structure of fucans sterically constraints enzyme-substrate interaction and also, fucan structure varies depending on algae and season challenging adaptation of microbial pathways. Here we show how Lentimonas specialized to overcome the complexity and diversity of sulfated fucans. The strain acquired a 0.9 mbp plasmid with over 200 glycoside hydrolases and sulfatases for the degradation of at least six different sulfated fucans. Per fucan, 100 enzymes are induced and we identified three structural types of fucans with similar pathways depending on their galactose, acetate and sulfate content. The highly decorated structure sulfated fucans expands the copy number and diversity of few key enzyme families, namely GH29, GH95, GH141 and sulfatases S1_15, S1_16 and S1_17. Those enzymes are co-regulated in large operons to step-wise degrade sulfated fucans. Fucose metabolism places additional burden as the conversion of toxic intermediates into lactate and propanediol occurs in a proteome-costly bacterial microcompartment. Through analyzing available genomes and metagenomes, we emphasize that Verrucomicrobia are abundant, yet specialized degraders of complex polysaccharides.

### Sample Protocol
Verrucomicobia isolates were either grown in Tibbles and Rawling medium (Tibbles and Rawlings, 1994) or MOPS-buffered minimal medium (MMM) which is derived from Tibbles Rawling medium by reducing the phosphate to 1mM, omitting the Tris buffer and supplementing it with 20 mM MOPS buffer at pH8. Unless otherwise stated, we used 0.2% (w/v) of carbohydrates.For proteome analysis, Lentimonas sp. CC4 was cultured in triplicates (n = 3) in MMM with 0.1% iota-carrageenan, 0.2% galactose, 0.2% fucose, 0.2% sulfated fucan from Cladosiphon okamurans or 0.2% sulfated fucan from Fucus vesiculosus. Pre-cultures with the same carbon source were used to set the starting OD600 of the main culture to 0.05. Cells were harvested in mid-exponential phase (OD600 = ~0.25) by centrifugation at 4000g for 10 minutes at 4°C and stored at -80°C until analysis. Cell pellets were washed in TE buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10mM EDTA pH 8.0) containing cOmplete Protease Inhibitor (Roche). Soluble proteins were extracted by sonication (2 x 25 s), and the protein concentration was determined with the Bradford assay. Then, 15 ug of protein were loaded onto 10% polyacrylamide sodium dodecyl sulfate mini gels, separated (60 min, 150 V) and stained with Roti-Blue quick (Carl Roth). Subsequently, entire gel lanes were sliced into ten equal pieces and digested with a 1 µg ml trypsin solution. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a nano-ACQUITY-UPLC (Waters Corporation) equipped with a C18 column and mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were determined using an online-coupled LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) (Otto et al., 2010).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy protein sequence database, including sequences of Lentimonas sp. CC4 and of common laboratory contaminants. Protein searches were performed using MaxQuant with a peptide level false discovery rate of 0.01 (Tyanova, Temu and Cox, 2016). Only proteins that could be detected in at least two out of three replicates were counted as identified. The automatically calculated iBAQ values (intensity-based absolute quantification; i.e., peak area divided by the sum of all theoretical peptides) were used to calculate riBAQ values (relative iBAQ; giving the relative protein abundance in % of all proteins in the same sample) for semiquantitative comparisons between samples from different nutrient conditions (Shin et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Brown algae are important players in the global carbon cycle by fixing carbon dioxide into 1&#x2009;Gt of biomass annually, yet the fate of fucoidan-their major cell wall polysaccharide-remains poorly understood. Microbial degradation of fucoidans is slower than that of other polysaccharides, suggesting that fucoidans are more recalcitrant and may sequester carbon in the ocean. This may be due to the complex, branched and highly sulfated structure of fucoidans, which also varies among species of brown algae. Here, we show that 'Lentimonas' sp. CC4, belonging to the Verrucomicrobia, acquired a remarkably complex machinery for the degradation of six different fucoidans. The strain accumulated 284 putative fucoidanases, including glycoside hydrolases, sulfatases and carbohydrate esterases, which are primarily located on a 0.89-megabase pair plasmid. Proteomics reveals that these enzymes assemble into substrate-specific pathways requiring about 100 enzymes per fucoidan from different species of brown algae. These enzymes depolymerize fucoidan into fucose, which is metabolized in a proteome-costly bacterial microcompartment that spatially constrains the metabolism of the toxic intermediate lactaldehyde. Marine metagenomes and microbial genomes show that Verrucomicrobia including 'Lentimonas' are abundant and highly specialized degraders of fucoidans and other complex polysaccharides. Overall, the complexity of the pathways underscores why fucoidans are probably recalcitrant and more slowly degraded, since only highly specialized organisms can effectively degrade them in the ocean.

### Keywords
Lentimonas, Lc-ms/ms, Sulfated fucans

### Affiliations
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald
University Greifswald

### Submitter
Marie-Katherin Zühlke

### Lab Head
Dr Marie-Katherin Zühlke
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald


