### Accession
PXD019667

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analyses to reveal the key features of proteins in new onset Ankylosing spondylitis patients

### Description
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a chronic immune-mediated disease. Various immune cells play an essential role in the AS pathogenesis. However, the specific pathogenesis of AS has not been well understood. Proteomic profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were applied to reveal the specific pathogenesis of AS. Quantitative proteomic analyses were performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based methods, to investigate the proteins profiling of PBMCs from new-onset AS patients (n=9) and healthy controls (n=9). We identified 782 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 527 differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) between AS patients and healthy controls. Subcellular location of DEPs and DPPs showed most of DEPs from cytoplasm (n=296, 38%), extracellular (n=141, 18%) and nucleus (n=114, 15%), respectively; most of DPPs from cytoplasm (n=37, 34%), nucleus (n=35, 32%) and plasma membrane (n=10, 9%), respectively. We further identified 89 proteins with both expression and phosphorylation differences. Functional annotation of the 89 differentially expressed and phosphorylated proteins enriched in antigen processing and presentation pathway. Four differentially expressed proteins with six phosphorylated position were found in antigen processing and presentation pathway. The differentially expressed and phosphorylated proteins may be helpful to uncover the pathogenesis of AS. The six AS-specific proteins may sever as candidate markers for AS diagnosis and new treatment targets.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) PBMCs were isolated using density gradient centrifugation method. Briefly, the heparinized whole blood was diluted 1:1 with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Gibco) and 20 mL of diluted blood was layered onto 10 mL of Ficoll-Paque Plus (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden). Samples were then centrifuged at 500 g for 20 min at room temperature. PBMCs were collected from the interface of spun blood samples and were washed twice with PBS by centrifugation at 500 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the PBMCs were then resuspended at a final concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin. The viability of the cells was consistently greater than 95% as measured by trypan blue solution (Sigma, Germany). Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The extraction and digestion procedures of proteins following the published method.14 We took samples from -80 °C cryogenic refrigerator, then sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (JY92-IIN, Scientz, China) in four-fold volume lysis buffer (containing 8 M urea, HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). The cell fragments were removed by centrifugation for 10 min, at 12 000 g at 4 °C. Finally, supernatant was collected and transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Beyotime, China). For digestion, reduced the protein solution with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C, then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The urea concentration of the protein sample was diluted to less than 2 M by adding 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Finally, trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Modification enrichment and affinity enrichment After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 solid-phase extraction column (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. For the enrichment of the modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (containing 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), then incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number 001, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then we washed the beads four times using NETN buffer and twice using H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS analysis We performed LC-MS/MS analysis on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. When the ion source voltage was set to 1.4kV, peptides were detected in the Orbitrap one MS/MS scan of 70,000. Followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were retrieved by Maxquant search engine (v1.6.6.0). A human database was searched (Swiss-Prot, downloaded 2019-05-13, 20422 protein sequences). Decoy database anti-library was used to reduced false positive rate (FDR). FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Proteins with a fold-change ≥1.50 or ≤0.67 were considered as expression/phosphorylation significant. Based on the protein sequence alignment method, the proteins domain functions were defined by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). The subcellular localization was predicted by WoLF PSORT. Functional annotation enrichments of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) were performed by Gene Ontology (GO) annotation analysis, and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. The enrichment significant identified as p < 0.05 in Fisher's exact test and q < 0.05 in Benjamini-Hochberg's Procedure. We conducted hierarchical clustering analysis for the DEPs and DPPs using the “heatmap.2” function form and “gplots” R package.

### Publication Abstract
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a chronic immune-mediated disease. Various immune cells play an essential role in the AS pathogenesis. However, the specific pathogenesis of AS has not been well understood. Proteomic profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were applied to reveal the specific pathogenesis of AS. Quantitative proteomic analyses were performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based methods to investigate the protein profiling of PBMCs from new-onset AS patients (<i>n</i> = 9) and healthy controls (<i>n</i> = 9). We identified 782 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 527 differentially phosphorylated proteins (DPPs) between AS patients and healthy controls. The subcellular location of DEPs and DPPs showed that most of the DEPs were from the cytoplasm (<i>n</i> = 296, 38%), were extracellular (<i>n</i> = 141, 18%), and from the nucleus (<i>n</i> = 114, 15%); most of the DPPs were from the cytoplasm (<i>n</i> = 37, 34%), nucleus (<i>n</i> = 35, 32%), and plasma membrane (<i>n</i> = 10, 9%). We further identified 89 proteins with both expression and phosphorylation differences. The functional annotation of the 89 differentially expressed and phosphorylated proteins enriched in the antigen processing and presentation pathway. Four DEPs with six phosphorylated positions were found in the antigen processing and presentation pathway. The differentially expressed and phosphorylated proteins may be helpful to uncover the pathogenesis of AS. The six AS-specific proteins may serve as candidate markers for AS diagnosis and new treatment targets.

### Keywords
Ankylosing spondylitis; peripheral blood mononuclear cells; proteomic; phosphoromics

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Southern University of Science and Technology, the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen People’s Hospital, Shenzhen 518020, China
Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, China

### Submitter
Yongping Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Dai
The First Affiliated Hospital of Southern University of Science and Technology, the Second Clinical Medical College of Jinan University, Shenzhen People’s Hospital, Shenzhen 518020, China


