### Accession
PXD035249

### Title
Four-dimensional proteomics analysis of human cerebrospinal fluid on a trapped ion mobility mass spectrometer using PASEF

### Description
A quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry coupled with a trapped ion mobility mass spectrometer operated in parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation  mode has recently emerged as proteome profiling platform capable of providing four dimensional features of elution time, collision cross section, precursor and fragment ion masses of peptides. The PASEF mode has demonstrated its superior performance by providing nearly 100% ion sampling efficiency both in data-dependent acquisition and data-independent acquisition modes without sacrificing sensitivity. In addition, the substantial gain in selectivity has been proven in targeted measurements using PASEF integrated parallel reaction monitoring mode. However, because these are emerging technologies in the field of proteomics, their applicability to clinical samples has been less investigated. Cerebrospinal fluid is in direct contact with brain and has been shown to contain biomarkers related to a variety of  neurological diseases although the proteomics data have been mainly generated using orbitrap-based mass spectrometers. Thus, we acquired in-depth proteome profiles of human CSF in DDA mode to generate a spectral library of 3,478 proteins. The benefit of applying the spectral library to PRM experiments was demonstrated by using CSF samples from 15 Alzheimer’s disease patients and 19 controls and utilizing the spectral library to determine elution times and ion mobility values of targeting peptide. Further, we acquired DIA data from the same CSF samples, and analyzed using the spectral library without additional efforts to generate study-specific library, which also resulted in sensitive protein identification compared to a library-free approach. Overall, we established resource of CSF proteome profiles with 4D features and demonstrated the significant gain for designing and analyzing targeted and DIA studies, which is expected to facilitate 4D proteomics of CSF to study various neurological disorders.

### Sample Protocol
CSF sample was vacuum dried and reconstituted in 200 µl of 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. After reduction and alkylation using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively, proteins were digested using sequencing grade trypsin with 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. Peptide concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay as per the manufacturer’s instructions, and 500 µg of peptides were loaded on a Xbridge column for separation over 2 hours. Gradient was generated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system. Solvent A and solvent B were 20 mM ammonium formate in water (pH 8.5) and 20 mM ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile (pH 8.5), respectively. A linear gradient was applied from 2 to 40% of solvent B and the eluents were collected into 96 fractions which were further concatenated into 24 fractions. CSF samples from 15 AD patients and 19 controls that were processed for prm-PASEF and diaPASEF experiments. Equal amounts of protein were lysed in 8M urea in 50 mM HEPES buffer. These solubilized proteins were first reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37ºC followed by alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC with 1:20 enzyme to protein ratio. Peptides were desalted and 1 µg of peptides from individual fractioned samples were analyzed in DDA-PASEF mode. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column and separated on 200 cm long micro pillar array column. Gradient was generated using nanoElute liquid chromatography system with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The following gradient was applied; 3-7% sol B in 15 min, 7-37% sol B in 250 min, 37-80% sol B in 10 min, maintaining at 80% sol B for 10 min, and equilibrating with 3% sol B for 15 min. The flow rate was set as 400 nl/min except at the first 15 min where the flow rate of 700 nl/min was used. Samples were analyzed on timsTOF Pro using DDA-PASEF mode with 10 PASEF scans. Ion mobility range was set as from 0.6 to 1.6 V s cm-2 with 100 ms of ramp time and accumulation time. For prm-PASEF analysis, 500 ng of peptides were injected and separated on an analytical column over 60 min; 5-40% sol B in 45 min, 40-80% in 5 min, maintaining at 80% sol B for 5 min, and equilibrating with 5% sol B for 5 min at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Mass spectrometer was operated in prm-PASEF mode monitoring 27 peptides. Ramp time and accumulation time were set as 100 ms. For diaPASEF analysis, 500 ng of peptides were separated on a 50 cm long micro pillar array column  over 150 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min; 3-40% sol B in 120 min, 40-80% in 10 min, maintaining at 80% sol B for 10 min, and equilibrating with 3% sol B for 10 min. Ions were monitored in the range of 400-1200 m/z with isolation widow of 20 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data of DDA-PASEF experiments were loaded on Fragpipe suite (version 15.0) and searched against uniport human protein database using MSFragger. Two missed cleavages were allowed by trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. PSM validation and protein inference were performed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet, respectively under 1% FDR. IonQuant process was selected for quantitation at MS1 level. To generate a spectral library, EasyPQP was used under default setting. The analysis of prm-PASEF data was performed using Skyline. Peak area was calculated from 6 fragment ions per peptide. DIA-NN (version 1.8) was used for analyzing diaPASEF data using the spectral library generated from MSFragger. For Spectronaut (version 15) analysis, the spectral library generated through Pulsar was used. All other setting were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
The roentgenoanatomical investigation, performed according to archival roentgenograms of the urinary tracts in 57 boys and 294 girls at the age of 2-16 years, characterizes the value of the subpubic angle and age dynamics of its form and size. The form and size of the subpubic angle in the children of the given age varies within large range--acute, right, obtuse; sex differentiation is clearly followed in the group of 11-16 years of age, when in the boys there are three forms of the angles--right (most often occurring), then obtuse and acute (seldom occurring), while in the girls of this age group there are only two forms--obtuse and right with definite predominance frequency of the obtuse angle. The formation of the feminine type of the subpubic angle takes a longer period of time than the masculine type.

### Keywords
Prm-pasef, And alzheimer’s disease, Dda-pasef, Csf, Diapasef, 4d proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


