### Accession
PXD005410

### Title
HiRIEF LC-MS allows for in depth quantitative analysis of the phosphoproteome.

### Description
In this project we aimed at improving phosphoproteomics analysis by taking advantage of high resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) fractionation. We developed a workflow that employs titanium dioxide phospho-enrichment, followed by isobaric labeling with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) and HiRIEF on a broad pI range (immobilized pH gradient, IPG gel strips employed were 2.5-3.7 and 3-10, Phospho HiRIEF LC-MS). We analyzed HeLa cells untreated (four biological replicates), treated with pervanadate or arrested in mitosis (three biological replicates each). Employing a relatively low amount of material (300 μg of peptides), we identify 22,674 phosphorylation sites, of which 19,036 were localized with high confidence. We demonstrate isoelectric point dependent fractionation of the peptides based on the number of phosphate groups that they carry: 18% of the phospho-peptides identified with the IPG 2.5-3.7 gel strip are multiply phosphorylated peptides and they localize predominantly in the most acidic pI fractions. Identified phosphorylation sites include 1,198 tyrosine phosphorylation sites and 1,491 phospho-sites that were not previously reported in the PhosphoSitePlus database. Total protein quantification performed by standard HiRIEF on the same samples identified 9,185 proteins, of which 4,575 overlap with the proteins identified by Phospho HiRIEF LC-MS. Phosphorylation sites corresponding to these proteins were normalized to total protein abundance, resulting in 18,374 quantified phospho-sites. Kinase association analysis on the quantified phospho-sites resulted in identification of a subset that has putative functions during the mitotic phase and protein-protein interaction network analysis shows a high degree of connectivity of these putatively functional novel phospho-sites.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from HeLa cells, untreated (4 replicates), pervanadate treated or arrested in mitosis (3 replicates each) in the presence of 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 0.35% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher). Proteins were digested to peptides with trypsin using a slightly modified FASP protocol. Briefly, cysteine residues were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide in solution. Subsequently, protein extracts were applied on 10k filtration units (Merck-Millipore), centrifuged and washed once before digestion at 37°C overnight with trypsin/Lys-C mix 1:25 w/w (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Wash and digestion steps were performed using a 0.2% SDC-50mM HEPES solution. The peptides were collected by centrifugation of the FASP filters and the SDC was precipitated by addition of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were then desalted using Polymeric Reversed Phase-Solid Phase Extraction (RP-SPE) cartridges (Phenomenex) and peptide concentration was measured with DC protein assay (BioRad).  For Phospho HiRIEF analysis, 300 μg of peptides per sample were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using STAGE tips packed with titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). Binding of phosphorylated peptides was performed in the presence of 80% acetonitrile, ACN, 6%, TFA for 30 minutes, followed by washing with a solution of 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA and elution with a 5% ammonia solution. Samples were then labeled with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT), pooled and desalted with Reversed Phase-Solid Phase Extraction cartridges. The pooled sample was split in two and fractionated by HiRIEF using immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips with pH range 2.5-3.7 and 3-10. Strips were extracted to 72 fractions in a 96-well plate and each fraction was analyzed by LC-MS on a Q-Exactive instrument.   For standard proteomics analysis, samples were prepared analogously besides no phospho-enrichment was performed and 50 μg of peptides per sample were employed for TMT labeling.  For phospho HiRIEF analysis all 72 fractions from the IPG 2.5-3.7 strip and the first 60 fractions from the IPG 3-10 strip were analyzed by LC-MS. For standard proteomics analysis all 72 fractions from the IPG 3-10 strip were analyzed by LC-MS. Each HiRIEF fraction was dissolved in 15 µl of phase A (95% water, 5% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), 0.1% FA), mixed by drawing/dispensing 10µl ten times, followed by the auto sampler (Ultimate 3000 RSLC system, Thermo Scientific Dionex) injecting 10 µl into a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo). Following 5 min of flow at 5 µl/min driven by the loading pump, the 10-port valve switched to analysis mode in which the binary high-pressure gradient pump (HPG) (referred to as NG pump) provided a flow of 250 nL/min through the guard desalting column. From an initial composition of 3% phase B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) the reversed phase gradient proceeded to 45% phase B over 50 min. Upon completion of the gradient, the column was washed with a solution of 99% phase B for 10min and re-equilibrated to the initial composition. Total LC-MS run time was 74 min. A nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo) was used on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo) at 60°C. Online LC-MS was performed using a hybrid Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Fourier transform-based mass spectrometer (FTMS) master scans with a resolution of 70,000 (and mass range 300-1,700 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the 5 most abundant ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1*106 for MS1 and 1*105 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150 ms (for proteomics) or 450 ms (for phosphoproteomics) for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with a 60 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge states or a charge state of +1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was applied.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were searched by Sequest/Percolator under the Proteome Discoverer software platform (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database was the human protein subset of Swissprot, release 2015-08-12, 42,121 entries. Precursor ion and product ion mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively were used for HCD-FTMS. Additionally, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to two missed trypsin cleavages (Lys-Pro and Arg-Pro were not considered cleavage sites). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 10-plex on lysine and N-terminus were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while searching all MS/MS spectra. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as dynamic modifications while searching MS/MS spectra from the phospho HiRIEF LC-MS analysis. Quantitation of TMT 10-plex reporter ions was performed using an integration window tolerance of 10 ppm. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide level. The phosphoRS algorithm node was added to the workflow for the phosphoproteomics search to obtain probabilities of localization of phosphorylation sites, and only sites with high confidence of localization (>= 95 pRS score) were used for quantification.  Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) tables were exported from the PD msf search files and used for subsequent data analysis. Briefly, ratios were calculated for each PSM by dividing the intensity of each TMT channel to the average intensity of the four TMT channels corresponding to the untreated samples. For Phospho HiRIEF analysis, ratios are then represented in a site-centric manner, by taking the median ratio of all the PSMs for a unique phospho-site. Analogously, for standard proteomics analysis, ratios are represented in a gene-centric manner by taking the median ratio across all PSMs mapping uniquely to a gene. Additionally, protein ratios are normalized by the median per each TMT channel assuming equal loading across the ten channels.  Statistical analysis and plots were generated with RStudio. Novel phosphorylation sites were defined by the overlap with phosphorylation sites included in the PhosphoSitePlus database. Kinase association analysis was performed with NetworKIN. Additional tools employed include GOrilla for gene ontology enrichment analysis, Cytoscape with the PhosphoPath plugin for protein-protein interaction analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is involved in the regulation of most eukaryotic cells functions and mass spectrometry-based analysis has made major contributions to our understanding of this regulation. However, low abundance of phosphorylated species presents a major challenge in achieving comprehensive phosphoproteome coverage and robust quantification. In this study, we developed a workflow employing titanium dioxide phospho-enrichment coupled with isobaric labeling by Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) and high-resolution isoelectric focusing (HiRIEF) fractionation to perform in-depth quantitative phosphoproteomics starting with a low sample quantity. To benchmark the workflow, we analyzed HeLa cells upon pervanadate treatment or cell cycle arrest in mitosis. Analyzing 300&#x2009;&#xb5;g of peptides per sample, we identified 22,712 phosphorylation sites, of which 19,075 were localized with high confidence and 1,203 are phosphorylated tyrosine residues, representing 6.3% of all detected phospho-sites. HiRIEF fractions with the most acidic isoelectric points are enriched in multiply phosphorylated peptides, which represent 18% of all the phospho-peptides detected in the pH range 2.5-3.7. Cross-referencing with the PhosphoSitePlus database reveals 1,264 phosphorylation sites that have not been previously reported and kinase association analysis suggests that a subset of these may be functional during the mitotic phase.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ipg, Phosphorylation, Quantification, Mitosis, Multiplex, Networkin, Quantitative, Mitotic arrest, Phospho-peptides, Tyrosine, Hirief, Fractionation, Multiply phosphorylated, Phosphoproteomics, Pervanadate, Phospho-sites, Cells, Kinase association, Hela, Isoelectric point, 10-plex, Proteomics, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Dept. of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtio
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Dept. of Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet


