### Accession
PXD021987

### Title
Prematuration treatment free of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid improves the maturation of sugarcane somatic embryos by affecting the hormonal balance and the accumulation of reserves

### Description
Several factors influence the culture conditions and somatic embryogenesis responses, such as the role of plant growth regulators (PGRs) during the establishment of in vitro cultures. For instance, auxin is required for callus induction and the acquisition of embryogenic capacity in different species, but the removal of auxin is needed for the further differentiation of somatic embryos. Thus, we aimed to evaluate the effects of residual 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) on the maturation of sugarcane somatic embryos. First, embryogenic calli were separated into two groups: the PGR-free group was cultured without 2,4-D and b) the control group was maintained on proliferation culture medium, which contains 2,4-D. After 21 days of culture in the dark, both groups were transferred to maturation culture medium under light. Our results showed that calli grown in PGR-free culture medium yielded more somatic embryos and exhibited a higher accumulation of protein and starch reserves. A proteomic analysis showed a decrease in the abundance of abscisic acid (ABA)-induced proteins in the control group. The levels of residual 2,4-D and endogenous 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC), an ethylene precursor, were higher in the control group than in the PGR-free group. Conversely, the level of ABA was higher in the PGR-free group than in the control group. A disruption in the ABA and ethylene levels might be responsible for the observed delay in the accumulation of storage reserves in the embryogenic calli of the control group, which might have affected the development of somatic embryos. Our results also showed that the efficient development of sugarcane somatic embryos appears to be preceded by an efficient accumulation of storage reserves in calli, which is related to hormone homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Analysis Total Protein Extraction  The extraction buffer consisted of 7 M urea (GE Healthcare), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 2% triton X-100 (GE Healthcare), 1% dithiothreitol (DTT, GE Healtcare), 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma-Aldrich), and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). Samples from PGR-free and control groups on days 0, 14, and 28 were pulverized using a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen. Then, in microtubes, 1 mL of extraction buffer was added to the sample powder. Samples were vortexed for 30 min at 8 °C and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was measured using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). This analysis used five biological samples (300 mg FM each) for each treatment (days 0, 14, and 28). However, only samples from days 0 and 14 proceeded with the proteomic analysis.  Protein Digestion  Before the trypsin digestion step, protein samples were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform methodology to remove any interferent from samples (Nanjo et al. 2012). After protein precipitation, samples were resuspended in urea 7 M/thiourea 2 M solution for proper resuspension. Protein digestion was performed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology as described by Wiśniewski et al. (2009), with modifications. Before starting the digestion procedure, an integrity test was made to check for damaged filter units (Hernandez-Valladares et al. 2016), thus only the working units were used. After that, protein aliquots were added to the Microcon-30 kDa filter units (Millipore) (Lipecka et al. 2016), washed with 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (solution A), and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 min at 25 °C (unless otherwise stated, all centrifugation steps were performed at this condition). This step was repeated once for complete removal of urea before reduction of proteins. Next, 100 µL of 50 mM DTT (GE Healthcare) freshly made in solution A were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 20 min at 60 °C (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 4 min resting). Then, 200 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (solution B) were added, and centrifuged for 15 min. For protein alkylation, 100 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) freshly prepared in solution B were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 20 min at 25 °C in the dark (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 19 min resting). Next, 200 µL of solution B were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated once. Then, 200 µL of solution A were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated twice. In the last washing, it should remain approximately 50 µL of sample. For protein digestion, 25 µL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest (Waters, Milford, CT, USA) and 25 µL of trypsin solution (1:100 enzyme:protein, V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C (1 min agitation at 650 rpm and 4 min resting). For peptide elution, the filter units were transferred for new microtubes and centrifuged for 10 min. Then, 50 µL of solution A were added and centrifuged for 15 min. This step was repeated once. For RapiGest precipitation and trypsin inhibition, 5 µL of 15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) were added, gently vortexed, and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Then, samples were centrifuged for 15 min, the supernatants collected, and vacuum dried. Peptides were resuspended in 100 µL solution of 95% 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were quantified by the A205 nm protein and peptide methodology using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis   Mass spectrometry was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK). Runs consisted of five biological replicates of 1 µg of digested proteins. The injections were performed randomly to avoid bias. During separation, samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 5 μm trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μL/min during 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity M-Class HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL/min, with a column temperature of 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia, Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution started at 5% B, then ramped from 5% B to 40% B up to 91.12 min, and from 40% B to 99% B until 95.12 min, being maintained at 99% until 99.12 min, then decreasing to 5% B until 101.12 min, and kept 5% B until the end of experiment at 117.00 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility (HDMSE), and in DIA mode; ion mobility separation used an IMS wave velocity ramp starting with 800 m/s and ending with 500 m/s; the transfer collision energy ramped from 25 V to 55 V in high-energy mode; cone and capillary voltages of 30 V and 3000 V, respectively; nano flow gas of 0.5 Bar and purge gas of 150 L/h; and a source temperature of 100 °C. In TOF parameters, the scan time was set to 0.6 s in continuum mode with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. The human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol/μL was used as an external calibrant and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra acquisition was performed by MassLynx v4.0 software.  Proteomic data analysis  Spectra processing and database search conditions were performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) software v.3.02 (Waters). After optimization using the free software PLGS Threshold Inspector v2.4, the analysis utilized the following parameters: Apex3D of 150 counts for low-energy threshold, 25 counts for elevated-energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; one missed cleavage; minimum fragment ions per peptide equal to three; minimum fragment ions per protein equal to seven; minimum peptides per protein equal to two; fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY); default false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%; automatic peptide and fragment tolerance. For protein identification, we used the sugarcane protein databank (Zhang et al. 2018), using a concatenated target-decoy approach for FDR estimation by reversing the database. Label-free quantification analyses were performed using ISOQuant software v.1.7 (Distler et al. 2014). Briefly, we used the following parameters: peptide and protein FDR 1%, sequence length of at least six amino acid residues, and minimum peptide score equal to six. Samples were normalized by a multidimensional normalization process, which corrects peak intensities based on the intensity and retention time domains. The software performed the relative protein quantification according to the TOP3 method. Based on relative abundances of uniquely assigned peptides, the abundances of shared peptides were redistributed to the respective source proteins, followed by the TOP3-based quantification (Distler et al. 2014). The output table contains the detailed settings used by ISOQuant for data analysis. To ensure the quality of the results after data processing, only proteins present in at least four runs were accepted for differential abundance analysis. Proteins were considered as differentially abundant if fold change value was greater than 2 according to Student’s t-test (Two-tailed, P < 0.05) and after p-value correction by Benjamini-Hochberg test. Functional annotations were performed using Blast2Go software v.5.0 (Conesa et al. 2005) and UniprotKB (www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Somatic embryos, Hormones, Storage reserves, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


