### Accession
PXD010005

### Title
Mutations in disordered regions cause disease by creating dileucine motifs - PRM dataset-

### Description
Mutations in intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins are associated with a wide spectrum of diseases. Since IDRs lack a fixed three-dimensional structure, the molecular mechanism by which such mutations cause disease is often unknown. Here, we employ a peptide-based proteomic screen to investigate the impact of mutations in IDRs on protein-protein interactions. We find that mutations in disordered cytosolic regions of three transmembrane proteins (GLUT1, ITPR1 and CACNA1H) lead to an increased binding of clathrin. In all three cases, the mutation creates a dileucine motif known to mediate clathrin-dependent trafficking. Follow-up experiments on full length GLUT1 (SLC2A1), the glucose transporter causative of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome, revealed that the mutated protein mislocalizes to intracellular compartments in a model cell line and in patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells. Mutant GLUT1 interacts with adaptor proteins (APs) in vitro, and knocking-down AP-2 reverts the cellular mislocalization. A systematic analysis of other known disease-causing variants revealed a significant and specific overrepresentation of gained dileucine motifs in structurally disordered cytosolic domains of transmembrane proteins. Thus, several mutations in disordered regions appear to cause “dileucineopathies”.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on an effective 150 min gradient (0, 2, 100, 30, 15, 1 and 5 min with 2, 4, 20, 30, 60, 90 and 90 % of buffer B with 90 % acetonitrile) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HFx (Thermo Fisher). The PRM settings were: 30,000 resolution; 5e5 AGC target; 1.6 m/z isolation window; 60 ms max ion injection time. The inclusion list for the PRM method was generated using Picky (Zauber et al., 2018) with SILAC option enabled and a retention time window of 30 min. Predicted retention-times were calibrated in Picky with a complex sample of 100 ng Pierce HeLa Protein standard (ThermoFisher Scientific) immediately before the PRM measurements. The acquisition sceme contains a Top3 Method followed by the set PRM scans.

### Data Protocol
RawFiles were analyzed with MaxQuant with the following settings: Multiplicity 2, with Lys8 and Arg10 set as heavy; carbamidomethylation as fixed modification; oxidation(M) and nterminal acyetylation as variable modification; Protein FDR 0.01; Peptide FDR 0.01. Experimental Design: Peptide-Protein Interaction Assays for Cacna1H, Glut1, Iptr and Control Peptide with no expected interaction. Empty control is set as light and peptide-protein interaction as heavy (fw). A labelswap was performed(rev).

### Publication Abstract
Many disease-causing missense mutations affect intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins, but the molecular mechanism of their pathogenicity is enigmatic. Here, we employ a peptide-based proteomic screen to investigate the impact of mutations in IDRs on protein-protein interactions. We find that&#xa0;mutations in disordered cytosolic regions of three transmembrane proteins (GLUT1, ITPR1, and CACNA1H) lead to an increased clathrin binding. All three mutations create dileucine motifs known to mediate clathrin-dependent trafficking. Follow-up experiments on GLUT1 (SLC2A1), the glucose transporter causative of GLUT1 deficiency syndrome, revealed that the mutated protein mislocalizes to intracellular compartments. Mutant GLUT1 interacts with adaptor proteins (APs) in&#xa0;vitro, and knocking down AP-2 reverts the cellular mislocalization and restores glucose transport. A systematic analysis of other known disease-causing variants revealed a significant and specific overrepresentation of gained dileucine motifs in structurally disordered cytosolic domains of transmembrane proteins. Thus, several mutations in disordered regions appear to cause "dileucineopathies."

### Keywords
Disordered regions, Glut1, Prm, Dileucin

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
Proteome Dynamics MDC in the helmholtz association  Berlin-Buch

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics MDC in the helmholtz association  Berlin-Buch


