### Accession
PXD039491

### Title
PRDX6 as a promoter of cancer malignancy in hepatocarcinoma cell lines targeting GSK3B

### Description
This project describes the mechanism by wich PRDX6 affects migration and invasiveness in hepatocarcinoma cells. SNU475 (mesenchymal) hepatocarcinoma cell line knockout for PRDX6 showed a marked increase in ROS and lipid peroxidation, mytochondrial dysfunction, metabolic reprogramming, altered cytoskeleton and activation of upstream regulators MYC, ATF4, HNF4A and HNF4G and inhibition of NRF2 and TP53. All these changes point to a role of PRDX6 in tumor development pointing to it as a candidate for antitumoral therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were cleaned-up in 10% 1D SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and protein bands were cut off, diced and kept in water until digestion. Gel dices were firstly distained, and protein resuspended and reduced by addition of 20mM dithiothreitol. The mixture was cooled down to room temperature and alkylatated by addition of 40mM iodoacetamide. Proteolytic digestion was performed by addition of Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid, the digested samples were finally Speedvac dried. Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.5.7.0) and Perseus (v1.6.15.0) software were used to analyse the different MSe runs in triplicate. Proteins were identified by searching raw data against the mouse UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (May 2022 version). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification, were set for the study. Cleavage specificity was by trypsin, allowing for a maximum of one missed cleavage, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.01 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off for protein identification was 1%. Enabling the “match between runs” option allowed for identification transfer between samples. Similar proteins were grouped, and only unique peptides were used for quantification. Identified from reverse database or contaminant hit proteins were removed prior to further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), the only mammalian 1-Cys member of the peroxiredoxin family, has peroxidase, phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) acyltransferase (LPCAT) activities. It has been associated with tumor progression and cancer metastasis, but the mechanisms involved are not clear. We constructed an SNU475 hepatocarcinoma cell line knockout for PRDX6 to study the processes of migration and invasiveness in these mesenchymal cells. They showed lipid peroxidation but inhibition of the NRF2 transcriptional regulator, mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic reprogramming, an altered cytoskeleton, down-regulation of PCNA, and a diminished growth rate. LPC regulatory action was inhibited, indicating that loss of both the peroxidase and PLA2 activities of PRDX6 are involved. Upstream regulators MYC, ATF4, HNF4A, and HNF4G were activated. Despite AKT activation and GSK3&#x3b2; inhibition, the prosurvival pathway and the SNAI1-induced EMT program were aborted in the absence of PRDX6, as indicated by diminished migration and invasiveness, down-regulation of bottom-line markers of the EMT program, MMP2, cytoskeletal proteins, and triggering of the "cadherin switch". These changes point to a role for PRDX6 in tumor development and metastasis, so it can be considered a candidate for antitumoral therapies.

### Keywords
Gsk3b, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Ros, Cell cycle, Lipid peroxidation, Peroxiredoxin 6, Hepatocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Córdoba University
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, University of Córdoba (Spain)

### Submitter
Raquel Requejo-Aguilar

### Lab Head
Dr Raquel Requejo Aguilar
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, University of Córdoba (Spain)


