### Accession
PXD028665

### Title
FLI1 and FRA1 transcription factors drive the transcriptional regulatory networks characterizing muscle invasive bladder cancer

### Description
Identification of transcriptional regulatory networks in muscle invasive and non-muscle invasive bladder cancer cell lines

### Sample Protocol
After performing the ChIP experiments, SICAP part of the protocol was continued as described in Rafiee et al. 2016. Resulting peptides were injected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.6) using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Uniprot databases (Human Swissprot) combined with a database which contains protein sequences of contaminants. Enzyme specificity was arranged as trypsin/P and LysC, via allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Global false discovery rate for both protein and peptides were set as 1%. The options for match-between-runs and re-quantify were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Bladder cancer is mostly present in the form of urothelium carcinoma, causing over 150,000 deaths each year. Its histopathological classification as muscle invasive (MIBC) and non-muscle invasive (NMIBC) is the most prominent aspect, affecting the prognosis and progression of this disease. In this study, we defined the active regulatory landscape of MIBC and NMIBC cell lines using H3K27ac ChIP-seq and used an integrative approach to combine our findings with existing data. Our analysis revealed FRA1 and FLI1 as two critical transcription factors differentially regulating MIBC regulatory landscape. We show that FRA1 and FLI1 regulate the genes involved in epithelial cell migration and cell junction organization. Knock-down of FRA1 and FLI1 in MIBC revealed the downregulation of several EMT-related genes such as MAP4K4 and FLOT1. Further, ChIP-SICAP performed for FRA1 and FLI1 enabled us to infer chromatin binding partners of these transcription factors and link this information with their target genes. Finally, we show that knock-down of FRA1 and FLI1 result in significant reduction of invasion capacity of MIBC cells towards muscle microenvironment using IC-CHIP assays. Our results collectively highlight the role of these transcription factors in selection and design of targeted options for treatment of MIBC.

### Keywords
Enhancer, Transcriptional regulation, Bladder cancer, Fra1, Fli1

### Affiliations
Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center

### Submitter
Gülden ÖZDEN YILMAZ

### Lab Head
Dr Serap ERKEK OZHAN
Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center


