### Accession
PXD027055

### Title
Early and late processes driving NET formation, and the autocrine/paracrine role of endogenous RAGE ligands

### Description
Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation has emerged as an important response against various pathogens; it also plays a role in chronic inflammation, autoimmunity, and cancer. Despite a growing understanding of the mechanisms underlying NET formation, much remains to be elucidated. We previously showed that in human neutrophils activated with different classes of physiological stimuli, NET formation features both early and late events that are controlled by discrete signaling pathways. However, the nature of these events has remained elusive. We now report that PAD4 inhibition only affects the early phase of NETosis, as do distinct signaling intermediates (TAK1, MEK, p38 MAPK). Accordingly, the inducible citrullination of residue R2 on histone H3 is an early neutrophil response that is regulated by these kinases; other arginine residues on histones H3 and H4 do not seem to be citrullinated. Conversely, chromatin decondensation is a belated event in NET formation, that is impaired by the inhibition of most signaling pathways known to control the phenomenon. We additionally show that neutrophils can condition themselves to be poised for rapid NET formation, and that this represents another late process. Similarly, activated neutrophils release a number of endogenous proteic factors that promote and largely mediate NET generation, and this is yet another late process. Our data shed new light on the cellular processes underlying NET formation, and unveil some unsuspected facets of the phenomenon. In view of the involvement of NETs in both homeostasis and several pathologies, our findings are of broad relevance.

### Sample Protocol
Cell isolation and culture. Neutrophils were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy donors, under a protocol approved by an institutional ethics committee (Comité d’éthique de la recherche du CIUSS de l’Estrie-CHUS). All subjects gave written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Briefly, whole blood was collected using an anticoagulant (sodium citrate), and successively submitted to dextran sedimentation, Ficoll separation, and water lysis – as previously described(16). The entire procedure was carried out at room temperature under endotoxin-free conditions. As determined by Wright staining and FACS analysis, final neutrophil suspensions contained fewer than 0.1% monocytes or lymphocytes; neutrophil viability exceeded 98% after 4 h in culture, as determined by trypan blue exclusion and by Annexin V/propidium iodide FACS analysis.   NETosis assays. For each condition, a 500-µl drop of a neutrophil suspension (2x106/ml in RPMI 1640/2% autologous serum) was deposited onto coverslips that were freshly coated with poly-L-lysine, and the cells were left to adhere for 60 min in a cell culture incubator. Cells were gently washed with pre-warmed culture medium and covered with 500 µl of fresh, pre-warmed medium. Inhibitors and/or stimuli were then added, and the final volume brought to 550 µl, prior to a 4-h incubation (37°C, 5% CO2). Reactions were stopped by adding 500 µl ice-cold PBS containing 1 mM PMSF, and the coverslips were placed on ice for 10 min. The liquid on the coverslips was discarded and cells were incubated (90 min on ice, with gentle shaking) in 1 ml of PBS containing 1 mM PMSF and diluted PlaNET reagent (as recommended by the manufacturer). Cells were finally fixed (15 min, room temperature) in PBS containing 2% parafornaldehyde, as well as a nuclear stain. The fixed cells were then washed with PBS, and the coverslips mounted onto glass slides using a drop of mounting medium (ProLong Gold, Life Technologies), prior to epifluorescence microscopy analysis. For quantitation, 3 fields at 10x magnification were typically counted, that never included the coverslip edges; this amounts to about 1,000 neutrophils in total.  In some experiments, neutrophil supernatants were collected to assess their ability to induce NETosis. In the case of unstimulated or MSU-activated cells, the supernatants were spun (18,000 g, 10 min, 4°C) to pellet the MSU crystals and any cells that might have detached during collection. In the case of TNF-activated neutrophils, supernatants were incubated (2 h, room temperature, on a rotator wheel) with a neutralizing Ab (Peprotech #500-M26, 0.5 µg/ml final concentration) and further incubated (2 h, room temperature, on a rotator wheel) with protein G-sepharose beads, prior to centrifugation (18,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). In some other experiments, stimulus-depleted supernatants (or supernatants from unstimulated cells) were digested with 30 U/ml proteinase K for 3h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry proteomics analyses. Neutrophils were incubated as described above for NETosis assays but in the absence of serum to avoid an overabundance of seric proteins in the subsequent MS analyses. Culture supernatants were collected in low adsorption eppendorf tubes, incubated with TNF neutralizing antibodies (2 h, 4°C, on a rotator), further incubated with protein G-Sepharose 4FF beads (30 min, 4°C, on a rotator), and spun (18,000 g, 15 min, 4°C) to immunodeplete the stimulus and pellet any cells that might have detached during culture. The resulting supernatants were processed for peptide preparation and purification as described before(19). LC-MS/MS analyses were then carried out at our institutional MS facility, as described(19). Proteins identified using LC-MS/MS were uploaded to the CRAPome database (http://www.crapome.org) and sorted by the fold change scores FC‐A or FC‐B.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Net formation, Inflammation, Activation, Neutrophil

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Medecine, Service of Pneumology, Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick McDonald
Department of Medecine, Service of Pneumology, Université de Sherbrooke


