### Accession
PXD015654

### Title
Yeast ubiquitin ligase LC-MS/MS

### Description
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) serves as a key regulator for ubiquitylation-mediated pathway. The identification of the corresponding relationship between E3 and its substrates is challenging but required for understanding the regulatory network of ubiquitylation. The low abundance of ubiquitinated conjugates and high redundancy of E3s-substrates regulation made screening pretty hard. Herein, we combined SILAC-based quantitative proteomics with two contrary genetic methods (overexpression and knockout) in theory for E3 (Hrt3, F-box subunit of SCF complex) substrates screening.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, strains with lysine and arginine auxotrophic phenotype were cultured in SC light medium containing lysine and arginine or heavy medium with 13C6-lysine and 20 mg/mL 13C615N4 arginine until early logarithmic phase (OD600=1.5)25. Equal OD of cells cultured with light and heavy medium mixed intersected together before lysis. The mixed cells were splitting decomposition by glass beads disruption in denatured lysis buffer. The mixture was subjected to centrifugation at 21000 g at 4 ℃. Total cell lysates (TCL) in supernatant were incubated with Ni-NTA agarose for 2 hours and washed with lysis buffer adding with 5 mM imidazole. The bound proteins (Ubiquitin conjugates, UbC) were eluted by boiling in 2 x SDS-PAGE loading buffer. The TCL and UbC samples were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE and cut into different slices based on the molecular weight and protein abundance. After in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight, the tryptic peptides were extracted from gels with extraction buffer and finally dried by a vacuum dryer before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the raw files were searched by MaxQuant against the protein FASTA file from UniProt database.For protein quality, specific-digestion of trypsin was used with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fix modification and oxidation of methionine was assigned as a variable modification. A minimal peptide length of seven amino acids was required. The FDR<1% on both peptide and protein levels was used as a filtering criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) serve as key regulators for the ubiquitylation-mediated pathway. The identification of the corresponding relationship between E3 and its substrates is challenging but required for understanding the regulatory network of ubiquitylation. The low abundance of ubiquitinated conjugates and high redundancy of E3 substrate regulation made the screening pretty hard. Herein, we combined SILAC-based quantitative proteomics with two contrary genetic methods (overexpression and knockout) in theory for E3 (Hrt3, the F-box subunit of the SCF complex) substrate screening. The knockout method could not overcome the constraint mentioned above, while the overexpression approach turned on the access to the potential substrates of E3. Subsequently, we obtained 77 candidates, which are involved in many critical biological processes and need to be verified in the future. Within these candidates, we confirmed the relationship between one of the candidates Nce103 and Hrt3 and linked Hrt3 with oxygen sensitivity and oxidative stress response in which Nce103 took part as well. This research is also beneficial for understanding the impact of oxygen supply on regulation of yeast growth through the ubiquitination of Nce103.

### Keywords
Hrt3;ubiquitinated substrates;

### Affiliations
NCPSB
Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， Beijing 102206 P.R. China.

### Submitter
Yihao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， Beijing 102206 P.R. China.


