### Accession
PXD016674

### Title
Multi-omics profiling of non-small cell lung cancer patient-derived xenografts reveals proteome and phosphoproteome remodeling associated with patient outcome

### Description
131 patient-derived xenograft models were generated for non-small cell lung carcinoma and were profiled at the genome, transcriptome and proteome level by analysis of gene copy number variation, whole exome sequencing, DNA methylation, transcriptome, proteome and phospho(Tyr)-proteome. At the proteome level, the human tumor and murine stroma were discernible. Tumor proteome profiling resolved the known major histological subtypes and revealed 3 proteome subtypes (proteotypes) among adenocarcinoma and 2 in squamous cell carcinoma that were associated with distinct protein-phosphotyrosine signatures and patient survival. Stromal proteomes were similar between histological subtypes, but two adenocarcinoma proteotypes had distinct stromal proteomes. Proteotypes comprise tumor and stromal signatures of targetable biological pathways suggesting that patient stratification by proteome profiling may be an actionable approach to precisely diagnose and treat cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem phospoho-tyrosine (pY) peptide enrichment by covalent bound GST_Src_SH2 superbinder (sSH2) Tumors and/or cultured cells were lyzed by 2%SDS lysis buffer (0.5 M Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP, 5 mM EDTA), sonicated for 15 sec twice, heated at 95C for 20 min with mixing at 1000 rpm, cooled to room temperature (~10 min on bench) and centrifuged at 20000 g for 5 min at 18C. Around 1.5 mg of proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform method and digested overnight at 37C with 30 μg trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Promega Cat#V5073). See detail protocol in previous published paper (Hughes CS et al., JPR 2017, PMID: 28418257; Krieger JR et al., 2019, PMID: 30938160).  Peptides were quantified by Pierce peptide quantification kit (Pierce Cat#23275) according to manufacturer’s instructions. One mg peptide of each samples was dried after trypsin digestion (Speed Vacuum) and dissolved in 200 ul of dissolving buffer from Thermo High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Cat#A32992). Phsopho-serine/threonine/tyrosine (pSTY) were enriched according to manufacturer’s instructions. 95% of the final elution of pSTY peptides were dried and dissolve in 500 l of Affinity Purification (AP) buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM dibasic sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl).  The phosphor-tyrosine peptides were enriched by 50 g of Src-SH2 superbinder according to our previous publication (J Tong et al., Proteomics. 2017, PMID: 27880036). There are two improvements in the current experiment compared with previous publication.  The first is, instead of using none-covalent bound His-Src-sSH2 fusion protein, GST-Src-sSH2 fusion proteins were cross-linked to glutathione beads with dimethyl pimelimidate (DMP) (http://www.sciencegateway.org/protocols/cellbio/antibody/coupgst.htm ). The second is using 60% of acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Abe 2017, PMID:28152594), instead of 50 mM phenyl phosphate in AP buffer, to elute pY peptides from SH2 superbinder beads. The enriched pY peptides were then dried, dissolved in 100 l of 0.1% formic acid and divided onto two EVOSEP C18 tips for MS/MS analysis.  MS analysis of pY peptide by CID and HCD MS methods  pY peptides enriched from 125 PDX samples and 3 normal mixed tissues were analyzed in Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS. Samples were loaded on EVOSEP tip, and analyzed with 44 min MS run as described previously (Jon’s 2019 paper, PMID: 30938160). Two separate LC-MS/MS runs were performed on every sample, the first one collected collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS/MS spectra and the other one collected higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS spectra.  The parameters used for MS data acquisition of CID-MS/MS and HCD-MS/MS spectra were: (1) MS: top speed mode, cycle time = 3 sec; scan range (m/z) = 400–2,000; resolution = 60,000; AGC target = 400,000; maximum injection time = 100 ms; MS1 precursor selection range = 700–2,000; included charge state=2–6; dynamic exclusion after n times, n =1; dynamic exclusion duration = 10 sec; precursor prior-ity= most intense; maximum intensity = 1E+20; minimum intensity = 50,000; (2) CID-MS/MS: isolation mode= ion trap; isolation window= 0.7; collision energy= 35%; detector type = orbi-trap; resolution =15,000; AGC target =10,000; maximum injection time = 35 ms; Neutral loss mass = 97.9763; microscan =1;  (3) HCD-MS/MS: isolation mode = quadrupole; isolation window = 0.7; collision energy = 30%; stepped collision energy (%) = 5; detector type = orbitrap; resolution = 15,000; AGC target = 10,000; maximum injection time = 35 ms; micros-can= 1.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant on human and mouse database without match between runs and default parameters were used for peptide and protein search. FDR for protein and peptide selection is less than 0.01.  Phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine is used for variable modifications.  pY site localization probability is higher than 0.75.  MS data of CID and HCD from the same sample were combined as different fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosine, Phosphorylation, Nsclc, Pdx, Proteome

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Hospital for Sickkids

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Jiefei Tong
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


