### Accession
PXD034917

### Title
Chaperonin CCT controls cell fuelling by lipids and extracellular vesicle production through kinesin dynamics

### Description
Please provide an overall description of your study, think something similar in scope to the manuscript abstractCell proteostasiCell proteostasis includes gene transcription, protein translation, folding of de novo proteins, post-translational modification, secretion, degradation and recycling. By profiling the proteome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from T cells, we have found the chaperonin complex CCT, involved in the correct folding of particular proteins. By limiting CCT cell-content by siRNA, cells undergo altered lipid composition and metabolic rewiring towards a lipid-dependent metabolism, with increased activity of peroxisomes and mitochondria. This is due to dysregulation of the dynamics of interorganellar contacts between lipid droplets, mitochondria, peroxisomes and the endolysosomal system. This process accelerates the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies leading to higher EV production through the dynamic regulation of microtubule-based kinesin motors. These findings connect proteostasis with lipid metabolism through an unexpected role of CCT.s includes gene transcription, protein translation, folding of de novo proteins, post-translational modification, secretion, degradation and recycling. By profiling the proteome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from T cells, we have found the chaperonin complex CCT, involved in the correct folding of particular proteins. By limiting CCT cell-content by siRNA, cells undergo altered lipid composition and metabolic rewiring towards a lipid-dependent metabolism, with increased activity of peroxisomes and mitochondria. This is due to dysregulation of the dynamics of interorganellar contacts between lipid droplets, mitochondria, peroxisomes and the endolysosomal system. This process accelerates the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies leading to higher EV production through the dynamic regulation of microtubule-based kinesin motors. These findings connect proteostasis with lipid metabolism through an unexpected role of CCT.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from 3 independent experiments of EV isolation from siCtrl and siCCT Jurkat cells were subjected to SDS-PAGE (10% resolving gel and 4% stacking gel) at 50V. The electrophoresis was stopped when the front dye had barely passed into the resolving gel, ensuring concentration of all proteins into a unique band. Staining was performed using GelCode® Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific). Gel pieces were cut into cubes (1 mm). For protein digestion, modified porcine trypsin (Promega) was added at a final ratio of 1:20 (trypsin-protein). Digestion proceeded overnight at 37ºC in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. The resulting tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to nano-liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry for protein identification. Peptides were injected onto a C-18 reversed phase (RP) nano-column (75 m I.D. and 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Scientific) and analysed in a continuous acetonitrile gradient consisting of 2-30% B in 240 min, 30-90% B in 3 min (B=90% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). A flow rate of 200 nL/min was used to elute peptides from the RP nano-column to an emitter nanospray needle for real time ionization and peptide fragmentation on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San José, CA, USA). An enhanced FT-resolution spectrum (resolution=60000) followed by the MS/MS spectra from most intense fifteen parent ions was analysed along the chromatographic run (272 min). Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge 581 state deconvoluted by Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All MS/MS samples were searched using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 15 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Cell proteostasis includes gene transcription, protein translation, folding of de novo proteins, post-translational modifications, secretion, degradation and recycling. By profiling the proteome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from T cells, we have found the chaperonin complex CCT, involved in the correct folding of particular proteins. By limiting CCT cell-content by siRNA, cells undergo altered lipid composition and metabolic rewiring towards a lipid-dependent metabolism, with increased activity of peroxisomes and mitochondria. This is due to dysregulation of the dynamics of interorganelle contacts between lipid droplets, mitochondria, peroxisomes and the endolysosomal system. This process accelerates the biogenesis of multivesicular bodies leading to higher EV production through the dynamic regulation of microtubule-based kinesin motors. These findings connect proteostasis with lipid metabolism through an unexpected role of CCT.

### Keywords
Chaperonin, Lipid droplet, Cct, Peroxisome, Extracellular vesicle, Lipidomic

### Affiliations
CNIC

### Submitter
Enrique Calvo

### Lab Head
Dr Enrique Calvo
CNIC


