### Accession
PXD001242

### Title
The proteome of normal human retina

### Description
The retina is a delicate tissue that detects light, converts photochemical energy into neural signals, and transmits the signals to the visual cortex of the brain. A detailed protein inventory of the proteome of the normal human eye may provide a foundation for new investigations into both the physiology of the retina and the pathophysiology of retinal diseases. To provide an inventory, proteins were extracted from five retinas of normal eyes and fractionated using SDS-PAGE. After in-gel digestion, peptides were analyzed in duplicate using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. A total of 3,436 non-redundant proteins were identified in the human retina, including 20 unambiguous protein isoforms, of which 8 have not previously been demonstrated to exist at the protein level. The proteins identified in the retina included most of the enzymes involved in the visual cycle and retinoid metabolism. One hundred and fifty-eight proteins that have been associated with age-related macular degeneration were identified in the retina. The MS proteome database of the human retina may serve as a valuable resource for future investigations of retinal biology and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Five human donor eyes were obtained from the Lions Eye Institute, Tampa, FL. Right eyes were selected from five adults (4 males, 1 female), age 51-76 y, with no history of eye disease or previous eye surgery. The causes of death were myocardial infarction, end-stage renal disease (2), and cancer (2, not on chemotherapy). Time of death to enucleation was 3-7 h for all subjects. Globes were placed in eye bank vials and refrigerated until received at the Wilmer Eye Institute. Time from enucleation to tissue freezing was 24-36 h for all subjects. A corneal surgeon (S.F.) dissected the globes following a standardized protocol for isolation of human eye tissues. Retina was dissected free from retinal pigment epithelium/choroid and vitreous, taking great care in the dissection to obtain pure retina samples. Retina samples were immediately snap frozen and stored at –80°C until processing. Retinas were suspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 42 mM KCl, ¬¬0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 1× phosphatase inhibitor [Pierce, PI78420], 1× protease inhibitor [Sigma, P8340]), and homogenized using a motorized handheld Eppendorf mortar/pestle until tissue was no longer clumped. Samples were then sonicated three times for ten seconds, storing on ice to prevent overheating between sonications. Sodium dodecyl sulfate was added for a final concentration of 2% (w/v). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 min to lyse the cells and extract the proteins. The samples were then spun for 45 min, 14,000 × g, at room temperature. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined using the Pierce microBCA kit.  Proteins were separated using SDS-PAGE gels. Double distilled H2O was added to the samples to achieve 50 μg of protein in 45 μL volume in a low retention Eppendorf tube. Four mL of 4× lithium dodecyl sulfate + 100 mM DTT was added to each tube. Tubes were vortexed, spun briefly, and placed on a 106°C heat block for 10 min to denature the proteins. Tubes were vortexed and spun twice. Fifty μg of sample was run in each lane on a 1D SDS gel using NuPAGE 4-12% BT 1.5, 200V for 35 min. Gels were stained with Coomassie blue (250 mL methanol, 50 mL acetic acid, 200 mL dH2O, 0.5 g Coomassie brilliant blue) on a rotating table at room temperature for 30 min. Gels were destained (50 mL methanol, 75 mL acetic acid, 875 mL dH2O) overnight. Each gel was cut into 12 bands. Gel pieces were placed in separate vials and disrupted with forceps. Gels were destained, dehydrated with acetonitrile, and dried down with a Speedvac concentrator. Samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, washed with ultrapure water, dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile, and dried. Samples were digested with trypsin/LysC (Promega, V5073) at 37°C overnight with shaking. Supernatant with peptides was removed, incubated with 100% acetonitrile, and then dried. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, placed in a desalting column (Pierce Spin-Tip), spun, eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, and then dried. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water and spike with 5 fmol/μL calibration peptides (Pierce Peptide Retention Time Calibration Mixture).   Samples were run LC-MS/MS using a one-hour gradient of 2-30% acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) using an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. EASY-Spray source was run at 35°C using a 25 cm x 50 μm integrated spray tip column. Peptides were trapped at 980 bar on a 2 cm x 75 μm trapping column. The trap was a 3 μm particle, and the column was 2 μm Acclaim PepMap C18. All individual samples were run with two technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were batch processed using i3D (Shimadzu and Integrated Analysis), X!Tandem and OMSSA search engines, and the UniProt Sequence database. UniProt database included all human sequences, and parameters allowed for 2 missed tryptic cleavages, a fragment ion mass error of 1 Da, and potential protein modifications for carbamidomethylation, oxidation, phosphorylation, deamidation, and carbamylation. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at ≥90.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein Prophet algorithm was used to assign protein probabilities using a false discovery rate of 0.13% for peptides and 0.81% for proteins. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
The retina is a delicate tissue that detects light, converts photochemical energy into neural signals, and transmits the signals to the visual cortex of the brain. A detailed protein inventory of the proteome of the normal human eye may provide a foundation for new investigations into both the physiology of the retina and the pathophysiology of retinal diseases. To provide an inventory, proteins were extracted from five retinas of normal eyes and fractionated using SDS-PAGE. After in-gel digestion, peptides were analyzed in duplicate using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. A total of 3436 nonredundant proteins were identified in the human retina, including 20 unambiguous protein isoforms, of which eight have not previously been demonstrated to exist at the protein level. The proteins identified in the retina included most of the enzymes involved in the visual cycle and retinoid metabolism. One hundred and fifty-eight proteins that have been associated with age-related macular degeneration were identified in the retina. The MS proteome database of the human retina may serve as a valuable resource for future investigations of retinal biology and disease. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001242 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001242).

### Keywords
Age-related macular degeneration / eye / human / retina / phototransduction / proteome

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Wilmer Eye Institute, Smith Building, M015, 400 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21287. Tel. (410) 532-2123, Fax (410) 502-1753

### Submitter
Pingbo Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D. Semba, M.D., M.P.H
Wilmer Eye Institute, Smith Building, M015, 400 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21287. Tel. (410) 532-2123, Fax (410) 502-1753


