### Accession
PXD022077

### Title
Dynamic responses of barley root quantitative succinyl-proteome to short-term phosphate starvation and recovery

### Description
Improving phosphate (Pi) acquisition and utilization efficiency is a crucial challenge for the sustainability of agriculture worldwide. The understanding of plant how to response and cope with Pi-limitation, and its underlying molecular mechanisms is key to discovering strategies of efficient Pi acquisition and utilization. Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) is one of the major cereal crops, has distinct advantage for studying mechanisms of tolerance of phosphorus deficiency due to low Pi demand. Recent studied reveal that post-translational modification (PTM) by phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and glycosylation are play important roles in cellular regulation the plant phosphate starvation response (PSR). Lysine succinylation occurs frequently in the proteins associated with metabolic pathways, which may participate in the regulation of the plant PSR process. However, succinylation precisely modulates the metabolic pathways of proteins in response to PSR in barley remain largely unknown.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Proteins were extracted as previously described (Oxidative stress). Briefly, the root samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and then homogenized in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. The mixtures were sonicated three times on ice and the remaining debris removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Soluble proteins were precipitated with cold 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The protein precipitates were washed with ice-cold acetone for three times. Finally, proteins were dissolved in 8 M urea and the concentration was determined with BCA (Pierce, Bonn, Germany) kit according to manufacturers’s instructions.  Trypsin digestion The protein solution was first reduced by addition of 10 mM DTT with incubation for 1 h under 37 °C. Proteins were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion as previously described.   Affinity Enrichment For phosphorylation, the tryptic peptides were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile and 6% trifluoroacetic acid). the IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 3 times, successively. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected, vacuum-dried.  LC–MS/MS spectrometric analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.; PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 0-70 min, 22% to 32% in 70-84 min and ascending to 80% in 87-90 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an NanoElute ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in tims-TOF Pro (Thermo, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage of 1.4 kV was applied. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 24 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5.0×104. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0; Max Plank Institute of Biochemistry, Germany). Group specific parameters and fractions were defined for the whole proteome and phosphorylation-enriched samples, respectively. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Hordeum vulgare L. proteins database (44,132 protein entries). The protein database was searched with the following parameters: Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm in first and main search, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on the protein N-terminus specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were adjusted to < 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. The site localization probability was set as >0.75. The minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorus；barley；ptm；starvation；lysine succinylation

### Affiliations
Gansu Provincial Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science/ Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China
College of Agronomy, Gansu Agricultural University

### Submitter
Juncheng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wang juncheng
Gansu Provincial Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science/ Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, China


