### Accession
PXD009979

### Title
SWATH quantitative proteomics and cellular assays show in vitro anticancer activity of ARA- and DHA-based monoacylglycerols in colorectal cancer cells

### Description
Colorectal cancer is one of the most common and widespread disease in the world and the third type of cancer causing a high mortality rate. There is increasing evidence that some polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are involved in the reduction of cancer risk and progression. Recent studies showed that sn-2 monoacylglycerols (MAG) exercise specific inhibitory actions on cancer cells through different mechanisms. However, the anticancer effect of PUFA-based MAGs on colorectal cancer has yet to be assessed. In this work we investigated the actions of two PUFAs, docosahexaenoic (DHA, 22: 6n3) and arachidonic acids (ARA, 20:4n6), both as MAG, on colon cancer human (HT-29) cell line. We performed the MTT test, LDH, and caspase-3 assays, while global proteome changes were assessed by SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics followed by pathway analysis in order to find out which molecular mechanisms were being affected. It has been proven that ARA- and DHA-MAG exercises dose- and time-dependent antiproliferative actions. In all cases, DHA-MAG acts on cancer cells more efficiently than ARA-MAG. Results clearly demonstrate the ability of MAGs to induce cell death in colon cancer cells and suggest a direct relationship between their chemical structure and their potency. Therefore, sn-2 MAG are suitable candidate for the production of new functional ingredients.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from HT-29 colorectal cancer cells treated with DHA- or ARA-MAG, and control samples without any treatment, were subjected to trypsin digestion. RepliCal iRT peptides were added to the peptide samples in order to calibrate retention times in the SWATH runs. Samples (1 ug) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS usign a data-independent SWATH acquisition using a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled to a nLC system with a 2 h gradient (5% to 30% ACN 0.1% formic acid, 300 nL/min, column:Thermo Acclaim PepMap100 25cm x 75 um). For building the spectral library, data-dependent acquisition runs (top 65 method) were performed on the same LC-MS equipment and gradient.

### Data Protocol
Proteins and peptides were identified from the DDA shotgun runs using ProteinPilot v5.0.1 and a concatenated target-reverse decoy SwissProt human protein database. A spectral library was built using the MS/MS ALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (v2.0) using the peptides that showed up in the database search with a confidence score above 99%. The library-assisted targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs, and the retention time calibration, was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0), using a 1% FDR threshold and 20 ppm of tolerance. MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalisation.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and mortal types of cancer. There is increasing evidence that some polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) exercise specific inhibitory actions on cancer cells through different mechanisms, as a previous study on CRC cells demonstrated for two very long-chain PUFA. These were docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6<i>n</i>3) and arachidonic acid (ARA, 20:4<i>n</i>6) in the free fatty acid (FFA) form. In this work, similar design and technology have been used to investigate the actions of both DHA and ARA as monoacylglycerol (MAG) molecules, and results have been compared with those obtained using the corresponding FFA. Cell assays revealed that ARA- and DHA-MAG exercised dose- and time-dependent antiproliferative actions, with DHA-MAG acting on cancer cells more efficiently than ARA-MAG. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) - mass spectrometry massive quantitative proteomics, validated by parallel reaction monitoring and followed by pathway analysis, revealed that DHA-MAG had a massive effect in the proteasome complex, while the ARA-MAG main effect was related to DNA replication. Prostaglandin synthesis also resulted as inhibited by DHA-MAG. Results clearly demonstrated the ability of both ARA- and DHA-MAG to induce cell death in colon cancer cells, which suggests a direct relationship between chemical structure and antitumoral actions.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Swath, Monoacylglycerol

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofía University Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain
IMIBIC

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofía University Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain


