### Accession
PXD005259

### Title
Proteomics of Diverse Clonal Groups of Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli Underline Variations in Surface Antigens and Similarities in Metabolism

### Description
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is an important cause of diarrhoea, a pervasive disease in low- and middle-income countries that affects mostly young children and visiting travellers. Substantial diversity exists among ETEC isolates, hindering development of effective preventive means. To investigate how ETEC genomic variation is reflected at expressed proteome level, we applied label-free quantitative proteomics to 7 human ETEC strains representing 5 epidemiologically important lineages. We further determined the protein profile of the non-pathogenic E. coli B strain BL21 to discriminate metabolic features specific for ETEC. The analysis yielded a dataset of 2,894 proteins, of which 1,777 were present in all strains. Each ETEC strain displayed on average 27 (±10) proteins with known or putative links to virulence, both plasmid- and chromosomally-encoded, and a number of strain-specific isoforms participating in the biosynthesis of surface antigens. Statistical comparison of relative protein levels between the ETEC strains and BL21 revealed several proteins with significantly increased amounts only in BL21, including enzymes of arginine biosynthesis and metabolism of melibiose, galactitol and gluconate. ETEC strains displayed consistently increased levels of proteins that were functional in iron acquisition, maltose metabolism, and acid resistance. These results suggest that specific metabolic functions are shared among ETEC isolates.

### Sample Protocol
For the mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, each strain was streaked onto sheep blood agar plates (Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway) in 3 or 4 parallel biological replicates and cultured at 37°C for ~16 h. Several colonies from each plate were resuspended in 1 mL of Lysogeny Broth, and 200 μL of this suspension was pipetted onto new blood agar plate and spread evenly to make a lawn. After incubation at 37°C for ~16 h the cells were harvested, washed and lysed as previously described (Pettersen et al. 2015, doi:10.1002/pmic.201500278). The whole cell lysates were processed according to the Multiple Enzymes for sample Digestion – Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol. In short, the cell lysates were treated with trypsin and LysC in a two-step digestion reaction, and the resulting peptide mixtures were desalted and lyophilised. Prior to the liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, ~ 1 µg protein was loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% formic acid (FA, vol/vol) with 2% acetonitrile (ACN, vol/vol). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl/min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN or 90% ACN (vol/vol) respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5%B, 5-5.5 min 8%B, 5.5-140 min 8–35%B, 140-155 min 35–90%B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90 %B (155-170 min) and 5%B (175-195 min) respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a Nanospray Flex ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisionally-induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1000 counts for MS/MS, and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework performed the spectra search against ETEC-specific protein databases and reviewed E. coli proteins from UniProtKB. In the MaxQuant run, enzyme specificity was defined in group-specific parameters as either to trypsin or LysC, allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The spectra of the LysC and tryptic fractions originating from the same replicate were combined in MaxQuant. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications in addition to N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was as high as 20 ppm, and the allowed tolerance value for the fragment mass was set to maximum 0.50 Da. The “match between runs” option was enabled to match identifications across samples. The maximum false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels were kept at 1%. Normalized spectral proteins intensities (LFQ intensity), proportional to the quantity of a given protein in a sample, were derived by the MaxLFQ algorithms. The normalization ensures that one can compare LFQ scores between different analyzed samples.

### Publication Abstract
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) infections are an important cause of diarrhea among young children living in low- and middle-income countries and visiting travelers. The development of effective vaccines is complicated by substantial genomic diversity that exists among ETEC isolates. To investigate how ETEC genomic variation is reflected at expressed proteome level, we applied label-free quantitative proteomics to seven human ETEC strains representing five epidemiologically important lineages. We further determined the proteome profile of the nonpathogenic E. coli B strain BL21(DE3) to discriminate features specific for ETEC. The analysis yielded a data set of 2893 proteins, of which 1729 were present in all strains. Each ETEC strain produced on average 27 plasmid- or chromosomally-encoded proteins with known or putative connections to virulence, and a number of strain-specific proteins associated with the biosynthesis of surface antigens. Statistical comparison of protein levels between the ETEC strains and BL21(DE3) revealed several proteins with considerably increased levels only in BL21(DE3) including enzymes of arginine biosynthesis and metabolism of melibiose, galactitol, and gluconate. ETEC strains displayed consistently increased levels of proteins that were functional in iron acquisition, maltose metabolism, and acid resistance. The latter results suggest that specific metabolic functions might be shared among ETEC isolates.

### Keywords
Plasmid, H10407, Enterotoxigenic escherichia coli, Bacterial metabolism, Proteogenomics, Virulence, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Veronika Kucharova

### Lab Head
Dr Harald G. Wiker
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


