### Accession
PXD012826

### Title
Proteome of mouse primary CD4 T cells

### Description
We analyzed the total proteome of CD4+ T cells isolated from WT mice, either non stimulated or at 5 different time points of stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibodies (30s; 120s; 300s; 600s)

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens, expanded for 48 hours in culture, harvested and grown in the presence of IL-2 for 48 h prior to stimulation. A total of 100 x 106 short-term expanded CD4+ T cells from OST mice and wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C with antibodies. In the latter case, CD4+ T cells were incubated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4, followed by one round of washing and then cross-linkage with a purified Rabbit anti-Rat for 30s, 120s, 300s or 600s at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by cell lysis in 1% SDS buffer and sonication. Whole cell lysates were fractionated into 10 gel bands through SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the fractions on a Q Exactive+ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) for database search with the Andromeda search engine against Mus musculus entries in the Swissprot protein database (release UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2015_05, 16711 entries), plus the set of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in tandem MS mode was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides was set to one.  Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein false-discovery rate of 1% at both PSM and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the proteins across stimulation time points, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of 1 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20min. Protein quantification was based on unique peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Whole cell lysate, Proteome, Primary cd4 t cell

### Affiliations
IPBS/CNRS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Karima Chaoui

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology CNRS, Toulouse


