### Accession
PXD031378

### Title
Effects of VLK knockout on the proteome of primary mouse hepatocytes

### Description
In the project « VLK in liver protection », we analyzed conditioned medium and whole cell lysate of Y/A/C-treated hepatocytes isolated from wildtype (WT) and VLK knockout (KO) mice, three biological replicates each.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry detection of VLK, primary hepatocytes were transdifferentiated as described above. Protein pellets resulting from a TCA-mediated precipitation of proteins from conditioned media or whole cell lysate (WCL) were resuspended in 8 M urea. Proteins were reduced by 1 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide, and digested by Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, 129-02541) for 4 h. The concentration of urea was diluted to 1 M before overnight trypsin (Promega, V5113) digestion.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using a Uniprot full-length mus musculus database (April, 2016) and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was selected for normalized protein quantification (Cox et al., 2014). The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique. The “match-between-run” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min.

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrate lonesome kinase (VLK) is the only known extracellular tyrosine kinase, but its physiological functions are largely unknown. We show that VLK is highly expressed in hepatocytes of neonatal mice, but downregulated during adulthood. To determine the role of VLK in liver homeostasis and regeneration, we generated mice with a hepatocyte-specific knockout of the VLK gene (Pkdcc). Cultured progenitor cells established from primary hepatocytes of Pkdcc knockout mice produced a secretome, which promoted their own proliferation in 3D spheroids and proliferation of cultured fibroblasts. In vivo, Pkdcc knockout mice developed liver steatosis with signs of inflammation and perivascular fibrosis upon aging, combined with expansion of liver progenitor cells. In response to chronic CCl4-induced liver injury, the pattern of deposited collagen was significantly altered in these mice. The liver injury marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was increased in the secretome of VLK-deficient cultured progenitor cells and in liver tissues of aged or CCl4-treated knockout mice. These results support a key role for VLK and extracellular protein phosphorylation in liver homeostasis and repair through paracrine control of liver cell function and regulation of appropriate collagen deposition. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hepatocyte, Liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


