### Accession
PXD020990

### Title
Hypoxia TMT Proteomics on Pancreatic Cancer Cell Lines

### Description
PDAC(pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma) cell lines- MiaPaca and 8988T were exposed to normoxic (20% Oxygen, 2 replicates each for MiaPaca and 8988T) or Hypoxia (0.1% Oxygen,3 replicates each for MiaPaca and 8998T) for 24 hrs

### Sample Protocol
After 24 h in normoxia or severe hypoxia (0.1%), cells were lysed in 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea, 1 M Tris pH 7.4, 5 M NaCl) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche) followed by sonication at 4oC. The sonicated lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4oC. Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay and 100 µg of total protein was used for each replicate. 100 µg of clarified lysate for each sample was then reduced and alkylated by the addition of 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37oC and 20 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min at room temperature, followed by methanol-chloroform precipitation at a 3:1 ratio to the lysate. The protein precipitate was washed thrice with ice cold methanol and resuspended in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for protein digestion. Protein digestion was carried out by 1:100 protease to protein ratio of Lys-C for 2 h at 37oC followed by trypsin overnight. Each sample was then labelled with TMT reagent (TMT10 reagent, ThermoFisher Scientific, 90110) for 1 h, and the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.3% w/v. 1% of each sample was mixed in a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio and a ‘ratio-check’ analysis using LC-MS/MS was performed to determine if the samples were present in equal ratios. Based on this result, the volumes of the remaining sample were adjusting and combined so as to maintain the 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. This combined sample was then dried to completeness using a vacuum centrifuge and acidified with 5% w/v formic acid. Digested peptides were cleaned up using C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters) and separated using basic pH reversed-phase HPLC and pooled into 24 fractions. All 24 fractions were vacuum dried to completeness and subject to the C18 stage tip method prior to loading on the mass-spectrometer. Data was obtained using an Orbitrap fusion Lumos mass spectrometer linked with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump. Peptides were separated on a 75 µM inner diameter microcapillary tube packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 µm, 100A, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The data was acquired using the MS3 method as outlined in (McAlister et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra obtained were processed using an in-house software pipeline as described in (Huttlin et al., 2010; Paulo et al., 2015). Values for protein quantification were exported and processed using Perseus to calculate Log fold changes and p-values. Volcano plots using these values were plotted in excel. Each comparison was subjected to gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) via Broad GSEA software (4.0) using Transcription Factor Targets (c3.tft.v7.1.symbols.gmt) from MsigDB.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by extensive fibrosis and hypovascularization, resulting in significant intratumoral hypoxia (low oxygen) that contributes to its aggressiveness, therapeutic resistance, and high mortality. Despite oxygen being a fundamental requirement for many cellular and metabolic processes, and the severity of hypoxia in PDAC, the impact of oxygen deprivation on PDAC biology is poorly understood. Investigating how PDAC cells survive in the near absence of oxygen, we find that PDAC cell lines grow robustly in oxygen tensions down to 0.1%, maintaining mitochondrial morphology, membrane potential, and the oxidative metabolic activity required for the synthesis of key metabolites for proliferation. Disrupting electron transfer efficiency by targeting mitochondrial respiratory supercomplex assembly specifically affects hypoxic PDAC proliferation, metabolism, and in&#xa0;vivo tumor growth. Collectively, our results identify a mechanism that enables PDAC cells to thrive in severe, oxygen-limited microenvironments.

### Keywords
Human, Pancreatic cancer, Hypoxia, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Vinay Eapen

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Mancias
Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA


