### Accession
PXD024822

### Title
The human GID complex engages two independent modules for substrate recruitment

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study two different assemblies of the human E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, GID. The 5mer complex consisted of subunits MAEA, RMND5a, TWA1, WDR26, and RanBP9; the 6mer complex consisted of the subunits of the 5mer complex and the additional subunit ARMC8β. Cross-linking experiments were performed with disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) or pimelic dihydrazide (PDH) in combination with the coupling reagent DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., PNAS, 2014, Mohammadi et al., Anal. Chem., 2021). The samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin and the digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography. For each complex and cross-linking chemistry, three SEC fractions were collected and analyzed in duplicate by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. For each fraction, one replicate was analyzed by detecting fragment ions in the Orbitrap analyzer, the other by detecting fragment ions in the linear ion trap. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest/xProphet (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance of initial search -= 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm (Orbitrap detection) or 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions (linear ion trap detection). The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. The false discovery rate for the identifications provided in the results tables is <5% at the non-redundant peptide pair level. Additional details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; pdh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; gid complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


