### Accession
PXD023223

### Title
The label-free quantitative secretome of MCF-7 cells treated with sumaCTX

### Description
This study aimed to investigate the alteration of intracellular proteome of MCF-7 cells following membrane permeabilization by sumaCTX at increasing concentration, using a label-free quantitative (LFQ) approach. The secretome represents the leakage of intracellular proteins in MCF- 7 cells were subjected to trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS. Based on the LFQ secretome, there was a total of 105 distinct abundance proteins (DAPs) identified in different experimental groups. Further bioinformatics analyses revealed that most of these DAPs were confined to cytoplasmic, nucleus, and membrane. The DEPs involved in metabolic pathways, membrane integrity, inflammatory responses, and necroptosis. There were relatively higher detectable levels of DAPs in the secretome treated with a higher concentration of sumaCTX, suggesting prominent membrane permeabilization. The necroptosis was possibly a stress response in MCF-7 upon exposure to the high concentration of sumaCTX.

### Sample Protocol
The conditioned media of MCF-7 cells treated with an increasing concentration of sumaCTX was centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 mins to pellet the cells. The cell supernatant was filtered and concentrated using centrifugal filters. The protein concentration in cell supernatant was determined by BCA colorimetric assay. The sample was then tryptic digested with Pierce Trypsin Protease. Before trypsin digestion, the sample was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). The digested peptides were then cleaned up and sent for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS was carried out on Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF LC-MS coupled to Agilent 1200 LC for separation of digested peptides. The MS/MS scan range was 50 – 3000 with the scan rate (spectra/sec) of 2 – 4. The data files were processed by PEAKS X software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada). Proteins were identified by searching against UniProt Homo sapiens database (188, 558 entries). The LFQ analysis was then conducted using the filter setting of 6 mins retention time shift tolerance, 20 ppm mass error tolerance, ≥ 1 unique peptide, > 2-fold change, 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and significance of 20 and above. The differentially expressed proteins were then classified into subcellular localization using PANTHER tool, functional annotation, and enrichment analysis on DAVID functional annotation tool. Then, the protein-protein interaction networks of DEPs were determined by STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Naja sumatrana venom cytotoxin (sumaCTX) is a basic protein which belongs to three-finger toxin family. It has been shown to induce caspase-dependent, mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis in MCF-7 cells at lower concentrations. This study aimed to investigate the alteration of secretome in MCF-7 cells following membrane permeabilization by high concentrations of sumaCTX, using label-free quantitative (LFQ) approach. The degree of membrane permeabilization of sumaCTX was determined by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay and calcein-propidium iodide (PI) assays. LDH and calcein-PI assays revealed time-dependent membrane permeabilization within a narrow concentration range. However, as toxin concentrations increased, prolonged exposure of MCF-7 cells to sumaCTX did not promote the progression of membrane permeabilization. The secretome analyses showed that membrane permeabilization was an event preceding the release of intracellular proteins. Bioinformatics analyses of the LFQ secretome revealed the presence of 105 significantly distinguished proteins involved in metabolism, structural supports, inflammatory responses, and necroptosis in MCF-7 cells treated with 29.8&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/mL of sumaCTX. Necroptosis was presumably an initial stress response in MCF-7 cells when exposed to high sumaCTX concentration. Collectively, sumaCTX-induced the loss of membrane integrity in a concentration-dependent manner, whereby the cell death pattern of MCF-7 cells transformed from apoptosis to necroptosis with increasing toxin concentrations.

### Keywords
Necroptosis, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Sumactx

### Affiliations
Monash University
School of Science, Monash University Malaysia

### Submitter
Michelle Yap

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Yap
School of Science, Monash University Malaysia


