### Accession
PXD009296

### Title
cardiorenal failure in rat - Proteomic analysis of the changes in kidney upon chronic heart failure in a rat model. Heart failure develops due to surgically created aorto-venoufistula.

### Description
Proteomic analysis of the changes in kidney upon chronic heart failure in a rat model. Heart failure develops due to surgically created aorto-venoufistula.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney pulverized under liquid nitrogen and extracted with CHAPS-containing buffer. To remove unbound tags and to fractionate the peptides before LC-MS, off-line manual strong cation exchange chromatography was performed using OPTI-TRAP SCX cartridge (Optimized Technologies, OR, USA) in manual macrotap holder. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were eluted into 4 fractions (50 mM, 100 mM, 200mM and 350 mM KCl). All four fractions were dried in speedvac and processed separately. The dried samples were resuspended in 300 µl of 0.1 % TFA in acetonitrile and desalted using manually operated OPTI-TRAP Peptide Concentration & Desalting cartridge (Optimized Technologies, OR, USA). Samples were eluted with 80 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % TFA into new tubes and dried in speedvac. Samples were solubilized and loaded to 50 cm EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size with EASY-Spray™ source with PepMap100 Pre-column (5mm x 300µm C18, 2 µm particles 100 Å). A linear gradient from 4 % B to 35 % B (A: water 0.1 % FA, B: acetonitrile 0.1 % FA) was applied for 240 minutes at flowrate 300 nl/min using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Dionex)

### Data Protocol
. Data were collected on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion™ in MS3 reporter ion quantification mode. Data from all 4 fractions were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) software. Percolator was used for FDR estimation and 1 % FDRs limits for peptides and proteins were used. Quantification data were normalized on total peptide amount, unique and razor peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Cardiorenal syndorme, Ckd, Kidney, Hf

### Affiliations
Charles University
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jiri Petrak

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Petrak
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic


