### Accession
PXD004177

### Title
Comparative Phosphoproteomics between Cavendish Banana and Dajiao (Musa spp.) Reveals an Important role of MKK2 Network in Cold Tolerance Mechanisms

### Description
Cold-sensitive Cavendish Banana and relatively cold-tolerant Dajiao (Musa spp.) comprise an important part of diets for millions of people around the globe. Low temperature is one of the key environment stresses which greatly affect the global banana production. However, little is known about the changes of global protein phosphorylation in Musa spp. and their regulatory roles in response to cold stress. In this study, we employed a TMT6-plex quantitative analysis to conduct a global phosphoproteome profiling between Cavendish Banana and Dajiao subject to the cold stress for 0 hour and 3 hour. A total of 679 phosphopeptides containing 772 distinct phosphorylated sites from 529 phosphoproteins were identified in Cavendish Banana, 180 phosphorylation sites (belonging to 147 phosphoproteins) were differentially changed after 3 h cold stress. While in Dajiao 241 phosphopeptides with 271 individual phosphosites from 207 phosphoproteins were confidently identified, and 83 phosphorylation sites from 63 phosphoproteins were differentially changed under 3 h cold stress. Bioinformatic analysis of protein interaction network indicated that Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 2 (MKK2) was located in the center of the MAPK signaling network along with 7 other members whose phosphorylated site abundances were remarkably differentiated between Cavendish Banana and Dajiao in response to cold stress. Western blotting of MKK2 protein and its T31 phosphorylated site showed the increased expression of MKK2 in the time course of cold stress, with no detectable T31 phosphorylation in Cavendish Banana. On the contrary, the decreased MKK2 expression with increased T31 phosphorylation was consistently observed in Dajiao. These results suggest that the MKK2 interaction network in Dajiao, along with other cold-specific phosphoproteins found in this study, appears to play an important role in the molecular mechanisms of Dajiao being high tolerance to cold stress. The results also provide new evidence that cellular MKK2 phosphorylation as a signaling pathway plays an important role in abiotic stress tolerance that serves as a universal plant cold tolerance mechanism. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of MKK2 network involved in the regulatory of the Musa spp. response to cold stress.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Digestion, and TMT Labeling-Leaves crude proteins were extracted according to Isaacson et al, with modifications. Then, the concentration of the extracted protein mixtures was determined by the Bradford assay using BSA as a standard. The final protein solution was stored at -80 °C for later use. Three biological replicates were conducted for the protein extraction of each sample.  Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 125 µL of denature buffer. The protein concentration for each sample was determined by Bradford assay using BSA as a standard, and further quantified by running on a precast NOVEX 12% Tris/Glycine mini-gel along with a series of amounts of E. coli lysates. The SDS gel was visualized with colloidal Coomassie blue stain, imaged by Typhoon 9400 scanner followed by ImageQuant Software version TL 8.1.  Further processing of the proteins was then performed according to Thermo Scientific’s TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents protocol with a slight modification. The TMT 6-plex labels were reconstituted with 45 µL of anhydrous ACN prior to labeling and added to each of the tryptic digest samples for labeling over 1 h at room temperature. The peptides from the following 6 samples of both Cavendish Banana and Dajiao were mixed each tag with 126-tag, 127-tag, 128-tag, 129-tag, 130-tag and 131-tag respectively. After checking label incorporation using 4000 Q Trap by mixing 1 µL aliquots from each sample and desalting with SCX ziptip, the six samples for both Cavendish Banana set and Dajiao set were pooled respectively, evaporated to dryness and subjected to cation exchange chromatography using a PolyLC strong cation-exchange cartridge. The SCX cartridge is PolySULFOETHYL Aspartamide material with particle size at 12 µm and 300 Å pore size. The pooled TMT labeled tryptic peptides were then reconstituted with 3.0 mL of loading buffer. The pH of the sample was adjusted to 2.5 with formic acid prior to cartridge separation. After conditioning of the Strong-cation exchange cartridge with loading buffer, the sample (~1200 µg) was loaded and washed with an additional 2.0 mL of loading buffer. The peptides were eluted in one step by 1.0 mL of loading buffer containing 500 mM KCl. Desalting of SCX fractions was carried out using solid phase extraction on Sep-Pak Cartridges and the eluted tryptic peptides were evaporated to dryness, and ready for enrichment of phosphopeptides. Sequential enrichment of phosphopeptides by IMAC and TiO2  The IMAC enrichment was carried out using a PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel  kit following the vendor-recommended procedure. The unbound fraction from wash step was saved and pooled for subsequent TiO2 enrichment. The eluted fraction was dried and reconstituted in 25 µL of 0.5% FA for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Nano-scale reverse phase chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC- MS/MS) The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation. The Orbitrap is equipped with a “CorConneX” nano ion source coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano. Each reconstituted fraction (12 µL) was injected onto a PepMap 100 C-18 RP nano trap column with nanoViper Fittings equilibrated with 0.5% FA at 20 µL/min flow rate for 2 min and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15 cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 5-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 5-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The eluted peptides are detected by Orbitrap through a “Plug and Play” nano ion source housing a 10-µm analyte emitter (NewObjective, Woburn, MA). The Orbitrap Elite is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 250 °C. The internal calibration using the background ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass for FT mass analyzer was performed. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting top 15 precursor ions followed by data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans on the precursor peptides with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 8000 with normalized collision energy of 37%. MS survey scans at a resolution of 60,000 (fwhm at m/z 400), for the mass range of m/z 375-1600, and MS/MS scans at 15,000 resolution for the mass range, m/z 100-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at repeat count 1 with a 20 s repeat duration, an exclusion list size of 500, 40s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. The activation time was 0.1 ms for HCD analysis. All data are acquired under Xcalibur 2.2 operation software.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS and MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) and proteome discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS/MS spectra were searched against Musa_AB_PEP_database (43,886 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for first search, 5 ppm for main search and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75 in MaxQuant. To confidently locate phosphorylation sites, the phosphoRS 3.0 node integrated in PD 1.4 workflow was also used to cross-validate the results of MaxQuant. The algorithm of phosphRS 3.0 software enables automated and confident location of phosphosites by determining individual probability values for each putatively phosphorylated site within validated peptide sequences (ref: J Proteome Res. 2011 Dec 2;10(12):5354-62).            The distribution charts for assessing raw MS data quality was shown in Fig S1. The distribution of mass error is near zero and most of them are less than 5 ppm indicating the mass accuracy of the MS data fits the requirement (Fig S1). The length of amino acid residues in most peptides distributed between 8 and 20, which agrees with the property of tryptic peptides (Fig S1), suggesting sample digests appear normal.

### Publication Abstract
Low temperature is one of the key environmental stresses, which greatly affects global banana production. However, little is known about the global phosphoproteomes in Musa spp. and their regulatory roles in response to cold stress. In this study, we conducted a comparative phosphoproteomic profiling of cold-sensitive Cavendish Banana and relatively cold tolerant Dajiao under cold stress. Phosphopeptide abundances of five phosphoproteins involved in MKK2 interaction network, including MKK2, HY5, CaSR, STN7 and kinesin-like protein, show a remarkable difference between Cavendish Banana and Dajiao in response to cold stress. Western blotting of MKK2 protein and its T31 phosphorylated peptide verified the phosphoproteomic results of increased T31 phosphopeptide abundance with decreased MKK2 abundance in Daojiao for a time course of cold stress. Meanwhile increased expression of MKK2 with no detectable T31 phosphorylation was found in Cavendish Banana. These results suggest that the MKK2 pathway in Dajiao, along with other cold-specific phosphoproteins, appears to be associated with the molecular mechanisms of high tolerance to cold stress in Dajiao. The results also provide new evidence that the signaling pathway of cellular MKK2 phosphorylation plays an important role in abiotic stress tolerance that likely serves as a universal plant cold tolerance mechanism.

### Keywords
Mkk2, Cavendish banana, Phosphoproteomics, Cold tolerance, Dajiao

### Affiliations
Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Fruit Tree Research. Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences. Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong Province, China

### Submitter
Jie Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Qiaosong Yang
Institute of Fruit Tree Research. Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences. Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong Province, China


