### Accession
PXD033092

### Title
Title（Project name）Proteomic Investigation of the Molecular Mechanisms in Response to the PEG-Induced Drought Stress in Soybean Roots

### Description
Roots are generally the critical drought sensors, but little is known about their molecular response to drought stress. We used the drought-tolerant soybean variety ‘Jiyu 47’ to investigate the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in soybean roots during the seedling stage based on the TMT proteomics analysis. Results of enrichment analyses based on a total of 468 DEPs revealed a coordinated expression pattern of proteins involved in various cellular metabolisms responding to drought stress in soybean roots. Our results showed that drought stress caused significant alterations in the expression of proteins involved in several metabolic pathways in soybean roots, including the carbohydrate metabolism, the metabolism of the osmotic regulation substances, and the antioxidant defense system (i.e., the glutathione metabolism). Increased production of reduced glutathione (GSH) enhanced the prevention of the damage caused by reactive oxygen species and the tolerance of the abiotic stress. The glutathione metabolism played a key role in modifying the antioxidant defense system in response to drought stress in soybean roots. Our proteomic study demonstrated that the soybean plants responded to drought stress by coordinating their protein expression during the vegetative stage, providing novel insights into the molecular mechanisms regulating the response to abiotic stress in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation and TMT labeling: The samples of root apices were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube, added with 4 mL of lysis buffer (containing 10 mM DTT, 1% protease inhibitor, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor), and followed by sonication on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz-5T, Ningbo Scientz Biotech-nology Co., Ltd., Ningbo, China). The sample was added with similar amount of Tris-saturated phenol and centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000g and 4°C. The supernatant was collected and mixed with 5 times the amount of 0.1 M ammonium-acetate/methanol, and incubated overnight at –20°C. Finally, the protein precipitate was washed with methyl-alcohol and acetone, and dissolved in 8 M urea. The protein concentration was measured using a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The protein sample was then diluted with 200 mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich, Beijing, China), digested with trypsin (1:50, w/w; Promega, USA) overnight at 37°C, and then digested again with trypsin (1:100, w/w) overnight at 37°C [33]. The sample volume of protein solution was adjusted with lysis buffer (20% tri-chloroacetic acid) slowly added, vortexed, sedimented for 2 h at 4°C, and the protein precipitate was washed thrice with cold acetone. Then the supernatant was discarded by centrifugation at 4,500g for 10 min. The final concentration of the protein solution was adjusted with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, Beijing, China) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Beijing, China) in dark at room temperature for 15 min.  HPLC HPLC classification: The digested peptides were desalted and vacuum dried using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, California, USA), then dis-solved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled using the TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tagged peptides were fractionated using a high pH reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Agilent 300Extend-C18, 5 µm particles, 4.6 mm × 250 mm). Peptides were separated into 60 fractions over 60 min using acetonitrile with a gradient of 8% to 32% (pH 9.0; Fisher Chemical, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Wal-tham, Massachusetts, USA). The peptides were then separated into 18 fractions and vacuum centrifuged to dry. LC-MS analysis:  The enriched peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, Beijing, China) and the elution gradient in-creasing from 6% to 25 % in mobile phase B (0.1 formic acid in 90 % acetonitrile) over 26 min, 25% to 35% in 9 min, elevating to 80% in 4 min, and then staying at 80% for the final 4 min. All experiments of the liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses were performed on the EASY-nLC 1000 ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, In., Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) with a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min.  The peptides were subjected to the nanospray ion source for nanospray ionization (NSI) followed by MS/MS analysis in Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) coupled with the UPLC system. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS analysis using NCE setting at 28 with the fragments detected at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. A da-ta-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans each with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant v.1.5.2.8 (https://www.maxquant.org/).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched against a total of 74,863 sequences of Glycine max (taxonomy ID: 3847) at the Uniprot database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/; accessed on August 06, 2020). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 10 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search with the mass tolerance for fragment ions set as 0.02 Da. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were divided into four groups (Q1 to Q4) based on their differentially expressed mul-tiples and the cluster analysis was conducted to identify the correlation of protein functions with different expression multiples (i.e., less than 0.667 in Q1, ranging from 0.667 to 0.769 in Q2, ranging from 1.3 to 1.5 in Q3, and larger than 1.5 in Q4). The false discovery rate (FDR) of the TMT-6plex, protein identification, and the peptide spectrum match (PSM) identification was set to 1%. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of the proteome of soybean roots were de-rived from the UniProtKB (https://www.uniprot.org/help/uniprotkb) at the Gene On-tology Annotation (GOA) (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) database. The identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt IDs and then annotated to GO IDs. The identified pro-teins not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database were further annotated for GO functional analysis by the InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) database based on protein sequence alignment and the proteins were classified into three categories (i.e., biological process, cellular component, and molecular function) based on the GO an-notations. The protein domains and functional locations were annotated based on the InterPro protein domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro). The proteins were also classified based on the databased of the Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) of proteins (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG). The metabolic pathways were annotated based on the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/). Specifically, the KEGG automatic annotation server KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/kaas_main) was used to annotate the KEGG database descriptions of the proteins. The annotations were then mapped onto the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tool KEGG mapper. The WoLF PSORT was used to predict the protein subcellular localizations (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html). A two-tailed Fisher's exact test with the p-value normalized to 0.05 was used for each category of the GO, KEGG, and protein domain enrichment analyses of the DEPs against all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
While a significant fraction of topological materials has been characterized using symmetry requirements<sup>1-4</sup>, the past two years have witnessed the rise of novel multi-gap dependent topological states<sup>5-9</sup>, the properties of which go beyond these approaches and are yet to be fully explored. Although already of active interest at equilibrium<sup>10-15</sup>, we show that the combination of out-of-equilibrium processes and multi-gap topological insights galvanize a new direction within topological phases of matter. We show that periodic driving can induce anomalous multi-gap topological properties that have no static counterpart. In particular, we identify Floquet-induced non-Abelian braiding, which in turn leads to a phase characterized by an anomalous Euler class, being the prime example of a multi-gap topological invariant. Most strikingly, we also retrieve the first example of an 'anomalous Dirac string phase'. This gapped out-of-equilibrium phase features an unconventional Dirac string configuration that physically manifests itself via anomalous edge states on the boundary. Our results not only provide a stepping stone for the exploration of intrinsically dynamical and experimentally viable multi-gap topological phases, but also demonstrate periodic driving as a powerful way to observe these non-Abelian braiding processes notably in quantum simulators.

### Keywords
Soybean root; drought stress; physiological response; proteomics; antioxidant; enrichment analysis

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun
College of Life Sciences, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118,China

### Submitter
Ying Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Zhou
College of Life Sciences, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118,China


