### Accession
PXD007787

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cell cycle progression in asynchronous cultures, including mitotic subphases, using PRIMMUS

### Description
The temporal regulation of protein abundance and post-translational modifications is a key feature of cell division. Recently, we analysed gene expression and protein abundance changes during interphase under minimally perturbed conditions (Ly et al. 2014; Ly et al. 2015). Here we show that by using specific intracellular immunolabeling protocols, FACS separation of interphase and mitotic cells, including mitotic subphases, can be combined with proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry. Using this PRIMMUS (PRoteomic analysis of Intracellular iMMUnolabeled cell Subsets) approach, we now compare protein abundance and phosphorylation changes in interphase and mitotic fractions from asynchronously growing human cells. We identify a set of 115 phosphorylation sites increased during G2, which we term 'early risers'. This set includes phosphorylation of S738 on TPX2, which we show is important for TPX2 function and mitotic progression. Further, we use PRIMMUS to provide a proteome-wide analysis of protein abundance remodeling between prophase, prometaphase and anaphase.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, reverse crosslinking, protein precipitation/SP3, Ti:IMAC phosphoenrichment Cells were resuspended in 4% SDS in PBS, homogenised with a probe sonicator (Branson, 10% power, 20 sec, 4°C), and heated to 95°C for 30 min to reverse crosslinks. For MS analysis, proteins were then reduced and alkylated using TCEP (25 mM final concentration, Sigma) and iodoacetamide (55 mM final concentration, Sigma). G1, S, G2, and M phase lysates for the single shot analyses were then chloroform-methanol precipitated.  The interphase fractions for phosphoenrichment and the mitotic substage fractions (G2, M, Pro, PM1, PM2, and Ana) were processed using the SP3 method, as described previously (Hughes et al. 2014). The mean cell counts for the phosphoenrichment experiment, which was performed in biological duplicate, was 10, 6, 3.5, and 1.5 million for G1, S, G2, and M phase fractions, respectively. The mean cell counts for mitotic subphases experiment, which was performed in biological triplicate, were 0.14, 0.52, 0.36, and 0.12 million for Pro, PM1, PM2, and Ana fractions, respectively. Lysis buffer volumes were adjusted according to cell count, and identical volumes were used for TMT labeling and mixing. Cell disruption and DNA homogenization was performed using a Pico Bioruptor (Diagenode). Reverse crosslinking was performed as above. Proteins were recovered from lysates using the SP3 method and digested on-bead with Lys-C followed by Trypsin.  Peptides were then recovered by SP3, and TMT labelled according to manufacturer's instructions. For phosphoenrichment, TMT labelled peptides were mixed and subjected to magnetic Ti:IMAC enrichment (Resyn Biosciences) using the manufacturer's protocol. Offline HPLC and LC-MS/MS analysis Chloroform-methanol precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea in digest buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2). The protein solution was then diluted to 4 M urea with digest buffer and then digested with Lys-C, which was added at a 1:50 w/w Lys-C:protein ratio from a 1 mg/ml stock in water (Wako Chemicals) overnight at 37°C. The lysates were then further diluted with digest buffer to 0.8 M urea and digested with trypsin, which was added at a 1:50 w/w trypsin:protein ratio from a 0.2 mg/ml stock in 50 mM acetic acid (Thermo Pierce) for four hours at 37Â°C. The digests were then desalted using SepPak-C18 SPE cartridges, dried, and resuspended in 5% formic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using the amine-reactive, fluorogenic CBQCA assay (Life Technologies). SP3-processed proteins were digested in a similar manner to above. For one biological replicate, the resulting peptides were TMT-labelled according to manufacturer's instructions. Peptides (SILAC or TMT) were then mixed, dried, and resuspended in high pH reverse phase buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in 2% ACN, pH 9.3). Peptides were then chromatographed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 off-line HPLC equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 4.6 mm x 250 mm column packed with 3.5 µm particles containing 130 angstrom pores (Waters) and a standard gradient over 20 min from 25% at 0 min to 60% B at 11 min (10 mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN, pH 9.3) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. 48 fractions were collected into 24 wells in a concatenated format.

### Data Protocol
The SILAC and TMT RAW data files produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant, versions 1.5.1.2 and 1.5.3.30 (Cox & Mann 2008).  This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (Scheltema et al. 2011). The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was a UniProt human protein database ('Human Reference Proteome' retrieved on April 16, 2016) combined with a commonly observed contaminants list. The initial mass tolerance was set to 7 p.p.m. and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation, oxidation of methionine and Gln->pyro-Glu were searched as variable modifications. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 1%. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate of less than 1%. Protein isoforms and proteins that cannot be distinguished based on the peptides identified are grouped by MaxQuant and displayed on a single line with multiple UniProt identifiers. The label free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein quantitation. The algorithm has been previously described (Cox 2014). MaxQuant output was analysed in RStudio v1.0.136 with R v3.3.0. Protein quantitation was performed on unmodified peptides and peptides that have modifications that are known to occur during sample processing (pyro-Glu, deamidation). All resulting MS data were integrated and managed using PepTracker Data Manager, a laboratory information management system (LIMS) that is part of the PepTracker software platform (http://www.PepTracker.com). For the interphase proteomic dataset, proteins were filtered to eliminate potential contaminants and reverse hits. For each of the four biological replicates, normalised SILAC ratios were normalized to the ratio measured in G1. A median ratio was calculated between replicates. The maximum fold change across a single experiment (i.e. between G1, S, G2, and M phase) was calculated. The distribution of maximum fold changes was then used to calculate fold change cutoffs were using Z-scoring, i.e. the median Â± 1.96 * the sample standard deviation. P-values were calculated using a one-way ANOVA with the four biological replicates, excluding proteins with missing values. The p-value cutoff was arbitrarily set to 0.05. Proteins that met the fold change and p-value cutoffs were deemed significantly different in abundance between the cell cycle fractions. For the interphase phosphorylation dataset, raw data were analysed using MaxQuant  For the mitotic subphases proteomic dataset, SILAC ratios were normalized to the prophase fraction, in a similar fashion to the interphase dataset (which was normalized to G1). The TMT reporter channels, 126, 127N, 128C, 129N, 130C, and 131, relate to G2, M, Pro, PM2, PM1, and Ana fractions, respectively. TMT reporter intensities were corrected for isotope contamination (Lot QL226165A) and normalized by dividing each TMT reporter by the sum of TMT reporter intensities.  TMT reporter ratios were then calculated by dividing by the prophase (Pro) TMT reporter intensity. Thus TMT and SILAC experiments are both normalized to the same fraction. The TMT and SILAC datasets were merged using the Leading Razor Protein UniProt identifier. Correlation coefficients between the three biological replicates were calculated for the patterns across Pro, PM1, PM2, and Ana fractions in a pairwise fashion ('cor 1vs2', 'cor 1vs3', and 'cor 2vs3' in Supplementary Table 4). A fold change cutoff based on maximum fold change was calculated using Z-scoring as above. Proteins that a) have at least one pair of biological replicates with a correlation coefficient greater than 0, and b) meet the fold change cutoff were deemed to be significantly changed. Protein profiles were clustered using k-means, where k = 12. The appropriate k was determined by identifying the inflection point in a plot of within groups sum of squares vs the number of clusters. Clusters showing increased abundance were removed and remaining clusters were agglomerated into three groups based on 'earliest' fraction showing decreased abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The temporal regulation of protein abundance and post-translational modifications is a key feature of cell division. Recently, we analysed gene expression and protein abundance changes during interphase under minimally perturbed conditions (Ly et al., 2014, 2015). Here, we show that by using specific intracellular immunolabelling protocols, FACS separation of interphase and mitotic cells, including mitotic subphases, can be combined with proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry. Using this PRIMMUS (PRoteomic analysis of Intracellular iMMUnolabelled cell Subsets) approach, we now compare protein abundance and phosphorylation changes in interphase and mitotic fractions from asynchronously growing human cells. We identify a set of 115 phosphorylation sites increased during G2, termed 'early risers'. This set includes phosphorylation of S738 on TPX2, which we show is important for TPX2 function and mitotic progression. Further, we use PRIMMUS to provide the first a proteome-wide analysis of protein abundance remodeling between prophase, prometaphase and anaphase.

### Keywords
Human, Cell cycle, Facs

### Affiliations
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Tony Ly

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression University of Dundee


