### Accession
PXD013784

### Title
Identification of MDN1-dependent proteome changes in Arabidopsis seeds

### Description
mdn1-1 is a weak mutant of the Arabidopsis MDN1 gene. mdn1-1 exhibits an increased seed-size phenotype. To further figure out the proteome changes in the mdn1-1 seeds, we applied the iTRAQ-based LC-MS/MS analysis. A total of 3217 proteins were identified in dry seeds of both wild type and mdn1-1. The significantly differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were filtered out based on the fold change (FC > 1.5 or < 0.667) of expression level and P value (< 0.05). We defined 282 up- and 40 downregulated proteins in mdn1-1.

### Sample Protocol
All of the chemicals used for protein extraction and digestion were of analytical grade.  The protein were extracted using the Plant Total Protein Extraction Kit ( Bangfei  Bioscience Co.,Ltd, Beijing,China), and the protein concentration was determined using  the protein quantification kit (Dingguo Changsheng,Beijing ,China) with bovine serum  albumin as the standard according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein  digestion was performed by primarily following the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)  protocol 1. For all of the samples, three biological replicates were performed. A portion  (150 mg) of collected samples was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and  pestle. The powder was added to a solution of PE Solution A, and the resulting  suspension was mixed thoroughly by vortexing. The mixture was adding equal volume of  PE Solution B and incubated on the ice for 1 h. After centrifugation at 15,000×g for 20 min  at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected and then added PE Solution C. for this procedure,  the collects were restored at -20 °C overnight and centrifugated at 15,000×g for 15 min at  4 °C. The remaining pellet was washed twice with precooled acetone,and resuspended in  lysis buffer PE Solution D. Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford

### Data Protocol
reconstituted peptides were analyzed with the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer  (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a nano high-performance  liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000 LC Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific) system. The  peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (3 μm-C18 resin, 75 μm × 15 cm)  and separated on an analytical column (5 μm C18 resin, 150 μm × 2 cm; Dr. Maisch  GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using mobile phase A: 0.5% formic acid [FA]/H2O and B:  0.5% FA/ACN at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a 150 min gradient. Spectra were  acquired in data-dependent mode. The 10 most intense ions selected for MS scanning   (300–1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution at m/z 400, accumulation of 1 × 106 ions for a maximum  of 500 ms, 1 microscan). The isolation window was 1.3 m/z, and the MS/MS spectra were  accumulated for 150 ms using an Orbitrap. MS/MS spectra were measured at resolution  of 15,000 at m/z 400. Dynamic precursor exclusion was allowed for 120 s after each  MS/MS spectrum measurement and was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision  energy was 30 eV and the under fill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the  target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was defined  as 0.1%. The  instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Seed germination and formation are the beginning and ending, respectively, of a plant life cycle. These two processes are under fine regulation by the internal genetic information. Previously, we demonstrated that <i>Arabidopsis</i> MIDASIN 1 (MDN1) is required for ribosome biogenesis, and its dysfunction leads to pleiotropic developmental phenotypes, including impaired embryogenesis and slow seed germination. In this study, we further found that the weak mutant of <i>MDN1</i>, <i>mdn1-1</i>, exhibits an increased seed size phenotype. Seed proteomic analysis reveals that a number of proteins involved in seed development and response to external environments are mis-regulated by the MDN1 dysfunction. Many 2S seed storage proteins (SSPs) and late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins are over-accumulated in the dry seeds of <i>mdn1-1</i>. Further, some genes encoding seed storage reserves are also upregulated in <i>mdn1-1</i> seedlings. More interestingly, abscisic acid-insensitive 5 (ABI5) is over-accumulated in <i>mdn1-1</i> seeds, and the loss of its function partially rescues the low seed germination rate of <i>mdn1-1</i>. Together, this study further demonstrates that MDN1 is essential for establishing a normal seed proteome, and its mutation triggers ABI5-mediated repression of seed germination.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis seeds, Itraq, Mdn1

### Affiliations
shangdong academy of agricultural
Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Pengcheng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Li pengcheng
shangdong academy of agricultural


