### Accession
PXD038302

### Title
Proteomics reveals unique identities of human TGF-β-induced and thymus-derived CD4+ regulatory T cells

### Description
The CD4+ regulatory T (Treg) cell lineage comprises thymus-derived (t)Treg cells and peripherally induced (p)Treg cells. As a model for Treg cells, studies employ TGF-β-induced (i)Treg cells generated from CD4+ conventional T (Tconv) cells in vitro. Here, we describe the relationship of iTreg cells to tTreg and Tconv cells. Proteomic analysis revealed that iTreg, tTreg and Tconv cell populations each have a unique protein expression pattern. iTreg cells had very limited overlap in protein expression with tTreg cells, regardless of cell activation status and instead shared signaling and metabolic proteins with Tconv cells. tTreg cells had a uniquely modest response to CD3/CD28-mediated stimulation. As a benchmark, we used a previously defined proteomic signature that sets ex vivo naïve and effector phenotype Treg cells apart from Tconv cells and includes unique Treg cell properties (Cuadrado et al., Immunity, 2018). This Treg cell core signature was largely absent in iTreg cells. We also used a proteomic signature that distinguishes ex vivo effector Treg cells from Tconv cells and naïve Treg cells. This effector Treg cell signature was partially present in iTreg cells. In conclusion, iTreg cells are distinct from tTreg cells and share limited features with ex vivo Treg cells at the proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were collected from healthy human buffy coats by performing a Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare) density gradient centrifugation to isolate PBMCs and subsequently using CD4 magnetic MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturers’ protocols. To sort naïve Tconv and tTreg cells, CD4+ T cells were stained with CD4-PE-Cy7, CD127-BV421 (BioLegend), CD25-PE (BD Biosciences), CD45RA-FITC (Immunotools) and GPA33-AF647 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Cells were sorted on a MoFlo Astrios using Summit software version 6.2 (Beckman Coulter). Propidium iodide (Sigma) was used as a live/dead marker. Following cell sorting, naïve Tconv and tTreg cells were cultured in 96-well round bottom plates (Greiner) at 1 × 10^4 cells per well using IMDM (Gibco, Life Technologies) supplemented with 8% FCS (Sigma), penicillin/streptomycin (Roche) and 300 IU/ml IL-2 (DuPont Medical), hereinafter referred to as T-cell medium, at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were expanded using agonistic mAbs against CD3 (clone CLB-T3/4.E, IgE isotype, Sanquin, 0.1 μg/ml) and CD28 (clone CLB-CD28/1, Sanquin, 0.2 μg/ml) in solution, added at day 0 and 7 during expansion cultures. On day 4, fresh T-cell medium was added. From day 7 to day 14, cells were cultured in 24-well plates (Greiner) at 5 × 10^5 cells per ml, while fresh T-cell medium was added on day 11. On day 14, cells were cultured in 6-well plates (Corning) at 1 × 10^6 cells per ml for four days using fresh T-cell medium in the absence of agonistic mAbs. To generate iTreg cells, naïve Tconv cells were cultured as described above in the presence of TGF-β (Peprotech, 10 ng/ml). Prior to restimulation experiments, dead cells were removed by Ficoll-Paque Plus density gradient centrifugation. T cell restimulation for 24 h was performed using T-cell medium in the presence of agonistic mAbs against CD3 (0.1 μg/ml) and CD28 (0.2 μg/ml), but without TGF-β. At least 1 × 10^6 resting or restimulated Tconv, tTreg and iTreg cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 with 4% SDS and 100 mM DTT in Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). As described before (Cuadrado et al., Immunity, 2018), samples were heated at 95°C, sonicated (Bioruptor) and centrifuged (16,000 g), followed by isolation of cell lysates and storage at -80°C. Cell lysates were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described (Wisniewski et al., Nat Methods, 2009). In short, proteins were alkylated and digested into peptides using sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Samples were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al., Anal Chem, 2003), the aqueous phase was evaporated in a speedvac, and proteins were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA in water before analysis by mass spectrometry. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter-fused silica emitter (New Objected) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 µm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 min at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5%–15% (22-87 min) and 15%–38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 min wash to 90% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 10^5 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 10^4 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software. The proteomics data from Tconv and tTreg cell samples were deposited before to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository and can be accessed with the dataset identifier PXD007745.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.5.2.8) using label-free quantitation (LFQ), as previously described (Cuadrado et al., Immunity, 2018). Peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human UniProt database with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff both at peptide and protein level. Potential contaminants and reverse hits were removed using Perseus (version 1.6.12). LFQ values were log2-transformed and the biological replicates were grouped based on sample group. For analysis of unstimulated samples, proteins with a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one cell type were included for further analysis. For analysis of samples with or without CD3/CD28-mediated restimulation, a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one sample group was required to include proteins for further analysis. Missing value imputation was performed separately for each sample, replacing missing values by random numbers drawn from the lower part of the normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8). The proteomics experiment was conducted with three biological replicates per sample group, but one sample, i.e. restimulated iTreg cells from donor 1, was excluded from the analysis due to lower protein content that led to fewer detected proteins. PCA revealed that this sample was an outlier. Proteomics data were analyzed using Qlucore Omics Explorer (version 3.8) to perform PCA and ANOVA test followed by a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction with a 5% FDR. After z-score normalization, clusters of proteins with similar expression patterns were identified using hierarchical clustering and visualized in heat maps.

### Publication Abstract
The CD4<sup>+</sup> regulatory T (Treg) cell lineage, defined by FOXP3 expression, comprises thymus-derived (t)Treg cells and peripherally induced (p)Treg cells. As a model for Treg cells, studies employ TGF-&#x3b2;-induced (i)Treg cells generated from CD4<sup>+</sup> conventional T (Tconv) cells in vitro. Here, we describe how human iTreg cells relate to human blood-derived tTreg and Tconv cells according to proteomic analysis. Each of these cell populations had a unique protein expression pattern. iTreg cells had very limited overlap in protein expression with tTreg cells, regardless of cell activation status and instead shared signaling and metabolic proteins with Tconv cells. tTreg cells had a uniquely modest response to CD3/CD28-mediated stimulation. As a benchmark, we used a previously defined proteomic signature that discerns ex vivo na&#xef;ve and effector Treg cells from Tconv cells and includes conserved Treg cell properties. iTreg cells largely lacked this Treg&#xa0;cell core signature and highly expressed e.g. STAT4 and NFATC2, which may contribute to inflammatory responses. We also used a proteomic signature that distinguishes ex vivo effector Treg cells from Tconv cells and na&#xef;ve Treg cells. iTreg cells contained part of this effector Treg cell signature, suggesting acquisition of pTreg cell features. In conclusion, iTreg cells are distinct from tTreg cells and share limited features with ex vivo Treg cells at the proteomic level.

### Keywords
Human, Induced regulatory t cell, Tgf-beta, Ttreg, Itreg, Tconv, Treg, Conventional t cell, Regulatory t cell, Thymus-derived regulatory t cell

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Department of Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Mark Mensink

### Lab Head
Dr Jannie Borst
Department of Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


