### Accession
PXD028407

### Title
Quantitative proteogenomic characterization of inflamed murine colon tissue using an integrated discovery, verification, and validation proteogenomic workflow

### Description
Rag2-/-Il10-/- mice were subjected to infection by Helicobacter hepaticus and allowed to develop long-term infections. Proximal colon tissue was then harvested from the mice for analysis. RNA was isolated from the samples and submitted for transcriptomic analysis; this data was then used to create a custom RNA-based FASTA database. Protein isolated from the proximal colon samples were digested and analyzed via bottom-up mass spectrometry. The custom FASTA database was then used for proteogenomic analysis of the raw mass spectrometry data in the Galaxy for proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform.

### Sample Protocol
Six samples (three control samples and three H. hepaticus-exposed samples) were chosen for analysis. 10mg of proximal colon tissue samples were resected and added to lysis buffer (25mM TEAB, 8M urea, 1mM PMSF, and 2.5μg/mL aprotinin, pH = 8.5), after which they were homogenized via pestle and sonication. After homogenization, 100 μg of protein were reduced, alkylated, and digested using a filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Following digestion, 10 μg of peptides from each sample were labeled with one of the reagents of the 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) kit. Samples were then desalted using C18 spin columns, concatenated and fractionated into eight fractions using a commercial high pH fractionation kit. Fractionated, TMT-labeled samples were analyzed via LC-MS (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC run in nano mode with a 15cm nLC column packed with Luna 5µm C18 resin) in DDA mode. For targeted experiments, digested individual samples were run on a QExactive Orbitrap Hybrid mass spectrometer interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC run in nano mode with a 15cm nLC column packed with Luna 5µm C18 resin) in DDA mode as well as PRM mode.

### Data Protocol
In Galaxy-P, workflows were used to generate a custom FASTA database from the transcriptomic data generated from the proximal colon samples. This was then downloaded, and the raw global proteomics data searched against this using Proteome Discoverer v2.2. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT6 labeling at peptide N-termini and lysine residues were set as static modifications, while methionine oxidation and phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as dynamic modifications. Confidence for peptide identifications was set at an FDR cutoff of 0.01. The resulting PSM reports were used for quantitative analysis using MSstatsTMT and visualization with MSstats. To identify non-canonical peptide sequences, the raw mass spectrometry data of the proximal colon tissue is searched against the custom protein FASTA database using SearchGUI and PeptideShaker in Galaxy. From the peptides that are identified, peptides from the murine reference and common contaminant reference proteomes are removed. Targeted mass spectrometry experiments were processed in Skyline and data analysis performed using limma in R.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic inflammation of the colon causes genomic and/or transcriptomic events, which can lead to expression of non-canonical protein sequences contributing to oncogenesis. To better understand these mechanisms, <i>Rag2</i><sup>-/-</sup><i>Il10</i><sup>-/-</sup> mice were infected with <i>Helicobacter hepaticus</i> to induce chronic inflammation of the cecum and the colon. Transcriptomic data from harvested proximal colon samples were used to generate a customized FASTA database containing non-canonical protein sequences. Using a proteogenomic approach, mass spectrometry data for proximal colon proteins were searched against this custom FASTA database using the Galaxy for Proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform. In addition to the increased abundance in inflammatory response proteins, we also discovered several non-canonical peptide sequences derived from unique proteoforms. We confirmed the veracity of these novel sequences using an automated bioinformatics verification workflow with targeted MS-based assays for peptide validation. Our bioinformatics discovery workflow identified 235 putative non-canonical peptide sequences, of which 58 were verified with high confidence and 39 were validated in targeted proteomics assays. This study provides insights into challenges faced when identifying non-canonical peptides using a proteogenomics approach and demonstrates an integrated workflow addressing these challenges. Our bioinformatic discovery and verification workflow is publicly available and accessible via the Galaxy platform and should be valuable in non-canonical peptide identification using proteogenomics.

### Keywords
Dda, Proximal colon, Mouse, Tmt, Prm, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics Director, Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics

### Submitter
Andrew Rajczewski

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy J Griffin
Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics Director, Center for Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


