### Accession
PXD008779

### Title
Localised protein expression changes in different regions of human Alzheimer’s brain correlate with disease severity  - Cingulate Gyrus

### Description
Human brain tissue was obtained from the New Zealand Brain Bank from donors with Alzheimer's disease (AD) or age-matched controls (n=9/group). Mean post mortem delays were ~12h. Six distinct brain regions were dissected, Hippocampus, Cingulate Gyrus, Entorhinal Cortex (severely affected), Motor and Sensory Cortex (less affected) and Cerebellum (spared). Protein was extracted from each sample and, each region was analysed independently. For each region, samples were divided into 3 sets of 3 cases and 3 controls and assigned to an iTRAQ 8 plex, alongside two aliquots of a pooled QC sample. Samples were digested, iTRAQ labelled and analysed. For each region, between 3000 and 4200 proteins were compared between AD and control, identifying a series of known and novel protein expression changes associated with the progression of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted, reduced alkylated and digested using standard protocols. Following iTRAQ labelled of peptides (8plex), samples were pooled and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography. Each fraction was subsequently analysed by LC-MS/MS using a AB Sciex QStar Elite MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were extracted, reduced alkylated and digested using standard protocols. Following iTRAQ labelled of peptides (8plex), samples were pooled and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography. Each fraction was subsequently analysed by LC-MS/MS using a AB Sciex QStar Elite MS.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that currently affects 36 million people worldwide with no effective treatment available. Development of AD follows a distinctive pattern in the brain and is poorly modelled in animals. Therefore, it is vital to widen the spatial scope of the study of AD and prioritise the study of human brains. Here we show that functionally distinct human brain regions display varying and region-specific changes in protein expression. These changes provide insights into the progression of disease, novel AD-related pathways, the presence of a gradient of protein expression change from less to more affected regions and a possibly protective protein expression profile in the cerebellum. This spatial proteomics analysis provides a framework which can underpin current research and open new avenues to enhance molecular understanding of AD pathophysiology, provide new targets for intervention and broaden the conceptual frameworks for future AD research.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Itraq, Cingulate gyrus, Alzheimer’s, Dementia

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, School of Medical Science, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Richard Unwin

### Lab Head
Dr Richard David Unwin
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, School of Medical Science, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester


