### Accession
PXD015790

### Title
Prolyl Hydroxylase Substrate Adenylosuccinate Lyase Is An 2 Oncogenic Driver In Triple Negative Breast Cancer

### Description
Protein hydroxylation extensively regulates cellular signaling by affecting protein stability, activity, and interactome, therefore contributing to the pathogenesis of various diseases including cancers. However, because of the transient nature of the hydroxylase-substrate interaction, identifying new prolyl hydroxylation substrates remains a daunting challenge. Here, by developing a novel enzyme-substrate trapping strategy coupled with TAP-TAG or orthogonal GST- purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) as a bona fide EglN2 prolyl hydroxylase substrate in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ADSL expression is significantly higher in TNBC than other breast cancer subtypes or normal breast tissues. Functionally, ADSL knockout greatly impairs TNBC 2-D and 3-D cell proliferation and invasiveness in vitro, as well as TNBC tumorigenesis and lung colonization in xenograft models. Mechanistically, an integrated transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis revealed that ADSL promotes the activation of the oncogenic cMYC pathway by regulating cMYC protein level via a mechanism requiring ADSL hydroxylation on proline 24. Specifically, hydroxylation-proficient ADSL, by affecting adenosine levels, represses the expression of the long non-coding RNA MIR22HG, thus upregulating the oncogene cMYC protein level and its target gene expression. Our findings identify the critical role of ADSL hydroxylation in controlling cMYC and TNBC tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The EglN2 immunoprecipitates from MDA231 cells were eluted in 8 M Urea, reduced with 5 mM DTT and akylated with 15 mM IAA. The solution was diluted with 25 mM Tris (pH 8)to get final 2 M of urea concentration followed by digestion by trypsin. The digests were desalted on homemade C18 tips and dried in speed-Vac. The clean peptides were dissolved in 0.1% Formic acid and ready for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.17, was used for search against Uniprot human proteome database. Carbamidomethyl modification on Cys was as fixed and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminus as variables. PSM and protein FDRs were set to 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. LFQ was used for quantification. The unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was used for experiments comparing two sets of data. p-value for significance was set to <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Protein hydroxylation affects protein stability, activity, and interactome, therefore contributing to various diseases including cancers. However, the transiency of the hydroxylation reaction hinders the identification of hydroxylase substrates. By developing an enzyme-substrate trapping strategy coupled with TAP-TAG or orthogonal GST- purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) as an EglN2 hydroxylase substrate in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ADSL expression is higher in TNBC than other breast cancer subtypes or normal breast tissues. ADSL knockout impairs TNBC cell proliferation and invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. An integrated transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis reveals that ADSL activates the oncogenic cMYC pathway by regulating cMYC protein level via a mechanism requiring ADSL proline 24 hydroxylation. Hydroxylation-proficient ADSL, by affecting adenosine levels, represses the expression of the long non-coding RNA MIR22HG, thus upregulating cMYC protein level. Our findings highlight the role of ADSL hydroxylation in controlling cMYC and TNBC tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Adenylosuccinate lyase (adsl), Egln2 prolyl hydroxylase, Protein hydroxylation

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology  UT Southwestern Medical Center
UNC at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Ling Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhang
Department of Pathology  UT Southwestern Medical Center


