### Accession
PXD023655

### Title
Determining the hydroxylation status of NAA10-Trp38

### Description
NAA10 is the major human N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT). The KAT activity of NAA10 towards hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α) was recently reported to depend on the hydroxylation at Trp38 of NAA10 by factor inhibiting HIF-1α (FIH). As a consequence, Trp38 hydroxylation status was proposed to act as a general NAA10-switch between its NAT and KAT state. We attempted to quantify the degree of hydroxylation of NAA10. We could not detect any hydroxylation of Trp38 of NAA10 in several human cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
NAA10 or NAA15 immunoprecipitated from HEK293, HeLa and HAP1 cells were analyzed for interactors and hydroxylation at tryptophan, aspartate and asparagine residues. IPs were digested with trypsin and LysC using either FASP or in-solution digestion, and analyzed by either a 3-hour method on a QExactive-HF (FASP samples) or a 30-minute method on an Exploris 480 (in-solution samples).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched in Maxquant 1.6.17.0 with fixed Cys carbamidomethylation and variable oxidation (+16 Da) of Met, Asn, Asp, or Trp. Peptides were quantified by intensity and protein groups by iBAQ.

### Publication Abstract
NAA10 is a major <i>N</i>-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT) that catalyzes the cotranslational <i>N</i>-terminal (Nt-) acetylation of 40% of the human proteome. Several reports of lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) activity by NAA10 exist, but others have not been able to find any NAA10-derived KAT activity, the latter of which is supported by structural studies. The KAT activity of NAA10 towards hypoxia-inducible factor 1&#x3b1; (HIF-1&#x3b1;) was recently found to depend on the hydroxylation at Trp38 of NAA10 by factor inhibiting HIF-1&#x3b1; (FIH). In contrast, we could not detect hydroxylation of Trp38 of NAA10 in several human cell lines and found no evidence that NAA10 interacts with or is regulated by FIH. Our data suggest that NAA10 Trp38 hydroxylation is not a switch in human cells and that it alters its catalytic activity from a NAT to a KAT.

### Keywords
Nat, Hydroxylation, Naa10, Trp-oh, Asn-oh, Asp-oh

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen

### Submitter
Rasmus Ree

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen


