### Accession
PXD035030

### Title
Comprehensive analysis of platelet glycoprotein Ibα glycosylation.

### Description
Background: Platelet glycoprotein (GP) Ibα is the major ligand-binding subunit of the GPIb-IX-V complex that binds von Willebrand Factor (VWF). GPIbα is heavily glycosylated, and its glycans have been proposed to play key roles in platelet clearance, VWF binding, and as target antigens in immune thrombocytopenia syndromes. Despite its importance in platelet biology, the glycosylation profile of GPIbα is not well characterized.   Objectives: The aim of this study was to comprehensively analyze GPIbα amino acid sites of glycosylation (glycosites) and glycan structures.  Methods: GPIbα ectodomain that was recombinantly expressed or that was purified from human platelets was analyzed by Western blot, mass spectrometry (MS) glycomics, and MS glycoproteomics to define glycosites and the structures of the attached glycans.  Results: We identified a diverse repertoire of N- and O-glycans, including sialoglycans, Tn antigen, T antigen, and ABH blood group antigens. In the analysis of the recombinant protein, we identified 62 unique O-glycosites. In the analysis of the endogenous protein purified from platelets, we identified at least 48 unique O-glycosites and 1 N-glycosite. The GPIbα mucin domain is densely O-glycosylated. Glycosites are also located within the macroglycopeptide domain and mechanosensory domain (MSD).  Conclusions: This comprehensive analysis of GPIbα glycosylation lays the foundation for further studies to determine the functional and structural roles of GPIbα glycans.

### Sample Protocol
The ectodomain of GPIbα was digested with several different conditions to maximize protein coverage and glycopeptide identification. When proteases were included in the digestion, peptides were subsequently reduced in 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65 °C for 30 minutes. After cooling, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a concentration of 3 mM and allowed to react for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then diluted using 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. All digests were performed in ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5. Mucinase digests (e.g., StcE, SmE) were performed overnight and protease (e.g., GluC, trypsin) digests were performed the following day for 6 h. In cases where N-glycans were removed, PNGaseF (NEB) was diluted 1:10 and 1 µL was added to the mucinase digests (20-60 µL) overnight. In sialidase treated samples (recombinant protein only), 1 µL of sialoEXO (Genovis) was added to 39 µL of water, then 1 µL of the dilution was added to the reaction. All digests were incubated at 37 °C. The combinations of proteases used and their enzyme : substrate ratios were as follows: SmE/GluC (1:20, 1:100), SmE/trypsin (1:20, 1:100), StcE/GluC (1:20, 1:100), StcE/Thermolysin (1:20, 1:100), SmE only (1:20), ImpA only (1:20). Reactions were quenched using 100 µL of 0.5% formic acid in ultrapure water (Pierce). C18 clean-up was performed using 1 mL strataX columns (Phenomenex). Each column was hydrated with 1 mL of acetonitrile, followed by one 1-mL rinse of 0.1% formic acid in water (“buffer A”). The samples were then added to the column and rinsed with 150 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The samples were eluted twice with 150 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 30% acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, a HILIC clean-up was performed to remove polyethylene glycol (PEG) contamination. The samples were reconstituted in 10 µL of buffer A for MS analysis. Further details are available in the Supporting Information.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem MS using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), electron transfer dissociation, and electron transfer dissociation with supplemental activation (EThcD) were performed. Raw files were searched using O-Pair search with MetaMorpheus and Byonic (ProteinMetrics) against a database containing the protein of interest.(52, 53) Files were searched with various cleavage specificities dependent on digestion conditions and search algorithm used. For O-Pair, an O-glycan database was built based on the glycomics data generated in this study and the maximum number of glycosites per peptide was set to 4. For Byonic, the O-Glycan common 9 database was used with a common max of 3. Peptide hits were filtered using a 1% FDR and, in O-Pair, a q value of < 0.01. All peptides were manually validated and/or sequenced using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Candidate sequences were obtained from search algorithms and an in-house program was used to identify MS2 spectra containing oxonium ions and the associated naked peptide backbone. HCD spectra were used to assign naked peptide sequences, glycan compositions, and characteristic fragmentation patterns. ETD and/or EThcD were then used to localize glycosites. Further details are available in the Supporting Information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteins, Platelets

### Affiliations
Yale Department of Chemistry
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Division of Hematology, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marie Hollenhorst

### Lab Head
Dr Stacy A Malaker
Yale Department of Chemistry


