### Accession
PXD012046

### Title
Oxidized fibrinogen HPLC-MS/MS

### Description
Fibrinogen is highly susceptible to oxidation compared to other plasma proteins. Fibrinogen oxidation damages its structure and affects the protein function. Fibrinogen was isolated from citrated human plasma by the modified cold ethanol precipitation technique. Oxidation of fibrinogen by ozone: a solution of 2.0 mg of fibrinogen in 1 ml of 0.05 M Tris/0.15 M NaCl buffer (pH 7.4) was introduced into a quartz reactor filled with ozone–oxygen mixture. The full exhaustion of ozone in each experiment was confirmed by spectrophotometry by the absorption band at 254 nm. The amount of ozone was varied in the range of 50–100 μM per 1 μM of fibrinogen. Ozone-induced oxidative modifications of the fibrinogen Aα, Bβ, and γ polypeptide chains upon addition of various amounts of the oxidizer have been studied by mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Disulfide bond reduction was carried out using dithiothreitol, alkylation was conducted by iodoacetamide followed by digestion of samples with trypsin in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol (V5280 Promega, USA). Briefly the protein was diluted with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer with 0.15 M NaCl (pH 8.0) and hydrolyzed with trypsin consistently at a digestion enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 mixture (w/w) overnight and 16 hours at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%. HPLC-MS/MS experiments were fulfilled on an Agilent 1100 nano-LC (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, USA) coupled to a 7T LTQ-FT Ultra (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) high resolution mass spectrometer. For chromatographic separation 1μl of each sample was injected onto a homemade C18 column (75μm × 12 cm, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 3μm;Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The following mobile phase was used: solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O; solvent B: acetonitrile. Chromatography was performed with a linear gradient by increasing the relative content of solvent B from 3% to 50% over 60 min. The ion spray voltage was set to 2.3 kV. Mass-spectrometric analysis of the peptide fractions was performed using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) with automatic spectra measurement in a 2-stage mode. At the first stage the accurate masses of peptides were measured in the ICR cell in the range m/z = 300–1600 with resolution R= 50,000 at m/z = 400 (the number of ions in the ICR cell was set to 5 × 10 6 ). At the second step five most intensive peaks from the first stage were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) and fragment spectra were registered in the linear ion trap (number of ions in LTQ was set to 3 × 10 4 ). After fragmentation, the corresponding parent masses were dynamically excluded from consideration for the next 30 s. For each type of samples (non-oxidized fibrinogen (control sample), fibrinogen treated by 50 μM and 100 μM of ozone per 1 μM of the protein (sample 1 and sample 2, respectively)), three biological replicates were carried out, for each of which the measurements were done in duplicate for first biological replicate and triplicate for others to ensure that the obtained data are reliable and reproducible.

### Data Protocol
Fibrinogen tryptic peptides were identified by searching the UniProtKB database (Swiss-Prot) using PEAKS Studio software (v. 8.5, BioinformaticsSolutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) with trypsin as the enzyme and one-sided non-specific cleavage allowed; mass accuracy for the precursor ion was set to 15 ppm; mass accuracy for MS/MS fragments to 0.50 Da. The cut-off false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides was set to <0.1%. Peptides with a minimum of 6 amino acids were considered for identification with a maximum allowance of 3 variable oxidative post-translation modifications per peptide. The oxidation degree of all modification types for each amino acid residue was calculated as the sum of areas for peptides carrying the determined oxidative modifications of this amino acid residue normalized by the total area of all peptide forms (oxidized and non-oxidized) containing this amino acid residue. The overall oxidation degree of an amino acid residue was calculated as the sum of the degrees of all modification types for the particular amino acid residue. The amount of amino acid residues involved in oxidative modification was calculated bydividing the number of modified residues by the whole number of residues in the covered part of the corresponding sequence and converting to percentage. The data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of 8 replicates. Each of amino acid residues oxidized by at least 1.0% (degree of modification >1.0%) was considered modified.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrinogen is highly susceptible to oxidation compared to other plasma proteins. Fibrinogen oxidation damages its structure and affects the protein function. Ozone-induced oxidative modifications of the fibrinogen A&#x3b1;, B&#x3b2;, and &#x3b3; polypeptide chains upon addition of various amounts of the oxidiser were studied by mass spectrometry. Amino acid residues located on all three chains and main structural parts of the protein were revealed to be involved in oxidation. The &#x3b1;C-connector was shown to be most vulnerable to oxidation as compared to other structural parts while the E region turned out to be the most protected area of the protein. For the first time, it was established that numerous amino acid residues responsible for the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin remain unaffected upon fibrinogen oxidation. The data obtained in this study indicate that none of the identified residues, which are considered crucial for the binding of both hole "a" and hole "b" to knob "A" and knob "B", respectively, as well as those responsible for the thrombin binding to fibrinogen E region, have been subjected to chemical alterations under moderate oxidation. The data on fibrinogen oxidation acquired in the current study enable one to assume that some of the structural fibrinogen parts and easily oxidisable residues could be endowed with antioxidant properties. New findings presented here could be essential for the detection of adaptive molecular mechanisms capable of mitigating the detrimental action of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on the functioning of oxidatively damaged fibrinogen. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012046. Highlights Various oxidative modifications were detected in fibrinogen by mass spectrometry &#x3b1;C-connector has been shown to be most susceptible to oxidation E region proved to be least vulnerable to the action of the oxidising agent Some of the Met residues in the fibrinogen structure could operate as ROS scavengers.

### Keywords
Oxidative post-translational modifications, Fibrinogen, Oxidation, Hplc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of biosystem thermodynamics, N.M. Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
N.M. Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics RAS (IBCP RAS)

### Submitter
Lyubov Yurina

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Rosenfeld
Laboratory of biosystem thermodynamics, N.M. Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia


