### Accession
PXD031213

### Title
Transcriptome innovations in primates revealed by single-molecule long-read sequencing

### Description
We produced an extensive transcript catalog for LCLs of 5 primate species by leveraging isoform sequencing and short-read RNA-seq. The curated transcriptomes were used to assist mass spectrometry protein identifications.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and precipitation  Two million cell pellets were thawed on ice, washed within 1ml of cold DPBS, and further centrifuged at 2500 × g 5 minutes at 4°C. After removing the supernatants, 450 μl of cold RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 10μl/ml Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) (Thermo Scientific) was added to disrupt cell pellets. After incubating 5 minutes the tubes swirling on ice, the suspension was sonicated for 30 seconds with 50% pulse a total of 3 times with 10 seconds of rest using the Branson 250 sonicator. Later, tubes were further incubated for 30 minutes on ice swirling. Finally, tubes were centrifuged at 14000 × g for 15 minutes at 4°C to pellet the cell debris, and supernatants were transferred into new protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). Extracted proteins were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −80°C until further analysis.  To precipitate the proteins, 6 volumes of overnight chilled acetone (−20°C) were added, then tubes were inverted 3 times and incubated overnight at −20°C. The next day tubes were centrifuged at 16000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and acetone was removed carefully without disturbing the protein pellet.  Mass spectrometry sample preparation  Three biological replicates for each species were processed. Samples (12-120 μg) were solubilized in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at a concentration of 1 μg/μl, reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (0.12-1.20 μmol, 37°C, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (0.23-2.25 μmol, 25 °C, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37°C, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37°C, 8h, Promega cat # V5113).  After digestion, the peptide mixes were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to have a final concentration of 1% TFA, desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide mixes were also solubilized with 100mM TEAB at a concentration of 1 μg/μl.  Samples were labeled to generate three different TMT mixes; in each TMT mix, one sample of each species was included with a common pool consisting of a mix of all the samples. Labels were used in a way that, in each TMT mix, each species uses a different TMT reagent. TMT-6 label reagents were resuspended adding 41 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) to each tube. 2 μL of the resuspended TMT label reagent was added to 10 μg of each sample. Additionally, 10 μL of anhydrous ACN and 8 μL of TEAB 100mM were added to achieve approximately a final concentration of 30% of acetonitrile. Tubes were incubated at room temperature for 1h, and then 2 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added and incubated to quench the reaction (15 min, 25°C). Samples were combined in three mixes, desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc), and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  TMT mixes were fractionated using basic pH reversed-phase fractionation in an Agilent 1200 system. Peptides were separated in a 90 min linear gradient from 5% to 90% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at 0.8 mL/min flow rate over an Agilent Zorbax Extend-C18 (4.6 mm ID, 220 mm in length, 5-m particles, 80 Å pore size). Fractions were collected every minute into a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24, of which only 12 nonadjacent samples were analyzed. Fractions volume was reduced to 300 μL approximately and acidified by adding formic acid up to 10% of the final volume. Fractions were desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis  Samples were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA).  Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased to 22% buffer B and 78% A in 79 min and then to 35% buffer B and 65% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nano spray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 275°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior to the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.12003. The dynamics exclusion duration was set at 60s, with a range in mass tolerance of ±10 ppm. Each analysis used the multinotch MS3-based TMT method. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120 000; mass range 375–1500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 4 × 105, maximum injection time 50 ms). In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm with a cycle time set at 3s. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer in “Turbo” mode. AGC was set to 104, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 50 ms were used. Following the acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, MS3 spectra were collected, in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 65% and acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at 50000 resolution. AGC was set to 105, and an isolation window of 2 m/z and a maximum injection time of 105 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v4.1.31.9.  Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument, and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.  Identification of peptides by mass spectrometry proteomics  Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). A UniProt-based database comprising all reference proteomes from the five primates was used to identify detectable genes and narrow down the search space. After removing transcripts classified as potential artifacts by SQANTI, Iso-seq protein predictions for these genes in all species were incorporated into a customized database, together with the predicted proteins from intergenic and fusion loci. For this, NHP Iso-seq isoforms were first lifted to the most recent assembly of the corresponding species. All created target databases included a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. This strategy leverages the high-quality Iso-seq isoforms detected in all species to build a comprehensive target database, which was used to identify peptides present across all samples.  For peptide identification, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as the enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines, TMT6plex in Lysines and TMT6plex in peptide N-terminal were set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5% (see Methods for additional information).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Iso-seq, Proteomics, Isoforms, Primates, Lcls

### Affiliations
IBE 
Comparative Genomics lab - Institute of Evolutionary Biology (IBE) Barcelona (Spain)

### Submitter
Luis Ferrández

### Lab Head
Dr Tomàs Marquès Bonet
Comparative Genomics lab - Institute of Evolutionary Biology (IBE) Barcelona (Spain)


