### Accession
PXD033451

### Title
Human P47 interactome for comparison against CryoEM data

### Description
p97 is an essential and abundant AAA+ ATPase that unfolds ubiquitylated substrates and is a central regulator of protein homeostasis. Here we report two cryo-EM structures of human p97 in complex with its p47 adaptor.  One of the conformations is six-fold symmetric, corresponds to previously reported structures of p97, and lacks bound substrate.  The other structure adopts a helical conformation, displays substrate running in an extended conformation through the pore of the p97 hexamer, and resembles structures reported for other AAA unfoldases.  These findings support the model that p97 utilizes a “hand-over-hand” mechanism in which two residues of the substrate are translocated for hydrolysis of two ATPs, one in each of the two p97 AAA ATPase rings.  Proteomics analysis supports the model that one p97 complex can bind multiple substrate adaptors or binding partners, and can process substrates with multiple types of ubiquitin modification

### Sample Protocol
Co-IPs were performed using a rapid affinity purification strategy as previously described18. In brief, IP Buffer (100 mM KOAc, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 1 mM ADP·BeFx, 10% glycerol, 0.2% Igepal CA- 630, 1 mM DTT, and a protease inhibitor cocktail comprising 0.5 μg/mL leupeptin, 0.5 μg/mL aprotinin, 0.7 μg/mL pepstatin, and 16.67 μg/mL PMSF) was added to the frozen cell pellets at a 1:4 (w/v) ratio. Cells were lysed by dounce homogenization on ice.  Lysates were clarified by centrifugation and supernatants used for co-IP experiments. Purified recombinant His-p47-FLAG (0.4 μM) was pre-incubated with equilibrated anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) for 30 min at 4°C, followed by addition of clarified lysate to the affinity gel. The affinity gel was washed extensively with IP Buffer, followed by several washes with IP buffer lacking detergent and glycerol. Resin-bound materials were eluted using synthetic 3xFLAG peptide (ApexBio) in the presence of 1 mM ADP⋅BeFx for 1 hour at 4°C, and eluted materials were recovered by pipetting. Eluted samples used for cryo-EM were crosslinked with a final concentration of 0.1% glutaraldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature, quenched with Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), and then immediately used for vitrification. Non-crosslinked samples used for mass spectrometry were stored at -80°C until further processing. Mock co-IPs as background controls for mass spectrometry analyses were performed as described above without the addition of His-p47-FLAG and either with or without the addition of ADP⋅BeFx. Frozen eluates of p47 co-IP with ADP⋅BeFx, mock co-IP with ADP⋅BeFx, and mock co-IP without ADP⋅BeFx (n=3 for each sample) were thawed with the addition of 50 μl of 5% SDS in 50 mM triethylamine bicarbonate pH 8.5 (TEAB) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma).   Cysteines were reduced using 10 mM TCEP and alkylated using 40 mM chloroacetamide in a single incubation for 5 minutes at 100°C. Samples were then sonicated in a bath sonicator for 5 minutes, collecting by centrifugation, acidified with 6 μl 12% phosphoric acid (H2PO4), and mixed briefly by vortexing.  This solution was diluted with wash buffer (350 µL of 100mM TEAB, 90% MeOH) at 4°C, mixed briefly by vortexing, and placed in a suspension trap (STrap micro, Protifi, Farmingdale NY) by centrifuging at 4,000 x g for 30 seconds.  The STrap was washed 3 times by centrifugation of 700 µL 50/50 IPA/MeOH through the STrap, followed by 3 washes of 400 µL of wash buffer.  The sample was digested to peptides on the STrap column by addition of 40 µL of TEAB containing 1 µgram of trypsin (Sigma Aldrich sequencing grade) at 37°C for 16 hours.  Sample was eluted into a clean collection tube with 3 sequential 50 µL washes (50mM TEAB in ddH2O, 0.2% formic acid in ddH2O, 50% acetonitrile in ddH2O) this solution was transferred to a MS sample vial, dried and resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid 3% acetonitrile in water.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A capillary RSLC column (EASY-spray column pepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm) was used for separation of peptides.  The mobile phase comprised buffer A (0.1% formic acid in optima water) and buffer B (optima water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile).  Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with the following gradients over 2 h: 3–25% B for 80 min; 25–35% B for 20 min; 35–45% B for 8 min; 45–85% B for 2 min and 85% for 8 min. Data were acquired using the top speed method (3 s cycle). A full scan MS at resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z mass was acquired in the Orbitrap with a target value of 4e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with charge states of 2-6 were selected from the top abundance peaks by the quadrupole for collisional dissociation (CID with normalized energy 30) MS/MS, and the fragment ions were detected in the linear ion trap with target AGC value of 1e4, a maximum injection time of 35 ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 60 s. Precursor ions with ambiguous charge states were not fragmented. PEAKS Studio software (version X pro) was used for de novo sequencing and database searching to identify proteins in our raw MS data and to quantify, filter (quality-control), and normalize the quantitation data for each protein46. Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra by searching against the Swiss-Prot human proteome database (downloaded April of 2020) with a reverse sequence decoy database concatenated. Variables for the search were as follows: enzyme was set as trypsin with one missed cleavage site. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false positive rate of 0.01 was required for peptides and proteins. Minimum length of peptide was set to 7 amino acids. At least 2 peptides were required for protein identification. The precursor mass error of 20 ppm was set for the precursor mass, and the mass error was set as 0.3 Da for the MSMS. Proteins identified from this first level analysis of fragmentation spectra were used as a constrained database to search for ubiquitin modifications using the PTM module in PEAKS Studio.  Label-free quantitation was enabled with MS1 tolerance ±20ppm and a MS2 tolerance ±50 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide assignments with a false discovery rate less than 1% were included in comparative quantitative analyses and used to generate protein identification files for the quantitative and kinetic analyses. Relative concentrations of each protein were measured via label-free quantitation in the PEAKS software by normalizing the area under the curve (AUC) for each peptide and protein to the total ion count (TIC) in each sample.  The probability of each protein being a p47 interactor was calculated by comparing 3 replicate samples from p47-FLAG co-IP eluates versus mock FLAG co-IP eluates using the SAINT software package47. The -logP values for each protein were calculated from Pvalues obtained using a two-way heteroscedastic t-test to compare the replicate measurements in each sample.  No values were imputed for zeros, no multiple testing corrections were applied as the analysis relied on multiple criteria beyond p-value to establish significance.

### Publication Abstract
The p97 AAA+ATPase is an essential and abundant regulator of protein homeostasis that plays a central role in unfolding ubiquitylated substrates. Here we report two cryo-EM structures of human p97 in complex with its p47 adaptor. One of the conformations is six-fold symmetric, corresponds to previously reported structures of p97, and lacks bound substrate. The other structure adopts a helical conformation, displays substrate running in an extended conformation through the pore of the p97 hexamer, and resembles structures reported for other AAA unfoldases. These findings support the model that p97 utilizes a "hand-over-hand" mechanism in which two residues of the substrate are translocated for hydrolysis of two ATPs, one in each of the two p97 AAA ATPase rings. Proteomics analysis supports the model that one p97 complex can bind multiple substrate adaptors or binding partners, and can process substrates with multiple types of ubiquitin modification.

### Keywords
Hek293, Affinity purification, Flag

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University

### Submitter
John Price

### Lab Head
Dr John C. Price
Brigham Young University


