### Accession
PXD014880

### Title
Effect of leucine and pyruvate on the proteomic profile of cysteine treated wt and ncl1 deleted strain

### Description
Cell requires optimal amount of nutrients for the synthesis of macromolecules like lipid, protein and nucleotides. There is a very limited knowledge about how cells maintain homeostasis in excess nutrients. By using Yeast as a model system we have shown that some aminoacids are toxic at higher concentration. Using cysteine as a reference molecule we delineated different biological pathways/processes required for survival. Leucine and pyruvate are two molecules which can rescue cysteine induced toxicity.Through a comprehensive genetic screen we show that leucine mediated effect depends on a tRNA methyltransferase (Ncl1), absence of which decouples transcription and translation in the cell. Using proteomics approach we have determined the altered pathway in both wild type and ncl1 deletion strain and the effect of leucine and pyruvate on the proteome of cysteine treated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells with different treatment were harvested and washed three times with sterile water. As mentioned previously, lysis was done by bead beating method  using lysis buffer containing 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 140mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP40 and Protease inhibitor cocktail. Isolated protein was then buffer exchanged with 0.5 M Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) using a 3 kDa cutoff centrifugal filter (Amicon, Millipore). Protein was then estimated using Bradford’s reagent (Sigma, USA). Buffer exchanged proteins from different groups were digesting using trypsin as mentioned previously. Briefly, sixty micrograms of protein from each sample was reduced with 25mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56°C and the cysteine’s were blocked by 55mM IAA at room temperature for 15-20 minutes. This was followed by digestion with modified trypsin added in the ratio of 1:10 ratio (trypsin to protein) and incubated at 37°C for 18 hrs. Protein from Wt and ncl1Δ strains, treated with cysteine and combination of leucine and cysteine for 6 hrs was used. With biological triplicates both the labelling procedures were performed using the manufacturer’s protocol

### Data Protocol
The raw files in the format of “.wiff” containing the spectra of MS and MS/MS were submitted to  Protein Pilot v5.0 software (AB Sciex) for protein identification and relative quantification. Paragon Algorithm was used in a “Thorough ID” search mode against the Uniprot-Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference dataset (6643 protein sequences). The parameter for identification search includes:  IAA as cysteine blocking agent,8-plex N-terminal iTRAQ labelling, trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages. Global protein level 1% FDR was considered for protein identification. 543 proteins were identified in all the three biological replicates of 8-plex experiment. Based on  fact that fold change of protein expression is generally underestimated in 8-plex iTRAQ experiment , and the narrow range of fold change in the present data set, a fold change cutoff of ±1.15 was considered. Thus, proteins were considered to be differentially expressed if the average fold change was ≤0.85 or ≥1.15, with a similar trend in atleast two replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine, Yeast, T-rna methyl transferase

### Affiliations
CSIR-IGIB
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology

### Submitter
Rahul Chakraborty

### Lab Head
Dr Shantanu Sengupta
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology


