### Accession
PXD015721

### Title
Brief exposure to heat differentially affects development of male  gametophytes in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum)

### Description
The development of viable gametes is especially susceptible to heat in all higher plants, including cotton (Gossypium hirsutum cv. Sicot 71), resulting in substantial reduction in lint quantity and quality at temperatures above 32 째C. Male reproductive cells are especially vulnerable to heat. This study demonstrates a relatively small impact of heat on leaves compared with a profound impact during early and late male gametophyte development. To investigate the mechanisms leading to heat sensitivity, the proteome of pollen was analyzed after two distinct phases of development (tetrads or binucleate microspores) had been exposed for 5 d to 36/25 째C (day/night) or 40/30 째C. The resulting mature pollen grains were collected for quantitative label-free shotgun proteomic analysis. A total of 868 proteins was quantified. Interestingly, Hsp70s were highly induced in response to extreme heat indicating key roles of this family to cope with heat stress.

### Sample Protocol
Tetrad and binucleate stages were tagged and exposed to 36 or 40 째C for 5 days. The corresponding mature pollen grains were collected for protein extraction. The resulting peptides from the in-solution digestion were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data from the mass spectrometer were converted into mzXML files and searched against the cotton database using the GPM software. The GPM outputs were further processed using the in-house Scrappy package to calculate normalized spectral abundance factors.

### Publication Abstract
The development of gametes in plants is acutely susceptible to heatwaves as brief as a few days, adversely affecting pollen maturation and reproductive success. Pollen in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) was differentially affected when tetrad and binucleate stages were exposed to heat, revealing new insights into the interaction between heat and pollen development. Squares were tagged and exposed to 36/25&#xb0;C (day/night, moderate heat) or 40/30&#xb0;C (day/night, extreme heat) for 5&#x2009;days. Mature pollen grains and leaves were collected for physiological and proteomic responses. While photosynthetic competence was not compromised even at 40&#xb0;C, leaf tissues became leakier. In contrast, pollen grains were markedly smaller after the tetrad stage was exposed to 40&#xb0;C and boll production was reduced by 65%. Sugar levels in pollen grains were elevated after exposure to heat, eliminating carbohydrate deficits as a likely cause of poor reproductive capacity. Proteomic analysis of pure pollen samples revealed a particularly high abundance of 70-kDa heat shock (Hsp70s) and cytoskeletal proteins. While short-term bursts of heat had a minor impact on leaves, male gametophyte development was profoundly damaged. Cotton acclimates to maxima of 36&#xb0;C at both the vegetative and reproductive stages but 5-days exposure to 40&#xb0;C significantly impairs reproductive development.

### Keywords
Pollen development, Lc-msms, Heat stress, Cotton

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Farhad Masoomi-Aladizgeh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian J. Atwell
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University


