### Accession
PXD015079

### Title
Epigenetic inactivation of the autophagy-lysosomal system in the Parkinson’s disease appendix

### Description
The gastrointestinal tract may be a site of origin for α-synuclein (α-syn) pathology in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD), and an abundance of aggregated α-syn has recently been demonstrated in both the healthy and PD appendix. However, the molecular changes that enable gut α-syn aggregates to contribute to the development and progression of PD remain unclear. Here, our deep-sequencing of DNA methylation changes at 521 autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP) genes in the human appendix and brain in PD and healthy controls indicates a pattern of widespread hypermethylation in the PD appendix that is recapitulated in the PD brain. There is significant overlap in the individual ALP genes affected across the PD appendix and brain, with lysosomal genes specifically downregulated in both regions. Healthy epigenetic aging, which involves a hypermethylation of macroautophagy and selective autophagy genes in the appendix and brain, is disrupted in both areas in PD. In mice, DNA methylation changes at ALP genes induced by chronic gut inflammation are greatly exacerbated by the presence of α-syn pathology. DNA methylation changes at ALP genes induced by α-synucleinopathy are significantly associated with the ALP abnormalities observed in the PD appendix, specifically involving lysosomal genes. Our work, which constitutes an in-depth, unbiased investigation of epigenetic changes in the ALP of the PD gut and brain, identifies the epigenetic misregulation of the ALP, especially a downregulation of lysosomal genes, as a potential culprit for the initiation and spread of α-syn pathology in idiopathic PD.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed on appendix and prefrontal cortex of PD patients and controls (n = 3 PD and 3 controls per tissue). Mass spectrometry analysis of appendix and prefrontal cortex samples (~30 mg tissue) was performed by the Integrated Mass Spectrometry Unit at Michigan State University. Briefly, protein lysate (20 g) of appendix and prefrontal cortex was denatured using 25mM ammonium bicarbonate/80% acetonitrile and incubated at 37⁰C for 3 hrs. The samples were dried and reconstituted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/trypsin solution and incubated overnight at 37⁰C. The resulting peptides were dried and reconstituted in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate/4% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded on to a C18 column (2 m particles, 25 cm x 75 m ID) and eluted using a 2 hr acetonitrile gradient into a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Each sample was run in triplicate to account for technical variance.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra from each technical replica were searched against the Uniprot human database using LFQ method in Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2.0.388, 2017). The technical replicates from each biological sample were pulled to compare appendix against prefrontal cortex, using a non-nested test. Only proteins with abundances recorded in at least two of three samples per diagnosis group were considered. Proteins with absolute log fold change between groups exceeding 0.2 were considered as altered. Genes of altered proteins in appendix dataset were intersected with those having at least one significantly differentially modified cytosine in the PD appendix study. The resulting list of genes and their interactions were visualized using STRING-db version 11.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neurons, Lysosome, Epigenetic, Autophagy, Appendix, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Vilnius university, Institute of Biotechnology
Center for Neurodegenerative Science Van Andel Research Institute 333 Bostwick Ave N.E., Rm 5051 Grand Rapids, MI 49503 Tel: 616-234-5262 ext. 5262  |  Email: viviane.labrie@vai.org Lab website: http://labrielab.vai.org/

### Submitter
Juozas Gordevicius

### Lab Head
Dr Viviane Labrie
Center for Neurodegenerative Science Van Andel Research Institute 333 Bostwick Ave N.E., Rm 5051 Grand Rapids, MI 49503 Tel: 616-234-5262 ext. 5262  |  Email: viviane.labrie@vai.org Lab website: http://labrielab.vai.org/


