### Accession
PXD042075

### Title
Cardiac Myofibrillogenesis is Spatiotemporally Modulated by the Molecular Chaperone UNC45B

### Description
Sarcomeres are fundamental to cardiac muscle contraction. Their impairment can elicit cardiomyopathies, leading causes of death worldwide. However, the molecular mechanism underlying sarcomere assembly remains obscure. We used human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) to reveal step-wise spatiotemporal regulation of core cardiac myofibrillogenesis-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC−nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25-cm long PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å , and they were separated over 1 h using a segmented gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode. In brief, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 240K resolution with a 2x105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed using an isolation window of 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid-scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1x104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s, with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
The MS and tandem MS raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4.0; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and searched against the Swiss-Prot protein sequence database with the Mascot server (v.2.7.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA). Taxonomy was set as Homo sapiens. To identify potential protein candidates interacting with UNC45B, the tandem MS data was analyzed by selecting proteins with a unique peptide number >25 and an abundance ratio >1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Sarcomeres are fundamental to cardiac muscle contraction. Their impairment can elicit cardiomyopathies, leading causes of death worldwide. However, the molecular mechanism underlying sarcomere assembly remains obscure. We used human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) to reveal stepwise spatiotemporal regulation of core cardiac myofibrillogenesis-associated proteins. We found that the molecular chaperone UNC45B is highly co-expressed with KINDLIN2 (KIND2), a marker of protocostameres, and later its distribution overlaps with that of muscle myosin MYH6. UNC45B-knockout CMs display essentially no contractility. Our phenotypic analyses further reveal that (1) binding of Z line anchor protein ACTN2 to protocostameres is perturbed because of impaired protocostamere formation, resulting in ACTN2 accumulation; (2) F-ACTIN polymerization is suppressed; and (3) MYH6 becomes degraded, so it cannot replace non-muscle myosin MYH10. Our mechanistic study demonstrates that UNC45B mediates protocostamere formation by regulating KIND2 expression. Thus, we show that UNC45B modulates cardiac myofibrillogenesis by interacting spatiotemporally with various proteins.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

### Submitter
Su-Yi Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Su-Yi Tsai
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan


