### Accession
PXD024217

### Title
Characterization of circulating extracellular vesides of steroid sensitive nephrotic syndrome patients

### Description
plasma extracellular vesicles of 8 petients and 4 healty controls were studied by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
proteins precipitated by using methanol/choloroform precipitation method and further dissolved in urea and tris buffer,diseted by trypsin, purifed and dissolved in water/Formic acid solution analyzed by mass sepctrometry

### Data Protocol
Raw data were run by Proteom Discoverer 2.2 and peptides and proteins were identified

### Publication Abstract
Since previous research suggests a role of a circulating factor in the pathogenesis of steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome (NS), we speculated that circulating plasma extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a candidate source of such a soluble mediator. Here, we aimed to characterize and try to delineate the effects of these EVs in vitro. Plasma EVs from 20 children with steroid-sensitive NS in relapse and remission, 10 healthy controls, and 6 disease controls were obtained by serial ultracentrifugation. Characterization of these EVs was performed by electron microscopy, flow cytometry, and Western blot analysis. Major proteins from plasma EVs were identified via mass spectrometry. Gene Ontology classification analysis and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis were performed on selectively expressed EV proteins during relapse. Immortalized human podocyte culture was used to detect the effects of EVs on podocytes. The protein content and particle number of plasma EVs were significantly increased during NS relapse. Relapse NS EVs selectively expressed proteins that involved actin cytoskeleton rearrangement. Among these, the level of RAC-GTP was significantly increased in relapse EVs compared with remission and disease control EVs. Relapse EVs were efficiently internalized by podocytes and induced significantly enhanced motility and albumin permeability. Moreover, relapse EVs induced significantly higher levels of RAC-GTP and phospho-p38 and decreased the levels of synaptopodin in podocytes. Circulating relapse EVs are biologically active molecules that carry active RAC1 as cargo and induce recapitulation of the NS phenotype in podocytes in vitro.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Up to now, the role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the pathogenesis of steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome (NS) has not been studied. Here, we found that relapse NS EVs contain significantly increased active RAC1, induce enhanced podocyte motility, and increase expression of RAC-GTP and phospho-p38 expression in vitro. These results suggest that plasma EVs are biologically active molecules in the pathogenesis of NS.

### Keywords
Nephrotic syndrome, Extracellular vesides

### Affiliations
HACETTEPE UNIVERSITY
Hacettepe University Department of Chemistry Science Faculty Ankara TURKEY

### Submitter
ulku guler

### Lab Head
Dr Bekir Salih
Hacettepe University Department of Chemistry Science Faculty Ankara TURKEY


