### Accession
PXD009114

### Title
Dystrophin isoform Dp71eΔ71 is involved in the neurite outgrowth and neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells

### Description
The Dp71 protein is the most abundant dystrophin in the central nervous system (CNS). Several dystrophin Dp71 isoforms have been described and are classified into three groups, each with a different C- terminal end. However, the functions of Dp71 isoforms remain unknown. In the present study, we analyse the effect of Dp71eΔ71 overexpression on the neuronal differentiation of PC12 Tet-On cells. Overexpression of the dystrophin Dp71eΔ71 stimulates neuronal differentiation, increasing the percentage of cells with neurites and the neurite length. According to the 2-DE analysis, Dp71eΔ71 overexpression modified the protein expression profile of PC12 Tet-On cells that had been treated with neuronal growth factor (NGF) for nine days. Interestingly, all differentially expressed proteins were up-regulated compared to the control. The proteomic analysis showed that Dp71eΔ71 increases the expression of proteins with important roles in the differentiation process, such as the HspB1, S100A6, and K8 proteins involved in the cytoskeletal structure and the HCNP protein involved in neurotransmitter synthesis. The expression of the neuronal marker TH was also up- regulated.

### Sample Protocol
Gel fragments were dehydrated by an incubation in 100 μl of ACN for 10 min, and the supernatant was then removed; this step was repeated once. Dry gel pieces were rehydrated with 200 ng of trypsin (Promega V528A) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 5% ACN. Gel pieces were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Then, the resulting peptides were extracted with 40 μl of 50% ACN and 5% formic acid. The volume of the resulting peptides was reduced in a concentrator (Eppendorf 5301). Peptides from each sample were desalted on C18 columns (ZipTipC18). One microliter of peptide solution corresponding to each protein and 1 μl of matrix solution (5 mg/mL CHCA in 50% v/v can and 0.1% v/v TFA) were analysed using a 4800 Plus MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were compared with the Rattus norvegicus database (download in September 2016) using the Protein PilotTM software (version 2.0.1) and the Mascot method. The search was performed with the enzyme specificity of trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Biological modifications and amino acid substitutions were used as modifications. The detected protein threshold used in the present study was 66%, and the precursor mass tolerance was 0.5 to 1 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The Dp71 protein is the most abundant dystrophin in the central nervous system (CNS). Several dystrophin Dp71 isoforms have been described and are classified into three groups, each with a different C-terminal end. However, the functions of Dp71 isoforms remain unknown. In the present study, we analysed the effect of Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub> overexpression on neuronal differentiation of PC12 Tet-On cells. Overexpression of dystrophin Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub> stimulates neuronal differentiation, increasing the percentage of cells with neurites and neurite length. According to 2-DE analysis, Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub> overexpression modified the protein expression profile of rat pheochromocytoma PC12 Tet-On cells that had been treated with neuronal growth factor (NGF) for nine days. Interestingly, all differentially expressed proteins were up-regulated compared to the control. The proteomic analysis showed that Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub> increases the expression of proteins with important roles in the differentiation process, such as HspB1, S100A6, and K8 proteins involved in the cytoskeletal structure and HCNP protein involved in neurotransmitter synthesis. The expression of neuronal marker TH was also up-regulated. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009114. SIGNIFICANCE: This study is the first to explore the role of the specific isoform Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub>. The results obtained here support the hypothesis that the dystrophin Dp71e<sub>&#x394;71</sub> isoform has an important role in the neurite outgrowth by regulating the levels of proteins involved in the cytoskeletal structure, such as HspB1, S100A6, and K8, and in neurotransmitter synthesis, such as HCNP and TH, biological processes required to stimulate neuronal differentiation.

### Keywords
Dystrophin; dp71eδ71; hspb1; neuronal differentiation; pc12 cells.

### Affiliations
National Institute of Genomic Medicine
INMEGEN

### Submitter
Juan Pablo Reyes Grajeda

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Pablo Reyes Grajeda
National Institute of Genomic Medicine


