### Accession
PXD028685

### Title
Comprehensive atlas of the myelin basic protein interaction landscape

### Description
Intrinsically disorder myelin basic protein (MBP) is one of the key autoantigens in autoimmune neurodegeneration and multiple sclerosis particularly. MBP is highly positively charged and lacks distinct structure in solution and therefore its intracellular part-ners are still mostly enigmatic. Here we used combination of formaldehyde-induced cross-linking followed by immunoprecipitation and Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to elucidate the interaction network of MBP in mammalian cells and provide the list of potential MBP interacting proteins. Our data suggest that the largest group of MBP-interacting proteins belongs to cellular proteins involved in the protein translation machinery, as well as in the spatial and temporal regulation of translation. MBP interacts with core ribosomal proteins, RNA helicase Ddx28 and RNA-binding proteins STAU1, ADAR-1 and hnRNP A0, which are involved in various stages of RNA biogenesis and processing, including specific maintaining MBP-coding mRNA. Among MBP partners we identified CTNND1, which has previously been shown to be necessary for myelinating Schwann cells, for cell-cell interactions and the formation of a normal myelin sheath. MBP binds proteins MAGEB2/D2 associated with neurotrophin receptor p75NTR, involved in pathways that promote neuronal survival and neuronal death. Finally, we observed that MBP interacts with RNF40 – a component of heterotetrameric Rnf40/Rnf20 E3 ligase complex, recruited by Egr2, which is the central transcriptional regulator of peripheral myelination. Concluding, our data suggest that MBP may be more actively involved in myelination not only as a main building block but also as a regulating element.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and Transfection HEK 293T cells obtained from the Russian Cell Culture Collection (RCCC, Institute of cytology of the Russian academy of sciences) were maintained by passage in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 100 units/ml penicillin, and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (pH 7.2–7.4) in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C. HEK293T cells were transfected with the pBud4.1EF_MBPwt_flag_strep (Kudriaeva et al, 2019) using Lipofectamine LTX Reagent with PLUS Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All the experiments were conducted at 48 h after transfection.  Formaldehyde Cross-Linking The stock 4% formaldehyde solution was obtained by dissolving paraformaldehyde in water for 2 h at ∼80C. The resulting solution was filtered through the 0.22-micron filter and stored in the dark at RT for maximum of 4 weeks. The working formaldehyde solution was obtained by appropriate diluting the stock solution in PBS. For cross-linking, transfected HEK 293 cells were detached with 0,25% trypsin-EDTA solution, transferred into 15 ml reaction tube, collected in a by centrifugation and washed 3 times with PBS. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of working formaldehyde solution. Cells were incubated for 7 min with mild agitation at RT and then pelleted at 1800 g for 3 min (RT) which gave in total 10 minutes exposure to formaldehyde. The supernatant was removed, and cells were resuspended in 0.5 ml ice-cold 1.25M glycine/PBS to quench the cross-linking reaction. Cell pellet was washed again with glycine in PBS and lysed in 1ml TNE buffer (50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 150mM sodium chloride, 1% NP40, 1mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich) and 1mM PMSF for 30 minute on ice. After 30 minutes, cell lysates were sonicated with an ultrasonic homogenizer, treated with 2.5 units of DNAse I (Thermo) and sonicated again. To remove insoluble debris, lysates were spun for 20 minutes at 10000 g and 4C, and the supernatants were passed through the 0,22 micron syringe filters. The cleared lysates were immediately used for the immunoprecipitation. 1% of the cleared lysates was kept as input controls. Immunoprecipitation The cleared lysates were incubated with 20 ul of ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich) slurry at 4°C for overnight. After incubation, agarose beads with immunocomplexes were washed with TNE buffer five times, and immunocomplexes were eluted from agarose beads with sample buffer (65.8 mM TrisHCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 1% SDS, 0,01% bromophenol blue) at 65C for 5 minutes. The supernatants were treated with 5 ul of 2-mercaptoethanol at 65C for 5 minutes. Supernatants containing immunocomplexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and gels were stained using Coomassie blue. Mass Spectrometry Analysis The bands developed by Coomassie blue were excised and subjected to a trypsin in-gel digestion procedure. In-gel digestion of protein with trypsin was performed as described previously 18. After overnight tryptic digestion, the resulting peptides in the gel blocks were extracted. Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20x0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 um sorbent (GLSciences), in the loading mobile phase (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 ul/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed 19 fused-silica column 300x0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into an emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Water containing 0.1% (v/v) FA was used as mobile phase A and ACN containing 0.1% FA (v/v), 20% (v/v) H2O as mobile phase B. Peptides were eluted from the trap column with a linear gradient: 3–6% B for 3 min; 6-25% B for 30 min, 25-40% B for 25 min, 40-60% B for 4 min, 60% B during 3 min, 60-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was reequilibrated with A for 10 min. MS data was collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-1500 scan range, max injection time – 30 sec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with normalized collision energy (NCE) 29, max injection time – 50 sec, AGC target – 2x105, loop count – 10. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and spectral counting Raw LC-MS/MS data from the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer were converted to .mgf peak lists with MSConvert (ProteoWizard Software Foundation). For this procedure, we used the following parameters: “--mgf --filter peakPicking true [1,2]”. For a thorough protein identification, the generated peak lists were searched with MASCOT (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd., UK) and X! Tandem (ALANINE, 2017.02.01, The Global Proteome Machine Organization) against the UniProt Knowledgebase, taxon human, (http://www.uniprot.org) with the concatenated reverse decoy dataset. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. The database search parameters included tryptic digestion with one possible missed cleavage, static modification for carbamidomethyl (C), and dynamic/flexible modifications for oxidation (M). For X! Tandem, we also selected parameters that allowed us to quickly check for protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. The resulting files were submitted to Scaffold 4 (version 4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., USA) for validation and further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically disordered myelin basic protein (MBP) is one of the key autoantigens in autoimmune neurodegeneration and multiple sclerosis particularly. MBP is highly positively charged and lacks distinct structure in solution and therefore its intracellular partners are still mostly enigmatic. Here we used combination of formaldehyde-induced cross-linking followed by immunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to elucidate the interaction network of MBP in mammalian cells and provide the list of potential MBP interacting proteins. Our data suggest that the largest group of MBP-interacting proteins belongs to cellular proteins involved in the protein translation machinery, as well as in the spatial and temporal regulation of translation. MBP interacts with core ribosomal proteins, RNA helicase Ddx28 and RNA-binding proteins STAU1, TDP-43, ADAR-1 and hnRNP A0, which are involved in various stages of RNA biogenesis and processing, including specific maintaining MBP-coding mRNA. Among MBP partners we identified CTNND1, which has previously been shown to be necessary for myelinating Schwann cells for cell-cell interactions and the formation of a normal myelin sheath. MBP binds proteins MAGEB2/D2 associated with neurotrophin receptor p75NTR, involved in pathways that promote neuronal survival and neuronal death. Finally, we observed that MBP interacts with RNF40-a component of heterotetrameric Rnf40/Rnf20 E3 ligase complex, recruited by Egr2, which is the central transcriptional regulator of peripheral myelination. Concluding, our data suggest that MBP may be more actively involved in myelination not only as a main building block but also as a self-regulating element.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, Formaldehyde-induced cross-linking, Myelin basic protein

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Laboratory of olecular oncology, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Pavlovich Arapidi
Laboratory of olecular oncology, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry


