### Accession
PXD035016

### Title
Biocontrol potentials and proteomic response of lipopeptide producing B. velezensis strains to Diaporthe spp.

### Description
Lipopeptide biosurfactant producing Bacillus strains have many useful applications in biotechnology and agriculture, based on their emulsifying, surface activity and antimicrobial properties. In the current study, lipopeptide production kinetics, and biocontrol potentials of two new B. velezensis strains, ES1-02 and EFSO2-04 were analyzed and compared with those of commercial strains QST713 and FZB42. ES1-02 and EFSO2-04 showed higher specific growth rates than FZB42, but lower growth rates than QST713. All strains produced surfactin lipopetides, while fengycin production was not observed in ES1-02 and EFSO2-04. Production of fengycin A, B, X and Y were however confirmed in strains QST713 and FZB42. Significant differences were observed in the production of lipopeptides of the iturin family. While ES1-02 and EFSO2-04 produced bacillomycin L, QST713 produced iturin A, and FZB42 produced bacillomycin D. This was in line with the PCR analysis of corresponding genes encoding the identified lipopeptides. Highest surfactin titer of 97.4 mg/L was observed in ES1-02, while QST713 produced highest amount of iturin/bacillomycin (8.5 mg/L). Surfactin isoforms C12 to C17, and iturin/bacillomycin isoforms C11 to C17 were identified by mass spectrometry. ES1-02 and EFSO2-04 showed biocontrol potentials comparable with that of QST713 against Diaporthe spp., while FZB42 showed superior antifungal potentials. Up to 41%, 43%, 47 % and 68.9 % inhibition of D. caulivora were achieved by ES1-02, EFSO2-04, QST713 and  FZB42 respectively. Upon exposure to B. velezensis strains, morphological changes to Diaporthe hyphae in form of swellings, distortion, and complete disruption occurred. Interaction of D. longicolla DPC_HOH20 with ES1-02 and EFSO2-04 induced 10-fold and 5-fold increase in surfactin synthesis, respectively. Antagonist interaction with D. longicolla induced significant changes in the proteome of ES1-02 including an increased abundance  of several proteins associated with biosynthesis of antimicrobial compounds and fatty acids, while proteins associated with phosphate uptake were decreased in abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteome analysis B. velezensis ES1-02 was co-cultivated with D. longicolla DPC_HOH20 on PDA plates as previously described. A control experiment was set up with ES1-02 cultivated alone on PDA plates. The experiments were each set up in seven biological replicates. After 5 days of cultivation with visible zone of inhibition between the bacteria and fungi, the edge of the bacteria colony next to the inhibition zone was gently scrapped with a sterile loop and immediately put in 40 µL Lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 6.8, 20mM DTT). In the control experiment, cell samples were collected at the edge of the growing ES1-02 colonies and put in the Lysis Buffer.   Protein extraction, on-bead digest, and peptide purification for proteome analysis  Bacteria samples in lysis buffer were subsequently heated for 5 min at 95 °C and 700 rpm in a ThermoMixer® (Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C, Hamburg, Germany). After centrifugation at 20000 g for 5 min, the protein concentrations of the cleared supernatants were determined by the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) and adjusted Tris HCL) to a protein concentration of 1µg/µL and a pH of 8.5 using Tris-HCl and lysis buffer. 28µL of cleared lysate was reduced and alkylated (10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark and proteins were subsequently extracted by Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3; 1:1 Mixture of SpeedBeads™ magnetic carboxylate modified particles 50mg/mL; Cytiva; CAT No: 45152105050250 and 65152105050250) (Hughes et al., 2014). Therefore, 10 µL activated SP3 Bead-Mix and ethanol to a final concentration of 80% was added to the sample and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were mounted on a magnetic rack and briefly washed three times with 80% Ethanol in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5.    Proteins were digested on the SP3 beads in 0.2% SDC, 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate by Trypsin (Roche) and LysC (Walko) in a 1:100 and 1:200 Protein to Protease ratio respectively for 20h at 36°C and 800 rpm.  Formic acid (FA) and Acetonitrile (ACN) were added to the samplesto a final concentration of 0.5% FA and 96% ACN. Samples were washed on a magnetic rack three times with 98% ACN, 0.05% FA. Peptides were eluted form the beads in water and lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.     Nano-LC-MS/MS Analysis Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray-Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a trap column (5 mm x 30 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 25 cm x 75 µm nanoEase MZ HSS T3 reversed phase column (100Å pore size, 1.8 µm particle size, Waters, USA) operated at constant temperature of 35 °C.  Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient with the following profile: 2 % - 8 % solvent B in 4 min, 8 % - 16 % solvent B in 22 min, 16 % - 30 % solvent B in 11 min, 30 % - 95 % solvent B in 4 min, isocratic 95 % solvent B for 4 min and 95 % - 2 % solvent B in 5 min. Solvents used were 0.1 % FA (solvent A) and 0.1 % FA in ACN/H2O (80/20, v/v, solvent B). MS spectra (m/z = 300-1500) were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000 (m/z = 200).  Maximum injection time (MIT) for MS spectra was set to 50 ms, the automatic gain control (AGC) value was set to 3 x 10E6. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was performed using lock-mass ions from ambient air as described by (Olsen et al., 2005)  The MS was operating in data dependent mode selecting the top 25 highest abundant peptide precursor signals for fragmentation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 30). For MS/MS analysis only undetermined charge states and charge states from 2-5 of were considered, the monoisotopic precursor selection was set to peptides and the minimum intensity threshold was set to 7.5 x 10E4. MS/MS scans were performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 150000, isolation width was set to 1.6 Da. The AGC target was set to 7 × 10E4, a max injection time of 70 ms and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s with a tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis and protein quantification Raw files were first processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008). Protein identification in MaxQuant was performed using the integrated database search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). MS/MS spectra were searched against B. velenzensis protein sequence database downloaded from UniProt (Bateman, 2019). Reversed sequences as decoy database and common contaminant sequences were added automatically by MaxQuant. Mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm (parts per million) for MS spectra and 20 ppm for MS/MS spectra were used. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of one minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR thresholds were set to 0.01. Protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed by label free quantification (LFQ) with a LFQ min. ratio count setting of one. In a second data processing step MaxQuant result files were fed into the IceR R-package, for further re-quantification using default settings (Kalxdorf et al., 2021). The pre-imputed IceR output file containing LFQ intensities was further normalized according to the median LFQ intensity of the sample and used subsequently for differential expression analysis.  Two samples Welch´s t-test, principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical clustering and Volcano plots were performed using Perseus version 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Matches to contaminants (e.g., keratins, trypsin) and reverse databases identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. First, normalized LFQ values were log2 transformed. Only protein groups with at least 40% valid values in data set were considered for the statistical analysis. Remaining missing values were imputed by the “Replace missing values from normal distribution” function (Width = 0.3, Down shift =1.8) implemented in Perseus drawing random numbers from a normal distribution representing low abundance intensity values. Significant changes in protein abundance were analyzed by a Welch’s t-test (two sided, S0 = 1) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using permutation-based FDR statistics (FDR = 0.05, 250 permutations). For subsequent hierarchical cluster analysis of the significant differential expressed proteins, imputed LFQ intensity values were removed.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Introduction:</b> <i>B. velezensis</i> strains are of interest in agricultural applications due to their beneficial interactions with plants, notable through their antimicrobial activity. The biocontrol ability of two new lipopeptides-producing <i>B. velezensis</i> strains ES1-02 and EFSO2-04, against fungal phytopathogens of <i>Diaporthe</i> spp., was evaluated and compared with reference strains QST713 and FZB42. All strains were found to be effective against the plant pathogens, with the new strains showing comparable antifungal activity to QST713 and slightly lower activity than FZB42. <b>Methods:</b> Lipopeptides and their isoforms were identified by high-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) and mass spectrometric measurements. The associated antifungal influences were determined in direct <i>in vitro</i> antagonistic dual culture assays, and the inhibitory growth effects on <i>Diaporthe</i> spp. as representatives of phytopathogenic fungi were determined. The effects on bacterial physiology of selected <i>B. velezensis</i> strains were analyzed by mass spectrometric proteomic analyses using nano-LC-MS/MS. <b>Results and Discussion:</b> Lipopeptide production analysis revealed that all strains produced surfactin, and one lipopeptide of the iturin family, including bacillomycin L by ES1-02 and EFSO2-04, while QST713 and FZB42 produced iturin A and bacillomycin D, respectively. Fengycin production was however only detected in the reference strains. As a result of co-incubation of strain ES1-02 with the antagonistic phytopathogen <i>D. longicolla</i>, an increase in surfactin production of up to 10-fold was observed, making stress induction due to competitors an attractive strategy for surfactin bioproduction. An associated global proteome analysis showed a more detailed overview about the adaptation and response mechanisms of <i>B. velezensis</i>, including an increased abundance of proteins associated with the biosynthesis of antimicrobial compounds. Furthermore, higher abundance was determined for proteins associated with oxidative, nitrosative, and general stress response. In contrast, proteins involved in phosphate uptake, amino acid transport, and translation were decreased in abundance. Altogether, this study provides new insights into the physiological adaptation of lipopeptide-producing <i>B. velezensis</i> strains, which show the potential for use as biocontrol agents with respect to phytopathogenic fungi.

### Keywords
Antimicrobial, Surfactin, Iturin, Bacillus, Fengycin, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Agriculture, Bacillomycin, Lipopeptide, Biocontrol

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
Department of Bioprocess Engineering, Institute of Food Science and Biotechnology, University of Hohenheim, Fruwirthstr. 12, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Pfannstiel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Lars Lilge
Department of Bioprocess Engineering, Institute of Food Science and Biotechnology, University of Hohenheim, Fruwirthstr. 12, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany


