### Accession
PXD034105

### Title
Characterising early phosphorylation events upon HER2 protein overexpression

### Description
HER2 transduced cells which we will refer to as HER2-DOX –. These cells are 99% GFP positive (i.e., 99% cells have HER2 transduced, un-induced). As a control, we had GFP empty vector transduced MCF10A cells (95% have GFP transduced). Both cell types in triplicates. We had 4 time-points 0h, 30 mins, 4hours, and 7 hours (time duration for which HER2 will be induced). DOX was added to the GFP-MCF10A cells as a control. Only 1ug/ml of DOX was be used.

### Sample Protocol
cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF) and lysed (either in normoxia or hypoxia) with a denaturing buffer with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1mM NaF, 2.5 mM Na4P2O7, 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate). Cell lysates were further homogenised by sonication and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4C. Protein concentration in the supernatants was calculated by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, IL). 250 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 10mM Dithiothreitol and 16.6mM iodoacetamide for an hour. Urea concentration was diluted to below 2M with 20mM HEPES (pH 8.0), trypsin beads [50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230)] were added and samples were incubated on thermoshaker for 18h at 37 ˚C. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 5 min at 4˚C. Peptide solutions were desalted using 10mg OASIS-HLB cartridges (Waters,UK). Cartridges were activated with acetonitrile (ACN [100%]) and equilibrated with washing solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After loading the samples, washing solution was applied to cartridges. Peptides were eluted with glycolic acid buffer (1 M glycolic acid, 50% ACN, 5% TFA). To enrich phosphopeptides, sample volumes were normalised using glycolic acid buffer (1M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA), 50µL of TiO2 beads [(50% slurry in 1% TFA), Hichrom] were added to the peptide mixture, incubated for 5 min at room temperature (RT) with agitation and centrifuged for 30 seconds at 1,500 x g. For each sample, the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the pelleted TiO2 was loaded into an empty PE-filtered top tip (Glygen, USA) prewashed with ACN and packed by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min. After loading the remaining volume of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min, top tips were sequentially washed by 3 min centrifugation at 1500 x g with glycolic acid buffer, 100mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN and twice with 10% ACN. For phosphopeptide recovery, peptides were eluted 4 times by 3 min centrifugation at 1500x g with 5% NH4OH. Eluents were dried in a speed vac and peptide pellets stored at -80˚C.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 13 µL of reconstitution (97% H2O, 3% ACN, and 0.1% TFA, 50fmol/µl-1 enolase peptide digest) and sonicated for 2 minutes at RT. Phosphopeptides were analysed by nano flow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 90 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 °C. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from MS data was automated with Mascot Daemon 2.5.0. Searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta) using the Mascot search engine (v2.5). The in house developed software Pescal was used for label-free peptide quantification. Pescal constructed extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for each identified peptide and measured the area of the XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples. Thresholds for XIC generation were ±7 ppm and ±2 min m/z and retention time windows, respectively, undetectable peptides were assigned a value equal to the lowest detected intensity across sample divided by 10. Pescal outputs were exported to XLS files and further processed with Microsoft Excel 2016. Values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged and intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. Differences in peptide phosphorylation between undifferentiated and differentiated variants were reported as fold over Undifferentiatedand statistical significance for those changes was assessed using unpaired two tailed t-test. Kinase activities from phosphoproteomics data were inferred by KSEA. The calculation of KSEA values for each kinase was automated using a VBA script written in house

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gfp, Phosphopoproteomics, Mcf10a, Labell-fee, Lc-ms/ms, Dox, Her2

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266


