### Accession
PXD011239

### Title
Intact N-glycopeptides in Serum Haptoglobin between HCC and Cirrhosis

### Description
A workflow for differential analysis of the microheterogeneity of site-specific intact N-glycopeptides of serum haptoglobin between early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver cirrhosis has been developed.

### Sample Protocol
Haptoglobin was immunopurified from serum in patients with early HCC, liver cirrhosis and healthy controls, respectively, followed by trypsin/GluC digestion, glycopeptide enrichment, and LC-EThcD-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were searched with Byonic (Protein Metrics) incorporated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo) against the UniProt human haptoglobin database (P00738) and a human N-glycan database containing 179 human N-glycans was employed. The search was performed using (1) static modification, carbamidomethyl of C; (2) dynamic modifications, oxidation of M, deamindation of N and Q, and glycan modifications; (3) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (4) precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm; (5) fragment ion mass tolerance 0.01 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Intact N-glycopeptide analysis remains challenging due to the complexity of glycopeptide structures, low abundance of glycopeptides in protein digests, and difficulties in data interpretation/quantitation. Herein, we developed a workflow that involved advanced methodologies, the EThcD-MS/MS fragmentation method and data interpretation software, for differential analysis of the microheterogeneity of site-specific intact N-glycopeptides of serum haptoglobin between early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver cirrhosis. Haptoglobin was immunopurified from 20 &#x3bc;L of serum in patients with early HCC, liver cirrhosis, and healthy controls, respectively, followed by trypsin/GluC digestion, glycopeptide enrichment, and LC-EThcD-MS/MS analysis. Identification and differential quantitation of site-specific N-glycopeptides were performed using a combination of Byonic and Byologic software. In total, 93, 87, and 68 site-specific N-glycopeptides were identified in early HCC, liver cirrhosis, and healthy controls, respectively, with high confidence. The increased variety of N-glycopeptides in liver diseases compared to healthy controls was due to increased branching with hyper-fucosylation and sialylation. Differential quantitation analysis showed that 5 site-specific N-glycopeptides on sites N184 and N241 were significantly elevated in early HCC compared to cirrhosis ( p &lt; 0.05) and normal controls ( p &#x2264; 0.001). The result demonstrates that the workflow provides a strategy for detailed profiles of N-glycopeptides of patient samples as well as for relative quantitation to determine the level changes in site-specific N-glycopeptides between disease states.

### Keywords
Human, Haptoglobin, Liver, Lc-ethcd-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
University of Michigan, Department of Surgery, USA

### Submitter
Jianhui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Lubman
University of Michigan, Department of Surgery, USA


