### Accession
PXD034014

### Title
The small RNA Teg41 is a pleiotropic regulator of virulence in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is Gram-positive commensal bacteria that can also cause human disease ranging from mild, self-resolving skin infections to life-threatening conditions like endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and septicemia. Previously we demonstrated a role for the S. aureus sRNA, Teg41 in regulating production of the alpha Phenol Soluble Modulin toxins (αPSMs). In this study, we further characterize the regulatory role of Teg41. RNAseq analysis shows Teg41 influences the abundance of not just the αPSM transcript, but a variety of other transcripts as well compared to wild type S. aureus. Proteomic analysis confirms that eliminating Teg41 from the cell influences both the cytoplasmic and secreted protein profile of S. aureus. Finally, we observe that the Teg41Δ3′ strain is more severely attenuated in two murine infection models than a ∆αPSM strain, indicating that Teg41 regulation reaches beyond the αPSMs. Overall, we show that Teg41 is a unique pleiotropic sRNA in S. aureus that influences several key cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus cultures were centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 15 min. Supernatants were harvested and filter sterilized through a 0.45 μm filter disk to ensure that all bacterial cells were removed from the sample. The remaining cell pellets were washed with ice-cold PBS and stored at −80˚C for intracellular proteome analysis. Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the culture supernatants (for a final concentration of 10%) and samples were incubated at 4˚C overnight. The following day, samples were centrifuged at 11,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was removed. The resulting pellets, containing precipitated proteins, were washed with ice-cold acetone. Samples were prepared by filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP). Samples were resuspended in 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM DTT, with protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific), clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 10 min, and protein concentration was determined by Pierce 600 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were then standardized to 100 μg and reduced at 37˚C for 1 h. Urea was added to a final concentration of 6 M with 20 mM Tris pH 8.5, and samples were placed in a 30 kDa Mw protein concentrator column (Millipore Sigma). All centrifugation steps performed from this point were performed at 12,000 × g for 3–5 min until column was almost empty. Three washes were performed with 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris pH 8.5 (urea buffer), prior to alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer, and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Washes were performed as above, followed by three more washes with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (TEAB). Trypsin was added in TEAB at 1:100 trypsin: protein (1 μg) and incubated at 37°C for 18 h. Digested samples were eluted by centrifugation, desalted using C18 columns (Waters), and resuspended in 2% ACN 0.1% formic acid. Digested peptides (5 μl) were separated on a 50 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 60 (in-gel digest) or 180 (whole proteome) min gradient (2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the S. aureus USA300 proteome (UniProt ID: UP000001939) using MaxQuant (62) (www.maxquant.org) and the integrated Andromeda search engine. Digestion was set as trypsin/P, variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethylation (C) was fixed. Label-free quantification was used, with peptides matched between runs. Other settings were left as defaults. The resulting protein groups files were further processed using Perseus (63) and for whole proteome experiments, this included an imputation step with default settings. Unpaired t-test with Welch's correction was used to establish significant changes in protein abundance (LFQ intensity) between strains. Proteins with a p-value less than 0.05 and a fold change greater than 2 up or down were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus teg41 psm spa

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University
Ohio University

### Submitter
Ronan Carroll

### Lab Head
Dr Ronan Carroll
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University


