### Accession
PXD035255

### Title
Mouse Liver LC-MS/MS Analysis Following Treatment With Lifespan-Extending Drugs

### Description
Aging manifests as progressive deterioration in cellular and systemic homeostasis, requiring systems-level perspectives to understand the gradual molecular dysregulation of underlying biological processes. Here, we collected data for the analysis of systems-level changes in the molecular regulation of biological processes under multiple lifespan-extending interventions in mice. High-resolution shotgun LC-MS/MS data were collected from liver samples obtained from multiple mouse cohorts treated with different lifespan-extending drugs, and analyzed using reverse phase liquid chromatography on Orbitrap mass spectrometers.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples from mice fed with lifespan-extending drugs were collected. 12 (6 female and 6 male) genetically heterogeneous UM-HET3 mice were prepared for each sample group: control, acarbose (ACA), 17α-estradiol (17aE2), and rapamycin (Rapa). The drugs were treated via daily feeding of the Purina 5LG6 diet with ACA (1,000 mg kg−1), 17aE2 (14.4 mg kg−1), or Rapa (14 mg kg−1) starting at 4 months. At 12 months, the mice fasted for 18 h and were euthanized for liver sampling. Excised livers were washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and snap-frozen for proteomic analysis. Hereinafter, this experiment is called “LC-M001”. Liver samples from 4EGI-1-treated mice were collected. Each group, control and 4EGI-1, consisted of 4 female and 4 male UM-HET3 mice aged 6 to 8 months old. Controls received an intraperitoneal injection of 15 µL dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) daily for 5 days, and treated mice received DMSO containing 4EGI-1 at 75 mg per kg body weight. After the last injection, the mice were fasted for 18 h prior to euthanasia. Excised livers were washed in PBS and snap-frozen for proteomic analysis. Hereinafter, this experiment is called “LC-M004”. The frozen livers were dissected, processed with lysis and trypsin digestion, and analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) for quantitative protein abundance. Liver sections placed in lysis buffer (50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)-HCl pH 8.0 and 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) and homogenized using a Precellys® 24 tissue homogenizer (Bertin Technologies SAS, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). For each sample, protein concentrations were determined by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. 300 µg of solubilized protein extract in 5% SDS was purified to remove SDS using Midi-S-Trap™ sample processing technology (ProtiFi, New York, USA), and digested with trypsin at 37 °C for 4 h. The extracted tryptic peptides were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) with a 50 cm fused silica capillary (75 µm inner diameter) packed with C18 (ReproSil-Pur 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch, Germany) heated to 45 °C. The mobile phase gradient consisted of 5–35% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid over 3 h for the LC-M001 samples or over 2 h for the LC-M004 samples. The LC-M001 samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with an MS scan mass range of 375–1375 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. MS/MS scans were acquired with TopN = 15 using 15,000 resolution, with an isolation width of 1.8 m/z, AGC set to 100,000, and 100 ms injection time. NCE was set to 27, and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The LC-M004 samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in DDA mode with an MS scan mass range of 375–1375 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. MS/MS scans were acquired with TopN = 12 using 15,000 resolution with an isolation width of 1.8 m/z, AGC set to 40,000, and 30 ms injection time. NCE was set to 30, and a dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was conducted using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. Peptide identification was performed by database searching with Comet using the mouse reference proteome UP000000589 (UniProt, downloaded on June 11, 2019) filtered to one protein sequence per gene. Peptide sequences were validated with PeptideProphet and iProphet. Protein inference was performed with ProteinProphet. Protein quantification was performed using the top-3 method on quantities obtained from the extracted ion chromatograms of the precursor signals of the identified proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shotgun ms/ms, Mouse, Liver, Orbitrap, Lifespan

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


