### Accession
PXD005202

### Title
A SUMO-Dependent Protein Network Regulates Chromosome Congression During Oocyte Meiosis

### Description
During Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte meiosis, a multi-protein complex localised between homologous chromosomes, the ring complex (RC), promotes chromosome congression through the action of the chromokinesin KLP-19. While some RC components are known, the mechanism of RC assembly has remained obscure. A germline-specific screen identified KLP-19 as a SUMO substrate in vivo and we found that the SUMO E3 ligase GEI-17/PIAS is required for KLP-19 recruitment to the RC. Additionally, KLP-19 is efficiently sumoylated in vitro in a GEI-17-dependent manner. Further biochemical analysis showed that KLP-19 and GEI-17 are efficiently modified by SUMO and that GEI-17 and another RC component, the kinase BUB-1, can interact non-covalently with SUMO. While SUMO conjugation is required for RC assembly, we also provide evidence consistent with non-covalent SUMO interactions contributing to RC assembly in vivo. Our results highlight the importance of sumoylation and non-covalent SUMO interaction in regulating dynamic protein complex assembly during oocyte meiosis.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro sumoylated KLP-19 or Ni-NTA enriched His6-SUMO(L88K)-modified proteins of C. elegans were concentrated on a 30-kDa-filter unit, treated with 50 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 20 min in the dark, and digested with either Lys-C, or Lys-C and Glu-C at enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. GlyGly-modified lysine-containing peptides were enriched by immunoaffinity purification using BS3-crosslinked anti-K-ε-GG antibody. Each desalted sample of peptides was analysed twice using EASY-nLC 1000 nano-flow UHPLC system, EASY-Spray ion source and Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (all Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nanoViper pre-column (75 μm inner diameter; 3 μm particles; 100 Å pore size) at a constant pressure of 800 bar and separated using 50 cm EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm inner diameter; 2 μm particles; 100 Å pore size) maintained at 45 °C. Exploratory analysis was performed with 10% of the sample and peptides were separated during either a 35 or 60 min linear gradient of 5−25% or 5−22% (vol/vol) of acetonitrile in 0.1% (vol/vol) of formic acid, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, followed by 10 or 12 min linear increase of acetonitrile to 50% or 40% (vol/vol), respectively. Total length of the gradient including column washout and re-equilibration was either 60 or 90 min, respectively. Comprehensive peptide analysis was performed using a 60 min linear gradient of 5−22% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, with a subsequent 12 min linear increase of acetonitrile to 40%. The overall length of the gradient during comprehensive analysis was 90 min.  Peptides eluting from the LC column were charged using electrospray ionization and MS data was acquired online in a profile spectrum data format. Full MS scan covered a mass range of mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300−1800 or 300−1600 during exploratory or comprehensive peptide analysis, respectively. Target value was set to 1 000 000 ions with a maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms and full MS was acquired at a mass resolution of 70 000 at m/z 200. Data dependent MS/MS scan was initiated if the intensity of a mass peak reached a minimum of 20 000 ions. During exploratory LC-MS/MS analysis, up to 10 most abundant ions were selected using 2 Th mass isolation range when centered at the parent ion of interest. For comprehensive analyses, the most abundant ion was exclusively picked for MS/MS. Selection of molecules with peptide-like isotopic distribution was preferred. Target value for MS/MS scan was set to 500 000 with a maximum IT of 60 ms and resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200 for exploratory, or maximum IT of 1000 ms and a resolution 35 000 at m/z 200 for comprehensive peptide analyses. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30 and fixed first mass was set to m/z 100. Precursor ions with undetermined, single, or high (>8) charge state were rejected. Ions triggering a data-dependent MS/MS scan were placed on the dynamic exclusion list for 40 s (exploratory analyses) or 60 s (comprehensive analyses) and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.3.0.5) and peak lists were searched with an integrated Andromeda search engine against an entire C. elegans UniProtKB proteome including canonical and isoform sequences downloaded in a FASTA format in May 2014, or May 2016 and supplemented with the sequence of SMO1(L88K) and the following H. sapiens proteins: UBC9 (P63279), SAE1 (Q9UBE0) and SAE2 (Q9UBT2). Raw files were divided into two parameter groups based on the specificity of proteolysis applied during sample preparation. Hydrolysis of peptide bonds C-terminal to Lys residues with a maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed for peptides processed exclusively with Lys-C. Samples acquired after an additional Glu-C digestion were analysed with enzyme specificity set to C-terminal to Lys, Glu or Asp with a maximum of five missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-termini, and Gly-Gly adduct on internal lysine residues were selected as variable modifications. Maximum peptide mass of 10 000 Da was allowed, multiplicity was set to 1 and re-quantify option was disabled. Decoy sequence database was generated using Lys as a special amino acid. Default values were chosen for the rest of the parameters.

### Publication Abstract
During Caenorhabditis elegans oocyte meiosis, a multi-protein ring complex (RC) localized between homologous chromosomes, promotes chromosome congression through the action of the chromokinesin KLP-19. While some RC components are known, the mechanism of RC assembly has remained obscure. We show that SUMO E3 ligase GEI-17/PIAS is required for KLP-19 recruitment to the RC, and proteomic analysis identified KLP-19 as a SUMO substrate in&#xa0;vivo. In&#xa0;vitro analysis revealed that KLP-19 is efficiently sumoylated in a GEI-17-dependent manner, while GEI-17 undergoes extensive auto-sumoylation. GEI-17 and another RC component, the kinase BUB-1, contain functional SUMO interaction motifs (SIMs), allowing them to recruit SUMO modified proteins, including KLP-19, into the RC. Thus, dynamic SUMO modification and the presence of SIMs in RC components generate a SUMO-SIM network that facilitates assembly of the RC. Our results highlight the importance of SUMO-SIM networks in regulating the assembly of dynamic protein complexes.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Klp-19, Pias, Sumoylation sites

### Affiliations
University of Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Triin Tammsalu

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
University of Dundee, UK


