### Accession
PXD022357

### Title
A co-fractionation mass spectrometry-based prediction of protein complex assemblies in the developing rice aleurone-subaleurone

### Description
Multiprotein complexes execute and coordinate diverse cellular processes such as organelle biogenesis, vesicle trafficking, cell signaling, and metabolism. Knowledge about their composition and localization provides useful clues about the mechanisms of cellular homeostasis and systems-level control. This is of great biological importance and practical significance in heterotrophic rice (Oryza sativa) endosperm and aleurone-subaleurone tissues, which are a primary source of seed vitamins and stored energy. Dozens of protein complexes have been implicated in the synthesis, transport, and storage of seed proteins, lipids, vitamins, and minerals. Mutations in protein complexes that control RNA transport result in aberrant endosperm with shrunken and floury phenotypes, significantly reducing seed yield and quality. The purpose of this study was to broadly predict protein complex composition in the aleurone-subaleurone layers of developing rice seeds using co-fractionation mass spectrometry. Following orthogonal chromatographic separations of biological replicates, thousands of protein elution profiles were subjected to distance-based clustering to enable large-scale multimerization state measurements and protein complex predictions. The predicted complexes had predicted functions across diverse functional categories, including novel heteromeric RNA binding protein complexes that may influence seed quality. This effective and open-ended proteomics pipeline provides useful clues about systems-level post-translational control during the early stages of rice seed development.

### Sample Protocol
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)  From the soluble sample, endogenous proteins were fractionated by an ÄKTA FPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) as described previously (Aryal et al., 2014; Aryal et al., 2017; McBride et al., 2019). Approximately 1 mg of total cytosolic proteins was injected onto a Superdex® 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare). The SEC elution was performed with the mobile phase [50 mM Hepes/KOH, (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2 5% glycerol, and 1mM DTT] at a flow rate of 0.65 mL/min. The elution chromatogram was monitored by measuring absorption at 280 nm. The column was calibrated using a Gel Filtration Markers Kit (MWGF1000; Sigma-Aldrich), determining a mass range from 669 to 29 kDa. SEC fractions of 500 μL were collected, and proteins were precipitated by cold acetone for LC-MS/MS Analysis.  Ion exchange chromatography (IEX)  One milligram of the cytosolic proteins was fractionated on a PolyCATWAX 204CTWX0510 column (200 x 4.6 mm id, 5 μm, 1000 A) using an UltiMate 3000 Standard HPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) as described previously (McBride et al., 2019). IEX separation was performed over a 100-minute linear gradient elution program (from 0.0 to 1.5 M NaCl) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The absorbances of 214 nm and 280 nm were set to monitor protein elution. One hundred and seven sample fractions were collected every 22 sec (approximately 367 mL) between 3 min and 40 min. Each fraction was subjected to protein precipitation via a cold acetone method.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis  Fractionated protein samples were digested for LC-MS/MS analysis using trypsin as described previously (McBride et al., 2017; McBride et al., 2019). Protein pellets were dissolved and denatured in 8 M urea for 1 hour at room temperature, reduced in 10 mM DTT for 45 minutes at 60 °C, and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The urea concentration in the peptide solution was brought to 1.5 M for trypsin digestion by adding ammonium bicarbonate. The digested peptides were purified using Pierce® C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), and all samples were adjusted to an equal volume. Peptide concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid assay following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). The most concentrated sample had a peptide concentration of 0.2 μg/μL, and 5 μL of each sample was injected onto the LC-MS/MS system.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out as described previously (McBride et al., 2017). In brief, a Q-Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer in conjunction with reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used. Peptides were resolved over a 125-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An MS survey scan was obtained from 350 to 1600 mass/charge ratio range. MS/MS spectra were acquired by selecting the 20 most abundant precursor ions for sequencing with high-energy collisional dissociation normalized collision energy of 27%. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was applied to reduce the number of times the same ion was sequenced.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) was used for relative protein abundance quantification and protein identification (Cox et al., 2014). The search was conducted as described (McBride et al., 2019). Raw files of total cytosolic, SEC, and IEX fractions were searched on MaxQuant together against the rice proteome Osativa_323_v7.0.protein.fa (Ouyang et al., 2007). The search parameters were as follows: Cysteine carbamidomethylation was a fixed modification; oxidation on methionine and acetylation on protein N terminus were variable modifications; up to two missed trypsin cleavages were accepted; 1% FDR at the protein and peptide level was chosen using a reverse decoy database; peptide abundance was calculated using the extracted ion current for both unique and razor peptides, and protein level signals were aggregated from peptide intensities using razor peptide signal allocation among protein groups; the match between runs function was set with a maximum matching time window of 0.7 min as default; all other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
Multiprotein complexes execute and coordinate diverse cellular processes such as organelle biogenesis, vesicle trafficking, cell signaling, and metabolism. Knowledge about their composition and localization provides useful clues about the mechanisms of cellular homeostasis and system-level control. This is of great biological importance and practical significance in heterotrophic rice (Oryza sativa) endosperm and aleurone-subaleurone tissues, which are a primary source of seed vitamins and stored energy. Dozens of protein complexes have been implicated in the synthesis, transport, and storage of seed proteins, lipids, vitamins, and minerals. Mutations in protein complexes that control RNA transport result in aberrant endosperm with shrunken and floury phenotypes, significantly reducing seed yield and quality. The purpose of this study was to broadly predict protein complex composition in the aleurone-subaleurone layers of developing rice seeds using co-fractionation mass spectrometry. Following orthogonal chromatographic separations of biological replicates, thousands of protein elution profiles were subjected to distance-based clustering to enable large-scale multimerization state measurements and protein complex predictions. The predicted complexes had predicted functions across diverse functional categories, including novel heteromeric RNA binding protein complexes that may influence seed quality. This effective and open-ended proteomics pipeline provides useful clues about system-level posttranslational control during the early stages of rice seed development.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Composition, Aleurone, Cytosolic, Prediction, Endosperm, Pcp, Cf-ms, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907  Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907  Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907
Purdue University

### Submitter
Youngwoo Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel B. Szymanski
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907  Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907  Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907


