### Accession
PXD000968

### Title
Proteomics of Alzheimer's Disease mouse models

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease displaying plaques formed by the neurotoxic amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles consisting of protein tau. However, how these pathologies relates to the massive neuronal death that occurs in AD brains remain elusive. To identify proteins, the levels of which are affected by increased Aβ levels, we performed a proteomic analysis of the AD mouse model APPsw and compared it to that of APPsw mice lacking the major Aβ degrading enzyme neprilysin. This was achieved by establishing an LC-MS/MS method to analyze brain homogenate, using an 18O-labeled internal standard to accurately quantify the protein levels. By this approach we identified approximately 600 proteins and could quantify the levels of 300 of these. Interestingly, several proteins, including some not previously reported to be associated with AD, were identified. The relevance of these proteins for AD warrants further research.

### Sample Protocol
Cortex from 3 months old male APPsw and APPsw x nep KO mice were dissected from PBS perfused brains and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The samples were homogenized in 8 M Urea and 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate using Multi-Beads Shocker (Yasui Kikai) at 2500 rpm for 20 seconds and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The protein concentrations of the homogenates were determined by BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific #23227). 50 μg protein was incubated with 2 μg trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation, WI, USA), and 2 mM CaCl2 for 12 hours. The reaction was acidified by adding 1.5 μl 37% HCl to hydrolyze RapiGest, followed by 10 min centrifugation at 15 000 rpm for ten min at 4 °C.  The 18O- labeled internal standard was made by pooling 100 μg of brain homogenate from each individual followed by removal of water by a spin-vacuum system (Savant SPD1010, ThermoScientific). The conditions for the tryptic digest were as described above with the exception that all solutions included in the reaction were made in H218O (97%, Sigma), and the protein:trypsin ratio was 1:15 to increase incorporation of two 18O residues into the peptide C-terminal. The incubation time was 48 h followed by acidification and RapiGest removal as described above. Before quantitative MS-analysis, the 18O-labeling was verified by MS/MS. Unlabeled and 18O-labeled peptides were stored at -80 °C until further use. 10 μg of tryptic peptides from each individual was mixed with 10 μg 18O-labeled internal standard and purified by ZipTipC18 (Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA). The purified peptides were subjected to SCX fractionation using OMIX Pipette Tips SCX (Varian). The sample was bound to the SCX tip, washed three times with 0.1% FA and step wise eluted with 37.5 mM ammonium formate, 75 mM  ammonium formate, 150 mM  ammonium formate and lastly with 5 % NH3 in 30% methanol. The conditions for the elution buffers were adjusted so that equal amount of material was eluted in each step as determined from the resulting MS ion chromatogram. The peptides were dried by spin-vacuum system, reconstituted in 0.2% FA, purified by ZipTipC18 as described above to remove traces of detached matrix material from the SCX tips and buffer salts, dried, dissolved in 15 ul 0.2% FA and injected into Paradigm MS2 HPLC system (Michrom BioResources) coupled to an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a L-Trap C18 trap column (0.3 x 5 mm, CERI) and an InertSustain C18 analytical column of dimensions 0.1 x 150 mm (GL Science). The mobile phase A consisted of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% Formic acid and the mobile phase B of 98% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. After sample injection, the trap column was washed with 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and the peptides eluted with a 120 min gradient (0 to 35 % mobile phase B in 90 min, 35% to 65% mobile phase B from 90 to 120 min) at 0.5 ul/min. The settings for peptide identification were: peptide MS/MS isolation width; 10 Da and MS range; 350-1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Identification of the peptides was performed with Mascot software using SwissProt database (Mus musculus). Quantification was performed at the MS/MS level using the 18O multiplex tool in Mascot (ver 2.4.0). Proteins that were quantified in at least two of the four individuals of each genotype were selected, and the p-values of the changes in proteins levels were calculated by Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease displaying extracellular plaques formed by the neurotoxic amyloid &#x3b2;-peptide (A&#x3b2;), and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles consisting of protein tau. However, how these pathologies relate to the massive neuronal death that occurs in AD brains remain elusive. Neprilysin is the major A&#x3b2;-degrading enzyme and a lack thereof increases A&#x3b2; levels in the brain twofold. To identify altered protein expression levels induced by increased A&#x3b2; levels, we performed a proteomic analysis of the brain of the AD mouse model APPsw and compared it to that of APPsw mice lacking neprilysin. To this end we established an LC-MS/MS method to analyze brain homogenate, using an (18) O-labeled internal standard to accurately quantify the protein levels. To distinguish between alterations in protein levels caused by increased A&#x3b2; levels and those induced by neprilysin deficiency independently of A&#x3b2;, the brain proteome of neprilysin deficient APPsw mice was also compared to that of neprilysin deficient mice. By this approach we identified approximately 600 proteins and the levels of 300 of these were quantified. Pathway analysis showed that many of the proteins with altered expression were involved in neurological disorders, and that tau, presenilin and APP were key regulators in the identified networks. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifiers PXD000968 and PXD001786 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000968 and (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001786). Interestingly, the levels of several proteins, including some not previously reported to be linked to AD, were associated with increased A&#x3b2; levels.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Alzheimer disease, Mosue models

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Center for Alzheimer Research, Dept of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 141 57, Huddinge, Sweden
RIKEN Brain Science Institute

### Submitter
Per Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Tjernberg
Karolinska Institutet, Center for Alzheimer Research, Dept of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 141 57, Huddinge, Sweden


