### Accession
PXD041171

### Title
Sirtuin 2 Promotes HCMV Replication by Regulating Cell Cycle Progression

### Description
The host cell cycle is a major target for manipulation by viral pathogens, which often replicate in certain cell cycle stages. The prevalent pathogen human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), for instance, only replicates during G1 and therefore employs diverse mechanisms for regulating cell cycle progression. Here, we demonstrate that the human enzyme sirtuin 2 (SIRT2) is required for HCMV-mediated cell cycle dysregulation. By combining virology assays with mass pectrometry-based proteome, acetylome, and interactome analyses, we have defined a pro-virus function for SIRT2 in regulating the G1 to S phase transition.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous SIRT2 IP-MS Analysis: SIRT2 protein interactions were analyzed in uninfected human fibroblasts (HFs) or human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infected HFs at 0, 6, 12, and 24 hours post infection (HPI). Cells were lysed in 20 mM HEPES KOH, pH 7.4, 110 mM potassium acetate, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 1 μM ZnCl2, 1 μM CaCl2, 1% Triton-X, 0.5% deoxycholate, 250 mM NaCl, 1:1000 universal nuclease, and 1:100 HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. SIRT2 antibody (Abcam, ab211033) or rabbit IgG were pre-conjugated to magnetic protein A/G beads. The antibody-conjugated magnetic beads were added to each IP sample and samples were rotated for 1 hour at 4°C. Beads were collected using a magnetic strip and proteins were eluted by heating in TEL Buffer (106 mM Tris HCl, 141 mM Tris Base, 2% LDS, 0.5 mM EDTA). Eluates were collected from the beads and reduced and alkylated with 25 mM TCEP and 50 mM chloroacetamide at 70°C for 20 minutes. All IP-MS samples were digested with trypsin and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using S-Trap (Protifi, C02-micro-80) on-column digestion by following the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptides were resuspended in 1% FA/1% ACN, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   Samples were analyzed via nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated over a 150 min gradient (4% B to 50% B) with a 250 nL/min flow rate by reverse-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray HPLC Column (ThermoFisher, 250 mm length, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm Diameter). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 97% ACN. An MS1 scan was performed at a resolution of 120,000 across a mass range of 350-1,800 with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, max injection time of 30 ms, Data-dependent MS2 scans of the top 20 ions followed each MS1 scan with collision-induced dissociation fragmentation, resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5, max injection time of 25 ms, a minimum signal of 2,500, isolation width of 1.2, normalized collision energy of 28%, and dynamic exclusion of 45 s.   Acetylome Analysis with AGK2 Treatment and HCMV Infection: To analyze the impact of AGK2 (SIRT2 inhibitor) on cellular proteome abundances and acetylation levels, infected HFs were collected at 0, 12, and 24 HPI. Cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 4% SDS. Samples were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and chloroacetamide and proteins were extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 25 mM HEPES and trypsin digestion was performed overnight. Following trypsin digestion, samples were acidified to 1% TFA and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Desalting was performed using an Oasis Column (Waters) per manufacturer instructions. Samples were dried using a combination of lyophilization and vacuum centrifugation and acetyl lysine immunoaffinity purification was performed using PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit #13416 from Cell Signaling, following the manufacturer’s protocol. 50 μg of each sample was reserved for whole proteome analysis prior to acetyl lysine immunoaffinity enrichment. Following the IP, acetylated peptides were eluted from the beads using 0.15% TFA. Whole cell proteome and acetyl-peptide enrichment samples were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using SDB-RPS StageTips. Peptides were resuspended in 1% FA/1% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteome and acetylome samples were analyzed via nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated over a 150 min gradient (3% B to 35% B) with a 250 nL/min flow rate by reverse-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray HPLC Column (ThermoFisher, 500 mm length, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm Diameter). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 97% ACN. An MS1 scan was performed at a resolution of 120,000 across a mass range of 350-1,800 with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, max injection time of 30 ms, For acetylome samples, data-dependent MS2 scans of the top 10 ions followed each MS1 scan with collision-induced dissociation fragmentation, resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 1e5, max injection time of 150 ms, a minimum signal of 4,200, isolation width of 1.6, normalized collision energy of 28%, and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. For proteome samples, data-dependent MS2 scans of the top 10 ions followed each MS1 scan with collision-induced dissociation fragmentation, resolution of 15,000, an AGC of 1e5, max injection time of 25 ms, a minimum signal of 2,500, isolation width of 1.2, normalized collision energy of 28%, and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Endogenous SIRT2 IP-MS Analysis: MS/MS data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher) using a FASTA file containing human and herpesvirus protein sequences and common contaminants. The Spectrum Files RC node and Minora Feature Detector nodes were used to perform offline mass recalibration and label-free MS1 quantitation, respectively. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Sequest HT for forward and reverse searches to determine FDR. Sequest was run with settings for a fully tryptic search with a maximum of two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 4 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, static carbamidomethylation of cysteine, dynamic deamidation of asparagine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, dynamic pyroglutamic acid formation, dynamic N-terminal acetylation, and dynamic loss of methionine plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The matched spectra were validated by the Percolator node with 1% FDR. Only unique or razor peptides were used for quantification and RT-dependent normalization and low-abundance based resampling was performed across samples. In Excel, protein abundances were normalized to SIRT2 (bait) abundance for each sample, and individual proteins were scaled by predicted tryptic peptide abundance, determined using Perseus.   Acetylome Analysis with AGK2 Treatment and HCMV Infection: MS/MS data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher) using a FASTA file containing human and herpesvirus protein sequences and common contaminants. The Minora Feature Detector and Spectrum Files RC nodes were used to perform label-free MS1 quantitation and mass recalibration. Sequest was run with a full tryptic search and 2 maximum missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 4 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Included modifications were: static cysteine carbamidomethylation, dynamic lysine acetylation, dynamic asparagine deamidation, dynamic methionine oxidation, dynamic N-terminal acetylation, and dynamic loss of methionine plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The matched spectra were validated with Percolator (1% FDR). Only unique or razor peptides were used for quantification. For whole proteome samples, normalization was performed in PD2 by Total Peptide Amount. Whole proteome data were normalized in PD2. Acetylome data were median normalized in Excel and missing values were imputed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sirtuin 2, Cell cycle, Acetylation, Protein-protein interactions, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
Princeton University

### Submitter
Cora Betsinger

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Princeton University


