### Accession
PXD014353

### Title
Carfilzomib-induced reticulocytosis in patients with multiple myeloma is caused by impaired terminal erythroid maturation

### Description
Proteasome inhibition constitutes a cornerstone of multiple myeloma (MM) treatment, with bortezomib, carfilzomib and ixazomib approved for clinical use.  We observed a consistent and highly significant increase in the reticulocyte count during treatment with carfilzomib-based regimens in patients with relapsed MM, an observation not made in a matched cohort of bortezomib-treated patients.  As this increased reticulocytosis was neither associated with elevated hemoglobin levels nor with hemolysis, we subsequently performed in vitro experiments to unravel the underlying mechanisms of this clinical observation.  While carfilzomib did not affect erythroid differentiation of CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells, both continuous and pulse exposure to carfilzomib significantly impaired terminal maturation of purified primary reticulocytes towards erythrocytes.  These results indicate that carfilzomib significantly impairs terminal erythroid maturation, independent of erythroid commitment, expansion or differentiation.  Our results report the first pharmacologically induced delay in erythroid maturation as a mechanism for carfilzomib-induced reticulocytosis in MM patients.  Quantitative proteomics using LC-MS/MS were performed to assess whether carfilzomib treatment alters the protein composition of reticulocytes

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed by the Proteomics Expertise Center of the Flemish Institute for Biotechnology (VIB).  Human reticulocytes were purified from the PB of healthy volunteers, as described in the main Methods section. Five biological replicates of purified reticulocytes were processed directly after purification. The remaining replicates were cultured for 48 hours, of which 5 replicates were treated with carfilzomib. For all culturing steps, reticulocyte maturation medium was used, as described elsewhere in this manuscript. Purified reticulocytes (0.5 – 1 million cells) were washed twice with PBS to wash away any growth medium, pelleted and subsequently frozen at -80°C until further processing. A total of 15 samples was prepared for LC-MS/MS analyses.  Frozen cell pellets were dissolved in 500 µl lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 8 M urea). Lysis was performed by sonication at high intensity with 10 cycles of 30 seconds in a water bath at 4°C using a Diagenode Bioruptor Plus. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 100 µg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were further diluted to a urea concentration of 2 M and digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on OMIX C18 tips (Agilent). The tips were first washed 3 times with 200 µL pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile (ACN) (20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 200 µl of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 200 µl of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 150 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)).  Purified peptides were dried, re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A and the peptide concentration was determined with a Lunatic instrument (Unchained Labs). From each sample 15 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano ProFLow system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 150 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (Butterfly, Phoenix S&T). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 50 and we excluded precursor ions with single, 7, 8, >8 and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of April 2018 containing 20,243 human protein sequences, downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1 minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 498 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 281 quantified proteins that was used for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erythropoiesis, Multiple myeloma, Carfilzomib, Proteasome inhibitors

### Affiliations
Department of Hematology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Delforge
Department of Hematology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium


