### Accession
PXD026505

### Title
Pull-down of nuclear proteins from HGC-27 cell line

### Description
To identify nuclear proteins that interact with KIT2KIT* G-quadruplex DNA, pull-down assays were performed with nuclear extracts from the KIT-positive HGC-27 cell line. Streptavidin-coated paramagnetic beads were derivatized with the biotinylated oligonucleotide and subsequently incubated with nuclear extracts. Bound proteins were eluted with a KCl gradient. A last fraction was obtained by boiling beads in denaturing Laemmli sample loading buffer. When solved by SDS-PAGE, this last fraction exhibited three main bands that were cut and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and LC-MSE analyses for protein identification. Two of them (bands S1 and S2 at ~15 kDa and ~28 kDa, respectively) corresponded to Streptavidin monomer and dimer that detached from the beads along boiling procedure. That aside, the band at ~50 kDa (band V) was associated to the intermediate filament protein Vimentin.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins mixtures obtained from pull-down assays were run on Laemmli SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250, interesting bands were cut and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. The tryptic digests were analysed using a Xevo G2-S QTof (Waters) equipped with a Waters Acquity H-Class UPLC system. Mobile phase A consisted in 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. LC analyses were performed using an ACQUITY BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-Column (2.1x5mm, 1.7μm, Waters) in line with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (1.0x100mm, 1.7μm, Waters). Peptide separation was performed using a linear gradient from 3% to 65% of B in 36 minutes at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min, with a column temperature set at 30 °C. For all the LC-MSE analyses, the Xevo G2-S QTof operated in the ESI positive ion resolution mode and with a detection window between 50-2000 m/z. MSE acquisition was performed by alternating two MS data functions: one for acquisition of peptide mass spectra with the collision cell at low energy (6 V), and the second for the collection of peptide fragmentation spectra with the collision cell at elevated energy (linear ramp 20 to 40 V). Analyses were performed with LockSprayTM using a solution of 1 ng/μL LeuEnk in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using the on-line MASCOT server (www.matrixscience.com) against the Swiss-Prot database (release 2020_06). For Vimentin identification, a taxonomy filter to Homo sapiens was applied and a contaminants database was included.The following parameters were used in the MASCOT search: trypsin specificity; maximum number of missed cleavages, 1; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (Cys); variable modifications, oxidation (Met); peptide mass tolerance, ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, ± 15 ppm; protein mass, unrestricted; mass values, monoisotopic. A protein was considered identified when two unique peptides with statistically significant scores (p < 0.05) were obtained.

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplex (G4) structures that can form at guanine-rich genomic sites, including telomeres and gene promoters, are actively involved in genome maintenance, replication, and transcription, through finely tuned interactions with protein networks. In the present study, we identified the intermediate filament protein Vimentin as a binder with nanomolar affinity for those G-rich sequences that give rise to at least two adjacent G4 units, named G4 repeats. This interaction is supported by the N-terminal domains of soluble Vimentin tetramers. The selectivity of Vimentin for G4 repeats versus individual G4s provides an unprecedented result. Based on GO enrichment analysis performed on genes having putative G4 repeats within their core promoters, we suggest that Vimentin recruitment at these sites may contribute to the regulation of gene expression during cell development and migration, possibly by reshaping the local higher-order genome topology, as already reported for lamin B.

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Nuclear extracts, Protein identification, Pull-down assays, In-gel tryptic digests, Hgc-27 cells

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, University of Padova, 35131, Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Silvia Ceschi

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Sissi
Department of Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, University of Padova, 35131, Padova, Italy


