### Accession
PXD002158

### Title
Members of the Plant CRK-superfamily are Capable of trans-/auto-Phosphorylation of Tyrosine Residues

### Description
Protein phosphorylation on Tyr residues is a key post-translational modification in mammals. In plants, recent studies have identified Tyr-specific protein phosphatase and Tyr-phosphorylated proteins in Arabidopsis by phosphoproteomic screenings, implying that plants have a Tyr phosphorylation signal pathway. However, little is known about the protein kinases (PKs) involved in Tyr phosphorylation in plants. Here, we demonstrate that Arabidopsis calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK/CPK)-related PKs (CRKs) have high Tyr autophosphorylation activity and that they can phosphorylate Tyr residue(s) on substrate proteins in Arabidopsis. In order to identify PKs for Tyr phosphorylation, we examined the autophosphorylation activity of 759 PKs using an Arabidopsis protein array based on a wheat cell-free system. In total, we identified 38 PKs with Tyr autophosphorylation activity. The CRK family was a major protein family identified. A cell-free substrate screening revealed that these CRKs phosphorylate beta-tubulin (TBB) 2, TBB7 and certain transcription factors (TFs) such as ethylene response factor 13 (ERF13). All five CRKs tested showed Tyr auto/trans-phosphorylation activity and especially two CRKs, CRK2 and CRK3, showed a high ERF13 Tyr phosphorylation activity. A cell-based transient expression assay revealed that Tyr16/207 sites in ERF13 were phosphorylated by CRK3 and that Tyr phosphorylation of endogenous TBBs occurs in CRK2 overexpressing cells. Furthermore, crk2 and crk3 mutants showed a decrease in the Tyr phosphorylation level of TBBs. These results suggest that CRKs have Tyr kinase activity, and these might be one of the major PKs responsible for protein Tyr-phosphorylation in Arabidopsis plants.

### Sample Protocol
CBB-stained protein bands were excised from the SDS-PAGE gels and further destained using 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.9). Destained gel pieces in 30 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.9) were reduced by adding 10 μL of 40 mM dithiothreitol for 2 h at 37 °C and alkylated by adding 10 μL of 250 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. In-gel digestion of each protein was performed with 0.1 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin or chymotrypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 12 h. After repeated extractions of tryptic digests from the gel with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, the solution containing the extracted peptides was concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge. The peptide sample was reconstituted with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis was performed using the LTQ XL linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with DiNa nano LC system (KYA Technologies). Peptide separations were performed at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a fused silica capillary column packed with C18 resin (75 μm × 15 cm). Mobile phases used for separation were 0.1% formic acid (A) and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (B). A gradient (2–50% mobile phase B) was applied for 25 min, followed by a 10-min wash at 100% mobile phase B, and a equilibration for 15 min with 2% mobile phase B. For the identification of autophosphorylation sites, MS/MS spectra were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was performed using the SEQUEST search algorithm with the following parameters: two missed cleavages allowed; precursor mass tolerance, 2 Da; fragment mass tolerance, 0.8 Da; static modification, propionamide (cysteine); dynamic modifications, phosphorylation (serine, threonine, and tyrosine), methionine oxidation, and pyroglutamic acid. For the identification of substrate proteins, the acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the IPI Arabidopsis database (ipi.ARATH v.3.85) using the SEQUEST software and we required at least one high-quality peptide for positive identification (peptide probability score ≥ 10).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation on Tyr residues is a key post-translational modification in mammals. In plants, recent studies have identified Tyr-specific protein phosphatase and Tyr-phosphorylated proteins in Arabidopsis by phosphoproteomic screenings, implying that plants have a Tyr phosphorylation signal pathway. However, little is known about the protein kinases (PKs) involved in Tyr phosphorylation in plants. Here, we demonstrate that Arabidopsis calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK/CPK)-related PKs (CRKs) have high Tyr-autophosphorylation activity and that they can phosphorylate Tyr residue(s) on substrate proteins in Arabidopsis. To identify PKs for Tyr phosphorylation, we examined the autophosphorylation activity of 759 PKs using an Arabidopsis protein array based on a wheat cell-free system. In total, we identified 38 PKs with Tyr-autophosphorylation activity. The CRK family was a major protein family identified. A cell-free substrate screening revealed that these CRKs phosphorylate &#x3b2;-tubulin (TBB) 2, TBB7, and certain transcription factors (TFs) such as ethylene response factor 13 (ERF13). All five CRKs tested showed Tyr-auto/trans-phosphorylation activity and especially two CRKs, CRK2 and CRK3, showed a high ERF13 Tyr-phosphorylation activity. A cell-based transient expression assay revealed that Tyr(16/)Tyr(207) sites in ERF13 were phosphorylated by CRK3 and that Tyr phosphorylation of endogenous TBBs occurs in CRK2 overexpressing cells. Furthermore, crk2 and crk3 mutants showed a decrease in the Tyr phosphorylation level of TBBs. These results suggest that CRKs have Tyr kinase activity, and these might be one of the major PKs responsible for protein Tyr phosphorylation in Arabidopsis plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis; phosphotyrosine signaling

### Affiliations
Ehime University, JAPAN
Ehime University

### Submitter
Nobuaki  Takemori

### Lab Head
Dr Nobuaki Takemori
Ehime University


