### Accession
PXD008111

### Title
Zc3h13/Flacc is required for adenosine methylation by bridging the mRNA binding factor Rbm15/Spenito to other components of the m6A machinery

### Description
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is an abundant RNA modification in eukaryotes, playing crucial roles in multiple biological processes. m6A is catalyzed by the activity of Mettl3, which depends on additional proteins whose precise functions remain poorly understood. Here we identified Flacc/Zc3h13 as a novel interactor of m6A methyltransferase complex components in Drosophila and mouse. Like other components, Flacc controls m6A levels and is involved in sex determination in Drosophila. We demonstrate that Flacc promotes the recruitment of the methyltransferase to mRNA by bridging Fl(2)d to the mRNA binding factor Spenito. Altogether, our work advances our molecular understanding of conservation and regulation of the m6A machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification and Mass Spectrometry One confluent 15cm dish of mESC’s per sample was resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold TAP lysis buffer (NaCl (150 mM-500mM depending on experiment), Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) 20 mM, NP-40 0.5%, EDTA 1 mM, Glycerol 10% and DTT 1 mM supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) after Trypsin/EDTA (0.25%) dissociation and PBS wash.  Samples were shaken at 1,000 rpm at 4°C for 30 min. Lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 4°C at maximum speed on a tabletop centrifuge. Protein concentration of each sample was determined using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Dye). Equal amounts of lysate (5 mg) from the control sample (parental untagged cells) and the bait-protein sample (gene tagged cells) were normalized adding an appropriate amount of cold TAP lysis buffer to each sample to adjust the final sample concentration to be ~5 mg/mL. Equilibrated FLAG M2 Dynabeads (Sigma, 10μl of packed bead slurry per 5 mg protein / sample) previously washed twice with 1 ml of cold TAP lysis buffer, were added to each 5mg/mL lysate. Tubes containing beads and lysates were incubated with end-over-end rotating at 4°C overnight. Dynabeads were washed the next day in TAP buffer (4x10min), followed by 3x15min elution of bound proteins with 3xFLAG peptide (final concentration of 0.3 mg.ml-1 in TAP buffer, Sigma). Next, elutions were pooled and added to the TAP washed Stepavidin Dynabeads (Thermofisher), and incubated overnight, rotating at 4°C. Streptavidin Dynabeads were washed the next day with TAP buffer (4x10min), followed by a wash with TAP buffer without NP40. For single step affinity purification, FLAG purification was omitted, and lysates were directly applied to the Streptavidin Dynabeads. The enriched proteins were digested directly on the Dynabeads with 0.1 mg.ml-1 trypsin in Digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM CaCl2, 1mM TCEP). The generated peptides were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.8% and analyzed by capillary liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry with an EASY-nLC 1000 using the two-column set-up (Thermo Scientific).  The peptides were loaded with 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in H2O onto a peptide trap (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75um x 2cm, C18, 3um, 100Å) at a constant pressure of 800 bar. Peptides were separated, at a flow rate of 150 nl/min with a linear gradient of 2–6% buffer B in buffer A in 3 minutes followed by an linear increase from 6 to 22% in 40 minutes, 22-28% in 9 min, 28-36% in 8min, 36-80% in 1 min and the column was finally washed for 14 min at 80% B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a 50um x 15cm ES801 C18, 2um, 100Å column (Thermo Scientific) mounted on a DPV ion source (New Objective) connected to a Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). The data were acquired using 120000 resolution for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap and a top T (3s) method with HCD fragmentation for each precursor and fragment measurement in the ion trap according the recommendation of the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific). SILAC experiment and LC–MS/MS analysis For SILAC experiments, S2R+ cells were grown in Schneider medium (Dundee Cell) supplemented with either heavy (Arg10, Lys8) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or light amino acids (Arg0, Lys0) (Sigma). For the forward experiment, Myc–Nito was transfected in heavy-labelled cells and Myc-alone in light-labelled cells. The reverse experiment was performed vice versa. The co-immunoprecipitation experiment was done as described earlier. Before elution, beads of the heavy and light lysates were combined in 1:1 ratio and eluted with 1× NuPAGE LDS buffer that was subject to MS analysis as described previously (Bluhm et al, 2016 Proteomics). Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the UniProt database of annotated Drosophila proteins (Drosophila melanogaster: 41,850 entries, downloaded 8 January 2015).   Bluhm, A., Casas-Vila, N., Scheibe, M. & Butter, F. Reader interactome of epigenetic histone marks in birds. Proteomics 16, 427-436, doi:10.1002/pmic.201500217 (2016).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was done with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine38 and label free quantification (LFQ.39) as described in40. The mouse subset of the UniProt version 2015_01 combined with the contaminant DB from MaxQuant was searched and the protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. All MaxQuant parameters can be found in the uploaded parameterfile: mqpar.xml.   Statistical analysis was done in Perseus (version 1.5.2.6)38,39,41. Results were filtered to remove reverse hits, contaminants and peptides found in only one sample. Missing values were imputed and potential interactors were determined using t-test and visualized by a volcano plot. Significance lines corresponding to a given FDR have been determined by a permutation-based method42. Threshold values (FDR) were selected between 0.005 and 0.05 and SO (curve bend) between 0.2 and 2 and are shown in the corresponding figures. Results were exported from Perseus and visualized using statistical computing language R.

### Publication Abstract
<i>N</i><sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is the most abundant mRNA modification in eukaryotes, playing crucial roles in multiple biological processes. m<sup>6</sup>A is catalyzed by the activity of methyltransferase-like 3 (Mettl3), which depends on additional proteins whose precise functions remain poorly understood. Here we identified Zc3h13 (zinc finger CCCH domain-containing protein 13)/Flacc [Fl(2)d-associated complex component] as a novel interactor of m<sup>6</sup>A methyltransferase complex components in <i>Drosophila</i> and mice. Like other components of this complex, Flacc controls m<sup>6</sup>A levels and is involved in sex determination in <i>Drosophila</i> We demonstrate that Flacc promotes m<sup>6</sup>A deposition by bridging Fl(2)d to the mRNA-binding factor Nito. Altogether, our work advances the molecular understanding of conservation and regulation of the m<sup>6</sup>A machinery.

### Keywords
Methyltransferase complex, Sex determination, Rna modifications, Flacc, M6a, Zc3h13

### Affiliations
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058 Basel, Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Daniel Hess

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bühler
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058 Basel, Switzerland


