### Accession
PXD030994

### Title
Dynamic changes in the proteome of early bovine embryos developed in vivo

### Description
Early embryo development is a dynamic process involving important molecular and structural changes leading to the embryonic genome activation (EGA) and first cell lineage differentiation. Our aim was to elucidate proteomic changes in bovine embryos developed in vivo. Eleven Holstein females were used as embryo donors and pools of embryos at the 4-6 cell, 8-12 cell, morula, compact morula and blastocyst stages were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled with tandem MS (nanoLC-MS/MS). A total of 2757 proteins were identified, of which 1950 were quantitatively analyzed. Principal component analysis of data showed a separation of embryo pools according to their developmental stage. Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) between stages were clustered into 626 upregulated and 400 downregulated proteins with most significant changes at the time of EGA and blastocyst formation. The main pathways and processes overrepresented among upregulated proteins were RNA metabolism, protein translation and ribosome biogenesis whereas Golgi vesicle transport and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum were overrepresented among downregulated proteins. This is the first comprehensive study of proteome dynamics in non-rodent mammalian embryos developed in vivo. These data provide a number of functional protein candidates and will be useful to evaluate the impact of in vitro conditions on embryo quality.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from pools of embryos were extracted and digested using the PreOmics iST-BCT kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were thawed and lysed (denatured, reduced and alkylated) for 10 min at 95°C then Trypsin/LysC digested for 60 min at 37 °C. Purification of peptides were then carried out at room temperature and peptides were finally eluted in 10 µL of LC-load buffer. The volume corresponding to one equivalent-embryo (corresponding to approximately 300 ng proteins) was then loaded on a 75 µm × 250 mm IonOpticks Aurora 2 C18 column (Ion Opticks Pty Ltd., Bundoora, Australia). A gradient of basic reversed-phase buffers (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 98% H2O MilliQ, 2% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was run on a NanoElute HPLC System (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 50 °C. The liquid chromatography (LC) run lasted for 120 min (2% to 15% of buffer B during 60 min; up to 25% at 90 min; up to 37% at 100 min; up to 95% at 110 min and finally 95% for 10 min to wash the column). The column was coupled online to a TIMS TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik). The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 180 °C. Ions were accumulated for 114 ms, and mobility separation was achieved by ramping the entrance potential from −160 V to −20 V within 114 ms. The acquisition of the MS and MS/MS mass spectra was done with average resolutions of 60,000 and 50,000 full width at half maximum (mass range 100–1700 m/z), respectively. To enable the PASEF method, precursor m/z and mobility information was first derived from full scan TIMS-MS experiments (with a mass range of m/z 100–1700). The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 and 3 Th and, for fragmentation, the collision energies varied between 31 and 52 eV depending on the precursor mass and charge. TIMS, MS operation and PASEF were controlled and synchronized using the control instrument software OtofControl 5.1 (Bruker Daltonik). LC-MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method with a total cycle time of 1.31 s, including 1 TIMS MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MA scans. The 10 PASEF scans (100 ms each) containing, on average, 12 MS/MS scans per PASEF scan. Ion mobility-resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs. m/z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.1 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the MASCOT software (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, 454 London, UK) against the Uniprot Bos taurus database (May 2019, 23523 sequences) using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). The parameters used for database searches included trypsin as enzyme (one missed cleavage allowed), carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Monoisotopic mass was considered and mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm for MS ions and 0,05 Da for MS/MS ions. Mascot results from the target and decoy databases were incorporated to Scaffold Q+ software (version 5.0.1, Proteome Software, Portland, USA, www.proteomesoftware.com). Threshold for peptide and protein identification were set to 95.0 % as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm and the Protein Prophet algorithm. To exclude potential human contaminants from the pool of ketarin proteins (KRT 1, 2, 5, 6A, 7, 8, 10, 14, 18, 19, 24, 28 and 75), the peptides identified in the Bos Taurus database were blasted again the Homo sapiens homologous sequences. For all keratins except KRT14, the peptide sequences were specific to Bos taurus, meaning that except for KRT14, we were able to exclude human contaminants. All proteins containing at least two unique peptides (False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01%) were considered for protein quantification. Protein quantification was based on a label-free approach using spectral counting. Scaffold Q+ software (Proteome Software, version 4.9) was used using the Spectral Count quantitative module. The normalization of spectra among samples was realized in Scaffold by adjusting the sum of the selected quantitative values for all proteins within each MS sample to a common value, which was the average of the sums of all MS samples present in the experiment. This was achieved by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein or protein group. Thus, numbers of normalized weighted spectra (NWS) were tabulated using experiment-wide protein clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Early embryo development is a dynamic process involving important molecular and structural changes leading to the embryonic genome activation (EGA) and early cell lineage differentiation. Our aim was to elucidate proteomic changes in bovine embryos developed <i>in vivo</i>. Eleven females were used as embryo donors and pools of embryos at the 4-6 cell, 8-12 cell, morula, compact morula and blastocyst stages were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled with label free quantitative mass spectrometry. A total of 2,757 proteins were identified, of which 1,950 were quantitatively analyzed. Principal component analysis of data showed a clear separation of embryo pools according to their developmental stage. The hierarchical clustering of differentially abundant proteins evidenced a first cluster of 626 proteins that increased in abundance during development and a second cluster of 400 proteins that decreased in abundance during development, with most significant changes at the time of EGA and blastocyst formation. The main pathways and processes overrepresented among upregulated proteins were RNA metabolism, protein translation and ribosome biogenesis, whereas Golgi vesicle transport and protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum were overrepresented among downregulated proteins. The pairwise comparison between stages allowed us to identify specific protein interaction networks and metabolic pathways at the time of EGA, morula compaction and blastocyst formation. This is the first comprehensive study of proteome dynamics in non-rodent mammalian embryos developed <i>in vivo</i>. These data provide a number of protein candidates that will be useful for further mechanistic and functional studies.

### Keywords
Embryo, Cattle, Development., Blastocyst, Proteomics, Morula, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085
UMS Biosit - CNRS 3480 - Inserm 018 Campus de Beaulieu - Bâtiment. 24 - CS2407 263 Avenue du Général Leclerc 35042 RENNES CEDEX FRANCE

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
UMS Biosit - CNRS 3480 - Inserm 018 Campus de Beaulieu - Bâtiment. 24 - CS2407 263 Avenue du Général Leclerc 35042 RENNES CEDEX FRANCE


