### Accession
PXD030740

### Title
Epidermal growth factor shedding directs macrophage education in cancer

### Description
Macrophages in the tumor microenvironment have a significant impact on tumor progression. Depending on the signaling environment in the tumor, macrophages can either support or constrain tumor growth and metastasis. It is therefore of therapeutic interest to identify the tumor-derived factors that control macrophage education. With this aim, we correlated the expression of ADAM proteases, which are key mediators of cell-cell signaling, to the expression of pro-tumorigenic macrophage markers in human cancer cohorts. We identified ADAM17, a sheddase upregulated in many cancer types, as a protein of interest. Depletion of ADAM17 in cancer cell lines reduced the expression of several pro-tumorigenic markers in neighboring macrophages in vitro as well as in mouse tumor models. Accordingly, ADAM17-/- educated macrophages demonstrated a reduced ability to induce cancer cell invasion. Using quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we identified HB-EGF, shed by ADAM17 in the cancer cells, as the implicated molecular mediator of macrophage education. Additionally, RNA-seq and ELISA experiments revealed that ADAM17-dependent HB-EGF release induces the expression and secretion of CXCL chemokines in macrophages, which in turn stimulates cancer cell invasion. In conclusion, we provide evidence that ADAM17 mediates a paracrine HB-EGF-chemokine feedback loop, whereby cancer cells hijack macrophages to promote tumor progression.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned medium for Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics  22.5*10^6 murine bone marrow-derived cells were seeded at the bottom part of 75mm Transwell polycarbonate membrane cell culture inserts (Corning) and differentiated towards BMDMs, as described above. For co-cultures, 1.5*10^6 4T1 cancer cells were seeded in 75mm Transwell polycarbonate membrane co-culture inserts with a pore size of 0.4µm and incubated for 24h. The next day, the inserts containing cancer cells were placed into the wells containing BMDM in DMEM with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100µg/ml streptomycin and incubated for 12h, after which the medium was changed to DMEM without phenol red, serum and antibiotics (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following another 12h incubation, the medium was collected and the proteolytic activity was inhibited using 0.5mM PMSF and 10mM EDTA. Cells and debris were removed by centrifugation and filtering through a 0.22µm filter. Next, medium was up-concentrated and reconstituted in 50mM HEPES, pH 7.8 buffer using 3kDa cut-off Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (Merck), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA Protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The reference sample was prepared by mixing equal amount of proteins from each sample. The protein concentration of all samples was adjusted to 10µg in 90µl of 50mM HEPES, pH 7.8 buffer and were denatured at 65°C, reduced with 3.5mM TCEP, alkylated with 5mM chloroacetamide and digested for 24h with trypsin (all from Sigma-Aldrich), using 1:20 (trypsin/protein) ratio.  Tandem mass tags (TMT)-based proteomics  Peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each condition, 10µg of peptides were labelled at 5:1 (TMT/peptide) ratio, pooled and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). Pooled samples were analyzed on Q Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC™ 1200 Liquid Chromatography system and a PepMap™ RSLC C18 50cm column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75μm × 50cm) at 45°C (all from ThermoFisher Scientific). Data was recorded in a data-dependent acquisition mode over a 140min HPLC gradient using full-MS scans. MS1 spectra was recorded with 70000 resolution using 3e6 ions, and MS2 spectra was acquired with 35000 resolution, top 10 precursors with isolation windows of 1.6 m/z and 60ms max injection time, AGC target of 1e6 ions.  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-based proteomics  Digested peptides were desalted using custom made C18 stage tips. Following resuspension in 1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile containing iRT peptides (Biognosys), 500ng of peptides per sample were spiked using SpikeMix stable isotope labeled peptides (JPT) with heavy C-terminal arginine or lysine. All samples were analyzed on the same equipment as TMT-based proteomics in scheduled PRM mode over a 70min HP-LC gradient. MS1 spectra were recorded with a 60000 resolution and MS2 spectra were acquired with a 17500 resolution, AGC target of 1e6 ions and 59ms injection time.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and statistical analysis  The TMT raw data file was analyzed as described in (1), using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) against a database compiled from the Uniprot reference proteome for Mus Musculus (taxid: 10090 v.29-11-2017). Search results were validated using Percolator and filtered to 1% FDR. PRM raw files were searched using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 and quantified using Skyline 20.2 (2). For normalization of TMT-channels, the function “Total Peptide Amount” was selected in ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 and the value of each channel was scaled to the channel of the reference sample. Quantified proteins were filtered to master only medium and high FDR confidence. Statistical analysis was performed using CarmaWeb (3), applying limma moderated t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg p-value adjustment. Adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered significant.  For PRM analysis, transition results were exported using Skyline 20.2. They were analyzed using RStudio v.1.2.5001. Between-run technical variation was normalized using summed indigenous and heavy peptides per sample. Next, spectrum area of each peptide was scaled to average all samples to 100. In each condition, biological triplicates were used and total sums of indigenous scaled peptides were normalized to the lowest sample per condition. P-values were calculated using two sided Student’s t-tests and a p-value <0.05 was considered significant. Ref: 1. F. Sabino, E. Madzharova, U. Auf dem Keller, Cell density-dependent proteolysis by HtrA1 induces translocation of zyxin to the nucleus and increased cell survival. Cell Death Dis 11, 674 (2020).  2. L. K. Pino et al., The Skyline ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics. Mass Spectrom Rev 39, 229-244 (2020).  3. J. Rainer, F. Sanchez-Cabo, G. Stocker, A. Sturn, Z. Trajanoski, CARMAweb: comprehensive R- and bioconductor-based web service for microarray data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 34, W498-503 (2006).

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages in the tumor microenvironment have a substantial impact on tumor progression. Depending on the signaling environment in the tumor, macrophages can either support or constrain tumor progression. It is therefore of therapeutic interest to identify the tumor-derived factors that control macrophage education. With this aim, we correlated the expression of A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase (ADAM) proteases, which are key mediators of cell-cell signaling, to the expression of protumorigenic macrophage markers in human cancer cohorts. We identified ADAM17, a sheddase upregulated in many cancer types, as a protein of interest. Depletion of ADAM17 in cancer cell lines reduced the expression of several protumorigenic markers in neighboring macrophages in vitro as well as in mouse models. Moreover, ADAM17-/- educated macrophages demonstrated a reduced ability to induce cancer cell invasion. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and ELISA, we identified heparin-binding EGF (HB-EGF) and amphiregulin, shed by ADAM17 in the cancer cells, as the implicated molecular mediators of macrophage education. Additionally, RNA-Seq and ELISA experiments revealed that ADAM17-dependent HB-EGF ligand release induced the expression and secretion of CXCL chemokines in macrophages, which in turn stimulated cancer cell invasion. In conclusion, we provide evidence that ADAM17 mediates a paracrine EGFR-ligand-chemokine feedback loop, whereby cancer cells hijack macrophages to promote tumor progression.

### Keywords
4t1, Conditioned medium, Lc-msms, Mouse, Hb-egf, Tmt, Prm, Adam17

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen (Biotech Research and Innovation Centre)
Biotech Research & Innovation Center (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Krzysztof Piotrowski

### Lab Head
Dr Marie Kveiborg
Biotech Research & Innovation Center (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Denmark


