### Accession
PXD010710

### Title
Comprehensive evaluation of RNAlater effect on proteome and phosphoproteome

### Description
Tumors such as pancreatic cancer contain a variety of enzymes including DNases, RNases and proteases which may lead to autolysis of DNA, RNA and proteins during sample processing. In general, RNAlater can be used to keep nucleic acids intact since it contains high concentrations of quaternary ammonium sulfates which denature those enzymes. Although a few studies were carried out to find effect of RNAlater mainly on DNA and RNA, it is largely unknown whether RNAlater affect both proteome and phosphoproteome. Thus, we carried out a systematic and comprehensive analysis of the RNAlater effect on the proteome and phosphoproteome using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Pancreatic tumor tissues from three patients were pulverized using Covaris CP02 Cryoprep device and incubated in RNAlater at 4 °C for 24 hours. We used the 6-plex TMT to measure quantitative information of proteome and phosphoproteome. Peptides fractionated by mid pH reverse phase liquid chromatography were divided into two parts: a portion (~8%) of each mRP fraction was used to profile the global proteome and the rest (~92%) was to survey phosphorylation enriched by IMAC–based approach. As a result, the global profiling identified 186,941 unmodified peptides of 9,152 protein groups, 18,705 phosphopeptides (15,842 phosphosites). When analyzing the unbiased proteomics and phosphoproteomics data, we observed no significant quantitative changes in both proteins and phosphorylation, if any, induced by RNAlater. Therefore, this result confirms that stored tissues in RNAlater do not significantly affect the proteome and phosphoproteome of pancreatic cancer tumors.

### Sample Protocol
RNAlater removed tissue powder sample was mixed with lysis buffer 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and one tablet phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) and lysed by sonication five times using a probe sonicator (Q55 Sonicator, Qsonica) for 30 sec on ice until there were no tissue pieces.  The homogenate was centrifuged at 16,000 g and 20 ℃ for 10 min (5810 R, Eppendorf), and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was then measured using the BCA protein assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce). The lysate was digested using the FASP protocol as previously reported1. The proteins were reduced in SDT buffer (4% SDS in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT) at 37 ℃ for 45 min with shaking at 300 rpm and boiled for 10 min at 95 ℃ on a thermomixer (Comfort, Eppendorf) and then transferred to a membrane filter (YM-30, Millipore Corporation), in which the protein sample was mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea (in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). The protein sample on the membrane filter was centrifuged at 14,000 g and 20 ℃ for 60 min to remove SDS three times. Subsequently, 100 μL of 0.05 M iodoacetamide in 8 M urea was added to alkylate free thiol groups in proteins for 25 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein samples on the membrane filters were diluted with 200 μL of 8 M urea and concentrated four times. Finally, 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, was added to the filter, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g and 20 ℃ for 30 min twice. Trypsin (Promega; Madison; WI) was added to the filter unit at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w) and the proteins were digested at 37 ℃ overnight. After the first digestion, the second digestion was carried out with trypsin (1:100 ratio) at 37 ℃ for 6 hours. The resulting peptides were then eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g and at 20 ℃ for 30 min. The filter was rinsed with 60 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged at 14,000 g and at 20 ℃ for 20 min. The peptides in eluents were combined, dried and kept in -80 ℃ until the subsequent TMT labeling.TMT-labeled 24 fraction global peptide and 12 fraction phosphopeptide samples were analyzed using a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with coupled with a modified nanoACQUITY LC system, which was previously described. A simple dual online ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (sDO-UHPLC) was equipped with two analytical RP column (75 μm × 100 cm, Jupiter, 3 μm, 300 Å, Phenomenex, Torrence, CA) and two solid phase extraction (SPE) column (150 μm × 3 cm, Jupiter, 3 μm, 300 Å). The solvent A and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile respectively. A 180 minutes linear gradient (1-40 % solvent B over 160 min, 40-80 % over 5 min, 80 % for 10 min and holding at 1 % for 5 min) and 240 minutes linear gradient (1-50% solvent B over 220 min, 50-80 % over 5 min, 80 % for 10 min and holding at 1 % for 5min) were used for global and phosphoproteome profiling, respectively. The column flow rate was 300 nL/min and temperature of column was controlled at 60 °C. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using a Q Exactive an applied electric potential of electrospray ionization at 2.4kV and the temperature of desolvation capillary was set at 250 °C. Full MS scans (400 – 2000 Th) were acquired at 70,000 resolution with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 1.0 x 106 and a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms. MS/MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and the 10 most abundant ions were isolated with an isolation window of ± 0.8 Th, which were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 35 and the exclusion duration of 30 s. The MS/MS scans were acquired at the resolution of 17,500 with fixed first mass of 120 Th and the target AGC value and the maximum IT were 1.0 x 106 and 60 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry data were searched against a human protein sequence database downloaded from UniProt (20,997 reviewed proteins) using MaxQuant (Max Plank Institute of biochemistry, Andromeda search algorithm). MaxQuant searches for global proteome analysis were carried out with following parameters: 4.5 p.p.m. and 20 p.p.m. for mass tolerances for precursor and fragments, respectively; fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages for enzymatic cleavage; peptide N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; at least 7 amino acids for the peptide length and less than 4600 Da for the maximum peptide mass; 0.75 for precursor intensity fraction. In case of phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine was set to additional variable modifications. Peptides and phosphopeptides were identified by applying 1% false discovery rates at both peptide spectrum match and protein levels. Phosphosite probability was estimated by MaxQaunt.

### Publication Abstract
Certain tumors such as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are known to contain a variety of hydrolytic enzymes including RNases and proteases that may lead to degradation of RNA and proteins during sample processing. For such tumor tissues with RNA instability, RNAlater containing a high concentration of quaternary ammonium sulfates that denature RNA-hydrolyzing enzymes is often used to protect RNAs from hydrolysis. Although a few studies have been carried out to determine the effect of RNAlater on DNA and RNA, whether RNAlater influences the proteome and phosphoproteome is largely unknown. In this study we carried out a systematic and comprehensive analysis of the effect of RNAlater on the proteome and phosphoproteome using high-resolution mass spectrometry. PDAC tissues from three patients were individually pulverized and the tissue powders of each patient were divided into two portions, one of which was incubated in RNAlater at 4&#xa0;&#xb0;C for 24&#xa0;h (RNAlater tissue) while the other was kept at -&#xa0;80&#xa0;&#xb0;C (frozen tissue). Comprehensive quantitative profiling experiments on the RNAlater tissues and the frozen tissues resulted in the identification of 99,136 distinct peptides of 8803 protein groups and 17,345 phosphopeptides of 16,436 phosphosites. The data exhibited no significant quantitative changes in both proteins and phosphorylation between the RNAlater tissues and the frozen tissue. In addition, the phosphoproteome data showed heterogeneously activated pathways among the three patients that were not altered by RNAlater. These results indicate that the tissue preservation method using RNAlater can be effectively used on PDAC tissues for proteogenomic studies where preservation of intact DNA, RNA and proteins is prerequisite. Data from this study are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD010710.

### Keywords
Rnalater, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Department of New Biology,
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, South Korea

### Submitter
Min-Sik Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, South Korea


