### Accession
PXD001247

### Title
The cellular and proteomic response of primary and immortalized murine Kupffer cells following immune stimulation diverges from that of monocyte-derived macrophages

### Description
Kupffer cells are the first line of defense in the liver against pathogens, yet several microbes successfully target the liver, bypass immune surveillance, and effectively develop in this tissue. Our current, albeit poor, understanding of Kupffer cell-pathogen interactions has been largely achieved through the study of primary cells, requiring isolation from a large numbers of animals. To facilitate the study of Kupffer cell biology, an immortalized rat Kupffer cell line, RKC1, was developed. We performed a comparative global proteomic analysis of RKC1 and primary rat Kupffer cells (PRKC) to characterize their respective responses to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated immune stimulation. We identified patent differences in the proteomic response profile of RKC1 and PRKC to LPS. We observed that PRKC upregulated more immune function pathways and exhibited marked changes in cellular morphology following stimulation. We consequently analyzed the cytoskeletal signaling pathways of these cells in light of the fact that macrophages are known to induce cytoskeletal changes in response to pathogens. Our findings suggest that Kupffer cells respond differently to inflammatory stimulus than do monocyte-derived macrophages, and such data may provide insight into how pathogens, such as the malaria parasite, may have evolved mechanisms of liver entry through Kupffer cells without detection.

### Sample Protocol
Rat Kupffer Cell 1 (RKC1) cells (a kind gift from Michel Murr, University of South Florida) and primary rat Kupffer cells (PRKC) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA),  were cultured in RPMI (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and Penicillin/Streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in a humidified chamber at 5% CO2 and 37°C. Cells were grown in 6 well plates (for protein extraction) or 24 well plates on collagen-coated glass coverslips (for immunofluorescence). RKC1 cells were seeded at 25,000 cells per cm2 and grown for 24 hours before LPS treatment, while PRKC cells were seeded at 25,000 cells per cm2 and grown for 1-5 days before LPS treatment. For LPS stimulation, spent medium was removed and replaced with fresh media supplemented with 1 µg/mL LPS (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) or an equivalent amount of PBS. Cells were stimulated for 4 hours at 37°C prior to harvest. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS. For LC-MS/MS analyses, cells were treated with 0.01% trypsin (Life Technologies) at 37 °C for 5 minutes, and then scraped from the plate. Cells were washed two more times using cold PBS. Following centrifugation of the cell suspension at 800 RCF for 5 min at 4 °C, the entire cell pellet was solubilized in SDST-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6), and boiled at 95 °C for 5 min. We performed protein digestion according to a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (EMD Millipore). Acidified tryptic peptides were desalted using an HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Peptide concentration following FASP was then estimated by comparison with protein standards. All the FASP desalted and digested peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (97.9% water, 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) and ~20 µg was injected to our constructed online 2-D HPLC-MS/MS system. To construct the online 2D methods, we integrated one SCX column (150 μm i.d. * 2 cm length, PolySULFOETHYLATM, 5 μm 300 A, PolyLC INC) into an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. For the online SCX fractionation, in the first dimension peptides were loaded into the SCX column at 1.8 μL/min and the peptides were eluted using the autosampler by injecting 6 μL of each increasing salt concentration (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 160 and 300 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA; followed by one injection of 500 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to wash the column). The salt elution was captured by a C18 enrichment column integrated in the Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 μm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column). In the second dimension, with valve switched and RPLC gradient started, the peptides were eluted from the enrichment column and separated by a C18 analytical column. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3-10% B for 4 min, 10-35% B for 56 min, 35-99% for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) MS acquisition was performed  by an Agilent 6520 QTOF at 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700 and the top 4 peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (~4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.6 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum was acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. Mascot version 2.4.1 was used to search the SwissProt RAT (Nov. 2013) protein FASTA sequence database (28847 sequences) for peptide sequence assignments using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints, and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications that were considered were oxidation of methionine residues. The Mascot search results were exported as .DAT format and then imported into the Scaffold software (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software) for curation, label-free quantification, analysis, and visualization. Overall, protein false discovery rates of less than 1% and peptide false discovery rates of less than 1% were obtained with Scaffold filters, and each protein had ≥ 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Kupffer cells (KCs) are the first line of defense in the liver against pathogens, yet several microbes successfully target the liver, bypass immune surveillance, and effectively develop in this tissue. Our current, albeit poor, understanding of KC-pathogen interactions has been largely achieved through the study of primary cells, requiring isolation from large numbers of animals. To facilitate the study of KC biology, an immortalized rat KC line 1, RKC1, was developed. We performed a comparative global proteomic analysis of RKC1 and primary rat KCs (PRKC) to characterize their respective responses to lipopolysaccharide-mediated immune stimulation. We identified patent differences in the proteomic response profile of RKC1 and PRKC to lipopolysaccharide. We observed that PRKC upregulated more immune function pathways and exhibited marked changes in cellular morphology following stimulation. We consequently analyzed the cytoskeletal signaling pathways of these cells in light of the fact that macrophages are known to induce cytoskeletal changes in response to pathogens. Our findings suggest that KCs respond differently to inflammatory stimulus than do monocyte-derived macrophages, and such data may provide insight into how pathogens, such as the malaria parasite, may have evolved mechanisms of liver entry through KCs without detection.

### Keywords
Cytoskeleton; kupffer cell; macrophage; malaria; murine

### Affiliations
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel R. Dinglasan
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health


