### Accession
PXD038712

### Title
Discovery of stress biomarkers in the skin mucus of Sparus aurata by shotgun proteomics

### Description
This study aimed at the identification of minimally invasive stress biomarkers in the skin mucus of fish submitted to distinct intensities (mild and most intense) of different types of stress i.e., overcrowding (OC), repeated net-handling (NET) and hypoxia (HYP). Fish trials were conducted in triplicate tanks and four fish per tank were randomly sampled for MS analysis. This work also aimed to disclose most significant changes in signaling and metabolic pathways involved in the stress response in this immunity related biofluid. The presented data-driven knowledge study may ultimately contribute for the improvement of species-specific welfare management protocols, towards a sustainable aquaculture.

### Sample Protocol
For total protein extraction of the skin mucus samples (n = 12, 4 fish per triplicate tanks; tank unit as biological replicate) 200 μL were first diluted with 10% (v/v) milli-Q water to decrease sample viscosity, and then solubilized with 200 μL buffer containing 1.5% (w/v) DTT, 1.5 mM EDTA, plus a PI cocktail (Merck KGaA). Samples were homogenized in a ThermoMixer® C (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 1400 rpm, 4°C, for 15 min. Homogenates were centrifuged at 14,000 g, 4°C, for 30 min, recovering the supernatant for further analysis. Mucus extracts were diluted in the initial buffer and the protein content measured using the BioRad Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent and BSA Standard Set (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, USA). Extracts were then depleted of non-protein contaminants using the ReadyPrep™ 2D Clean-up kit (Bio-Rad), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cleaned protein pellet was further resuspended in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitors for 10 min at 95ºC at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Samples were then prepared following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol, as described elsewhere 1. Enzymatic digestion was performed with 2 µg Trypsin/LysC overnight at 37ºC at 1000 rpm. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides (500 ng) were analyzed by online nanoLC using an UltiMate TM 3000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL min-1. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75 μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL min-1. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA, with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) positive mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV and capillary temperature was 275 °C. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chrom. peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. DDA settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45 s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass and spectrum data type profile. MS analyses were performed at the Proteomics Scientific Platform of i3S, Porto, Portugal. (1) Hughes, C.S.; Moggridge, S.; Müller, T.; Sorensen, P.H.; Morin, G.B.; Krijgsveld, J. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments, Nat. Protocols 2019, 14(1), 68-85.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw MS data were processed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) on Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 and searched against the UniProtKB Eupercaria database (taxon ID 1489922; Release 2020_05; 651,914 sequences) for protein identification. The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids and 144 as maximum. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation, and loss of methionine and Met-loss+Acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The Inferys rescoring node was considered for this analysis. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification (TOP3) was performed at the processing step with the following parameters: peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, the pairwise protein ratio calculation and hypothesis test were based on t-test (background based). Afterwards, the processing workflow results i.e., .msf files (magellan storage files) were imported into Scaffold (v.5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and a second search engine i.e., X! Tandem algorithm (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Alanine 2017.2.1.4) was applied to all MS/MS samples, using a reverse concatenated subset of the UniProtKB Eupercaria database (Release 2020_05; 651,914 entries), also assuming Trypsin digestion and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and Glu->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, ammonia-loss of the N-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the N-terminus as variable modifications. Protein identification The Scaffold software v.5.0.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.02% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (2) with Scaffold delta-mass correction, whereas protein identifications were accepted at a minimum 99% probability (protein Decoy FDR of 0.2%) by the Protein Prophet algorithm (3), containing at least four peptides. The MS/MS data of fish samples from the same trial (e.g., OC) were merged into one single Scaffold file for further statistical and bioinformatics analyses, comprising 4 fish into triplicate tanks (n=12) for each experimental group (n=3) in that trial, in a total of 36 MS/MS runs/trial. Experimental groups were established as follows 1) in the OC trial: OC Control, OC30, OC45; 2) in the NET Trial: NET Control, NET2, NET4; 3) in the HYP trial: HYP Control, HYP30 and HYP15. A total of 108 MS/MS runs were performed (36 fish samples x 3 trials). Proteins containing similar peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein abundance was estimated based on TOP3 Precursor Intensity. Normalized values (against the sum of all ion intensities in each sample replicate) were further corrected due to batch effect of 2 independent sets of proteins identified at different times. Protein abundances were then log10 transformed prior to statistical analysis to ensure a Gaussian distribution of the residuals. The residuals’ normality and homoscedasticity were confirmed using the IBM SPSS Statistics software v.25.0. One-way ANOVA (p < 0.05) of proteomics data were performed in the Perseus software (4), including only proteins quantified in at least 8 out of 12 replicates per challenging condition/group. (2) Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. Empirical Statistical Model To Estimate the Accuracy of Peptide Identifications Made by MS/MS and Database Search. Anal. Chem. 2002, 74 (20), 5383–5392. (3) Nesvizhskii, A.I.; Keller, A.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R. A Statistical Model for Identifying Proteins by Tandem Mass Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75 (17), 4646–4658. (4) Tyanova, S.; Temu, T.; Sinitcyn, P.; Carlson, A.; Hein, M.Y.; Geiger, T., Mann, M.; Cox, J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 731–740.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Welfare, Predictive modeling, Gilthead seabream, Stress

### Affiliations
Universidade Algarve
University of Algarve

### Submitter
Ana Paula Farinha

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Miguel Leal Rodrigues
University of Algarve


