### Accession
PXD010250

### Title
Tolerant Coxiella burnetii survives doxycycline stress: Proteomics reveals crucial mechanisms

### Description
Coxiella burnetii is an intracellular pathogen that causes Q fever, a zoonotic disease found worldwide. In humans, the bacterium is responsible for an acute and chronic disease. It is transmitted to humans by the inhalation of aerosols or contaminated dust containing bacteria from infected livestock. Recently C. burnetii re-emerged in Europe making considerable economic impact in farming industry and even causing multiple human cases. Antibiotic resistance represents a global public health problem; moreover, there are few reports about doxycycline resistance in C. burnetii. Understanding drug application consequences in tolerant bacterial strains is indispensable for the effective therapy. Herein, we report changes in proteome of C. burnetii challenged by antibiotic stress, highlighting polypeptides likely involved in the detoxification of doxycycline. These data were corroborated by gene expression analysis. Based on the identities of differentially abundant proteins we suggest that homeostasis of bacterial surface, oxidative stress defense and balanced carbon metabolism are key processes to survive doxycycline treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The tolerant C. burnetii Henzerling RSA 331 in phase II used in this study was obtained by repetitive passages in embryonated hen's eggs in presence of increasing doses of chlortetracycline. Cultures were incubated in vented 75 cm3 culture flask filled to 50 ml with medium at 37°C in a 2.5% O2 and 5% CO2 atmosphere using Galaxy-170R incubator (New Brunswick Scientific). The cell lysis was performed using the AllPrep RNA/prot kit (Quiagen), which allows to isolate RNA and proteins from the same sample, following the manufacture’s recommendations. Protein two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was done according to the standard protocol. The excised gel spots were trypsinized. The peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using nanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters) and Q-TOF Premier (Waters). The data were recorded in the MSE mode (parallel high and low energy traces without precursor ion selection).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the ProteinLynx Global Server v. 3.0 (Waters). Spectra were searched against C. burnetii RSA493 full proteome (1812 sequences) downloaded from UniProt in October 2016. Accepted peptide scores were equal or higher then 6.00 – 95% identification confidence threshold. Protein hits with two or more matched peptides were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Antibiotic resistance is a global threat with a top concern in healthcare. Doxycycline is an antibiotic highly permeable to cell membrane used for treating a broad variety of bacteria, including Coxiella burnetii. This intracellular pathogen is the causative agent of Q fever, a re-emerging zoonosis found worldwide. Hence, C. burnetii has a considerable impact on the farming industry and public health, it is essential to explore its antibiotic adaptation/tolerance strategy to ensure effective therapy. Herein, we tracked changes in the bacterium induced by doxycycline exposure. Our proteomic analysis detected fifteen significantly altered proteins. Adjustments of some key proteins were verified by gene expression analysis. We also observed an increasing in hydrogen peroxide as a consequence of treatment, indicating deregulation of redox balance. Thus, our data suggests the reduction of protein synthesis to minimal levels, activation of the defense mechanism against oxidative stress and maintenance of cell envelope integrity as the key processes ensuring C. burnetii survival under doxycycline exposure. SIGNIFICANCE: Infection by intracellular microorganisms like C. burnetii requires long periods of treatment, thus antibiotic resistance development is a risk. In this report, 2-DE quantitative proteomics was used to identify changes in the proteome that occurs when C. burnetii is exposed to high concentrations of doxycycline. The identification of pathways impacted by doxycycline could be helpful to understand the mechanism of how C. burnetii is dealing with antibiotic stress.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Axenic medium, Q fever, Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Cell envelope homeostasis, Enzymatic antioxidants

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriela Flores-Ramirez
Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences


