### Accession
PXD027773

### Title
Aging induces hepatic oxidative stress and nuclear proteomic remodelling in liver from Wistar ratAging induces hepatic oxidative stress and nuclear proteomic remodelling in liver from Wistar rats

### Description
Aging induces oxidative stress and proteome remodeling in the nucleus from liver in Wistar rats

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the liver NEF of young-mature (n=4) and aged Wistar rats (n=4), fasted for 36 hours or refed for 30 minutes before, were extracted by tissue homogenization with ceramic beads (MagNa Lyser Green Beads apparatus, Roche, Germany) in extraction buffer (50mmol/L Tris-HCl, 1mmol/L EDTA, 4% SDS, pH 8.5). The protein extracts (100 µg from each sample) were in-gel digested [1], and the resulting peptides were labelled with iTRAQ4-plex following manufacturers instructions. The labelled peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a quadrupole ion trap-orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).   1- Bonzon-Kulichenko, E., Pérez-Hernández, D., Núñez, E., Martínez-Acedo, P., Navarro, P., Trevisan-Herraz, M., Ramos, M., Sierra, S., Martínez-Martínez, S., Ruiz-Meana, M., Miró-Casas, E., García-Dorado, D., Redondo, J. M., Burgos, J. S., & Vázquez, J. (2011). A robust method for quantitative high-throughput analysis of proteomes by 18O labeling. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP, 10(1), M110.003335. https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M110.003335

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS scans were searched against a joined rat and mouse target database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, November 2011, 125669 protein sequences). Met oxidation (15.994915 Da) was set as variable modification, while Cys carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) and iTRAQ4-plex (144.102063 Da) on Lys and peptide N-terminus were used as fixed modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.03 Da; precursor charge range was set to 2-4; and 3 was the maximum fragment charge. 2 miss-cleavages were allowed and only y- and b-ions were used for scoring. SEQUEST results were analyzed using the probability ratio method [2] and false discovery rates (FDR) of peptide identifications were calculated from the search results against the inverted databases using the refined method [3, 4]. Protein abundan ce changes from MS/MS spectra of all the identified peptides with an FDR lower than 5% were analyzed using the Generic Integration Algorithm [5] on the basis of the WSPP model [6]. The biological interpretation of the results was made using the Systems Biology Triangle (SBT) as described [6]. Gene Ontology, KEGG and REACTOME data bases were used. 2: Martinez-Bartolome S, Navarro P, Martin-Maroto F, Lopez- Ferrer D, Ramos-Fernandez A, Villar M, Garcia-Ruiz JP, Vazquez J. Properties of average score distributions of SEQUEST the probability ratio method. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008; 7: 1135-1145  3: Navarro P, Vazquez J. A refined method to calculate false discovery rates for peptide identification using decoy databases. J Proteome Res. 2009; 8: 1792-1796. 4. Bonzon-Kulichenko E, Garcia-Marques F, Trevisan-Herraz M, Vazquez J. Revisiting peptide identification by highaccuracy mass spectrometry problems associated with the use of narrow mass precursor windows. J Proteome Res. 2015; 14: 700-710. 5. Navarro P, Trevisan-Herraz M, Bonzon-Kulichenko E, Nunez E, Martinez-Acedo P, Perez-Hernandez D, Jorge I, Mesa R, Calvo E, Carrascal M, Hernaez ML, Garcia F, Barcena JA, Ashman K, Abian J, Gil C, Redondo JM, Vazquez J. General statistical framework for quantitative proteomics by stable isotope labeling. J Proteome Res. 2014; 13: 1234-1247. 6. García-Marqués F, Trevisan-Herraz M, Martínez-Martínez S, Camafeita E, Jorge I, Lopez JA, Méndez-Barbero N, Méndez-Ferrer S, del Pozo MA, Ibáñez B, Andrés V, Sánchez-Madrid F, Redondo JM, Bonzon-Kulichenko E, Vázquez J. A novel systems-biology algorithm for the analysis of coordinated protein responses using quantitative proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016; 15: 1740-1760

### Publication Abstract
Aging is a continuous, universal, and irreversible process that determines progressive loss of adaptability. The liver is a critical organ that supports digestion, metabolism, immunity, detoxification, vitamin storage, and hormone signaling. Nevertheless, the relationship between aging and the development of liver diseases remains elusive. In fact, although prolonged fasting in adult rodents and humans delays the onset of the disease and increases longevity, whether prolonged fasting could exert adverse effects in old organisms remains incompletely understood. In this work, we aimed to characterize the oxidative stress and nuclear proteome in the liver of 3-month- and 24-month-old male Wistar rats upon 36 h of fasting and its adaptation in response to 30 min of refeeding. To this end, we analyzed the hepatic lipid peroxidation levels (TBARS) and the expression levels of genes associated with fat metabolism and oxidative stress during aging. In addition, to gain a better insight into the molecular and cellular processes that characterize the liver of old rats, the hepatic nuclear proteome was also evaluated by isobaric tag quantitation (iTRAQ) mass spectrometry-based proteomics. In old rats, aging combined with prolonged fasting had great impact on lipid peroxidation in the liver that was associated with a marked downregulation of antioxidant genes (<i>Sod2</i>, <i>Fmo3</i>, and <i>Cyp2C11</i>) compared to young rats. Besides, our proteomic study revealed that RNA splicing is the hepatic nuclear biological process markedly affected by aging and this modification persists upon refeeding. Our results suggest that aged-induced changes in the nuclear proteome could affect processes associated with the adaptative response to refeeding after prolonged fasting, such as those involved in the defense against oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress nuclear liver wistar rat lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
cnic

### Submitter
Elena Bonzon-Kulichenko

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez
cnic


