### Accession
PXD042226

### Title
Identify HILPS-interacting proteins and HIF1a phosphorylation sites

### Description
To dissect the molecular mechanisms of HILPS in promoting cell survival under hypoxia, we conducted RNA pull-down assay in combination with mass spectrometry analysis to identify HILPS-interacting proteins. Pull-down of antisense HILPS was used as a negative control. To identify the potential phosphorylation site(s), we conducted the in vitro kinase assay in combination with mass spectrometry analysis using PLK1-T210D, recombinant GST-HIF1a and cold ATP. A kinase assay using PLK1-K82R was included as a control.

### Sample Protocol
To determine HILPS-associated proteins, biotinylated RNA pull-down samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Gel slices including all proteins were excised. To identify HIF1a phosphorylation sites, kinases (PLK1 T210D or K82R) and GST-HIF1a were incubated in the kinase buffer together with 200 mM cold ATP at 30°C for 1 h. Reaction was stopped by addition of SDS loading buffer, followed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining. Gel bands corresponding to GST-HIF1a were excised.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in the Protein Chemistry Facility, Center of Biomedical Analysis at Tsinghua University. Briefly, proteins were treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol and 11 mM iodoacetamide, followed by gel digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were separated by silica capillary column and eluted at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min with the UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was set in the data-dependent acquisition mode by Xcalibur 2.2 software. We then mapped the MS/MS spectra from each run with the protein sequence from UniProt using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version PD1.4).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
Wuhan University

### Submitter
Zhi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Guoliang Qing
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China


