### Accession
PXD020092

### Title
Identification of brain metastasis vulnerabilities using METPlatform

### Description
Exclusion of cancer patients with brain metastases from clinical trials is a major cause of the limited therapeutic options available for secondary brain tumors. Here, we report a novel drug-screening platform (METPlatform) based on organotypic cultures that allows identifying anti-metastatic compounds in a preparation that includes the tumor microenvironment. By applying this approach to brain metastasis, we identified HSP90 as a promising therapeutic target. A blood-brain barrier permeable HSP90 inhibitor showed high potency against mouse and human brain metastases from melanoma, lung and breast adenocarcinoma with distinct oncogenomic profiles at clinically relevant stages of the disease, including a novel model of local relapse after neurosurgery. Furthermore, in situ proteomic analysis of brain metastases treated with the chaperone inhibitor revealed non-canonical clients of HSP90 as potential novel mediators of brain metastasis and actionable mechanisms of resistance driven by autophagy. Our work validates METPlatform as a potent resource for metastasis research integrating drug-screening and unbiased omic approaches that is fully compatible with human samples. We envision that METPlatform could be established as a clinically relevant strategy to personalize the management of metastatic disease in the brain and elsewhere.

### Sample Protocol
Fixed organotypic cultures were embedded in paraffin. 10 µm sections were placed on PET-membrane slides (415190-9051-000, Zeiss) pretreated with UV light. Slides were stained for 5 min in hematoxylin solution and 30 sec in eosin solution, and were left unmounted. Fully established brain metastases were isolated using the ArcturusXT™ Laser Capture Microdissection System (Thermo Scientific) and Arcturus® CapSure® Macro LCM Caps (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Each dissection was validated by inspection of the cap and the sample. At least 12 brain metastases per biological sample were dissected. Dissected samples were processed using the commercially available in-StageTip-NHS kit (PreOmics GmbH) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptides were dissolved in HPLCgrade water containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Randomization  22 for sample run order was applied and the samples were individually analyzed using shot-gun liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a high accuracy Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Acquity M nanoflow system (Waters GmbH). Samples were analyzed using 120 minutes gradient, top12 loop count, mass range 350 to 1500 m/z and an Acquity UPLC® M class 250 mm x 75 µM column.

### Data Protocol
All raw files from LC-MS/MS were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,373 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Then, the “proteinGroups.txt” file was loaded in Prostar (v1.14) (Wieczorek et al., 2017) for further statistical analysis. Briefly, global normalization across samples was performed using the LOESS function and missing values were imputed using the algorithms slsa (for partially observed values) and detquantile (for values missing on an entire condition). Differential analysis was done using the empirical bayes statistics limma. Proteins with a p.value <0.05 and a log2 ratio >1 or <-1 were defined as deregulated. The FDR was estimated to be 14 % by Benjamini-Hochberg. Functional analysis was performed with the GSEApreranked function (biocarta, canonical pathways, GO, KEGG, OncogenicSignatures, Reactome, TFs) using the log2 ratios as the input file to identify top 25 upregulated and downregulated signatures defined by NES values, FDR<25% and P<0.01.

### Publication Abstract
We report a medium-throughput drug-screening platform (METPlatform) based on organotypic cultures that allows to evaluate inhibitors against metastases growing in&#xa0;situ. By applying this approach to the unmet clinical need of brain metastasis, we identified several vulnerabilities. Among them, a blood-brain barrier permeable HSP90 inhibitor showed high potency against mouse and human brain metastases at clinically relevant stages of the disease, including a novel model of local relapse after neurosurgery. Furthermore, in&#xa0;situ proteomic analysis applied to metastases treated with the chaperone inhibitor uncovered a novel molecular program in brain metastasis, which includes biomarkers of poor prognosis and actionable mechanisms of resistance. Our&#xa0;work validates METPlatform as a potent resource for metastasis research integrating drug-screening and unbiased omic approaches that is compatible with human samples. Thus, this clinically relevant strategy is aimed to personalize the management of metastatic disease in the brain and elsewhere.

### Keywords
In situ proteomics, Brain metastasis, Metplatform

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
CNIO

### Submitter
Javier Munoz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


