### Accession
PXD007706

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Global Proteome in Aspergillus Flavus

### Description
In total, 4,563 protein groups were identified, among which 4128 proteins were quantified. The fold-change cutoff was set when proteins with quantitative ratios above 1.5 or below 1/1.5 are deemed significant. The bioinformatic analyses of protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment and cluster analyses were performed as listed below. For detailed information, please read the following report and the attached supplementary data.

### Sample Protocol
3.1.2. Protein Extraction Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. The protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 4 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 3.1.3. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 200 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. 3.1.4. TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 1 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.   Table 7. Labeling information Sampling Groups Labeling Information WT-1 126 WT-2 127 WT-3 128 ΔLaeA-rep1 129 ΔLaeA-rep2 130 ΔLaeA-rep3 131  3.1.5. HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.      3.2. Quantitative Proteomic Analysis by LC-MS/MS 3.2.1. Materials and Reagents Name Company H2O Thermo ACN (acetonitrile) Fisher Chemical FA (formic acid) Fluka Mass Spectrometer:  Thermo ScientificTM Q ExactiveTM  3.2.2. LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 4% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 22% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 320 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the Orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot Aspergillus Flavus database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. For protein quantification method, TMT 6-plex was selected in Mascot. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
In Aspergillus flavus, laeA affects cell morphology and contributes to the production of secondary metabolites (SMs) production including aflatoxin, cyclopiazonic acid, and aflatrem. Here, we investigated the function of this transcription factor by performing proteomics analysis of the wild-type (WT) and &#x394;laeA mutant growing on corn. Notably, our proteomics profile confirmed the functions of extracellular hydrolases, conidial hydrophobin, and response to oxidative stress during the induction of aflatoxin biosynthesis regulated by laeA. Unexpectedly, deletion of laeA resulted in the significant upregulation of the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent histone deacetylase sirA involved in silencing SM clusters via chromatin remodeling. Accompanying the chromatin modification, enzymes participating in SM, including aflatoxin and cyclopiazonic acid biosynthesis, were drastically decreased. Another unexpected finding was that enzymes in the recently identified ustiloxin B biosynthesis pathway might be regulated by laeA. These data provided novel insights into the complex regulation of laeA and suggested a potential link between laeA deletion, NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent histone deacetylation, and SM production in A. flavus.

### Keywords
Proteome aspergilus flavus tmt

### Affiliations
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China
company

### Submitter
Jones Macke

### Lab Head
Dr Jones macke
College of Biological Engineering, Henan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, China


