### Accession
PXD029003

### Title
Development of a novel minimally invasive sampling and analysis technique for bioarchaeological proteomics

### Description
Here we present the development of a novel minimally invasive sample preparation technique for application in the mass spectrometric analysis of bioarchaeological materials. The extraction protocol was developed by applying commercially available, dermatology grade skin sampling strips to modern skin surfaces as a surrogate, and then applied to cranial and bone fragments belonging to a 26th Dynasty Egyptian mummified individual from the coffin of a woman named Mer-Neith-it-es. Extracted proteins were subjected to electrophoretic separation and proteolytic digestion, resulting in peptides that were separated, fragmented and identified using nanoflow liquid chromatography - high resolution tandem mass spectrometry. We have identified a number of ancient brain and intracellular proteins on the surfaces of the various cranial and bone fragments, without causing any significant damage to these valuable remains.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Samples were collected by applying D-Squame D100 sampling strips (22mm diameter; CuDerm Corporation, Texas, USA) to the surface of the sample site. These samples include a modern forearm, as well as cranial and bone fragments belonging to the remains of Mer-Neith-it-es. Strips were applied to both the endo- and ectocranial surfaces of the cranial fragments, the buccolabial and lingual surfaces of the mandible (hereafter referred to as the interior and exterior surfaces, respectively), as well as a long bone believed to be the humeral shaft. Three strips were applied in adjacent areas and combined for protein extraction. A total of nine sampling strips were applied to the humeral shaft due to the length of the bone. Strips were applied to the uncleaned bone surfaces with gentle uniform pressure for 10 seconds, then removed and stored in fresh 1.5mL microcentrifuge tubes.  Extraction of proteins from sampling strips Laboratory work was conducted according to established guidelines for ancient protein work, namely the use of nitrile gloves and sterilised equipment, analysis of analytical  and procedural blanks, and the use of a sterilised laminar flow hood to minimise exogenous laboratory contamination. The extraction protocol was adapted from Clausen et al. (2016) with some modifications. Each strip or set of strips was transferred to fresh 1.5mL microcentrifuge tubes and covered with 1mL phosphate buffered saline (PBS), then bath sonicated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh 15mL falcon tube and 9mL of ice-cold acetone was added, before precipitating at -20ºC for two hours. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 minutes; supernatant was discarded, and pellet was left to briefly air-dry. A procedural blank was prepared by removing a set of five sampling strips from the packaging and immediately placing it in a new 1.5mL microcentrifuge tube for analysis as described herein.   SDS-PAGE of strip extracts Protein pellets were resuspended in 50µL 2x SDS loading buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS, 0.2% bromophenol blue, 20% glycerol, 200mM dithiothreitol), then heated to 95ºC for 5 minutes with agitation. Proteins were separated on a precast SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad 10% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™, 10 x 50µL wells) at 100V for one hour, along with 10µL of protein marker (Bio-Rad, Precision Plus Unstained Marker). Proteins were visualised for ease of handling using colloidal Coomassie blue staining and sample lanes were excised and divided into 8 equal fractions for further analysis.   Trypsin in-gel digestion SDS-PAGE gel fractions were finely chopped and transferred to 1.5mL microcentrifuge tubes and washed briefly with 200μL of 100mM NH4HCO3 before destaining by washing three times with 200μL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/ 50mM NH4HCO3 for 10 minutes and dehydrating with 100% ACN. The samples were briefly left to air-dry and then reduced with 50μL of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature for 1 hour. DTT solution was removed and replaced with 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM NH4HCO3 and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 1 hour. Gel pieces were then washed once with 100μL of 100mM NH4HCO3 for 10 minutes, twice with 200μL of 50% ACN/ 50mM NH4HCO3, then dehydrated with 100% ACN and air-dried. Samples were then rehydrated with 30μL of 10ng/μL trypsin (Promega, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin) in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 4ºC for 30 minutes before overnight digestion at 37ºC. After digestion, peptides were extracted using 30μL of 50% ACN/ 2% formic acid (FA) (Mass Spectrometry grade, Fluka Analytical), then repeated twice more, once with 70% ACN/ 2% FA, then 90% ACN/ 2% FA. Extracts were combined and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge then reconstituted in 10μL of 1% FA for analysis by nanoflow liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry.   NanoLC-MS/MS of peptide extracts Extractecd peptides were analysed using a Thermo Q-Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Easy-nLC1000 system. Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was conducted using a C18 HALO column (2.7μm bead size, 160Å pore size) of 75μm internal diameter x 75mm length. A linear gradient of 1-50% solvent A (0.1% FA) to solvent B (99.9% ACN/0.1% FA) was developed over 60 minutes. Data-dependent acquisition mode was configured to automatically switch from Orbitrap MS to MS/MS mode. Spectra were acquired from a m/z range of 350 to 1600 amu with a resolution of 35,000 and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z. The ten most abundant ions were then selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% normalised HCD collision energy, with dynamic exclusion of target ions set for 20 seconds. Fragmentation ions were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral files were converted to mzXML format and peptide to spectrum matching was performed using the X! Tandem algorithm running under the Global Proteome Machine (GPM) interface software (version 3.0, freely available from https://www.thegpm.org/) (Jones, et al., 2016). The files were searched against the SwissProt Human Protein database (downloaded January 2019, 20,329 proteins) and the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database which includes common laboratory contaminants and protein standards used in mass spectrometry. The search parameters were set as follows: Orbitrap method including ±20ppm parent ion mass tolerance, fragment ion mass tolerance of ±0.1Da, trypsin selected as digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages, fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and variable modifications including oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, hydroxyproline, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine. Spectra were also searched against a reversed sequence database for evaluation of false discovery rates (FDR). Each of the eight fractions of each sample were processed in sequential order then merged to generate an output file for each fraction and a merged sample output file. A protein expectation score log(e) cut-off value of -3 was applied to each output file to ensure a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) value of <1%. A second GPM search was conducted on the mzXML files against the total curated SwissProt protein database (downloaded April 2020, 562878 proteins) in order to identify proteins from potential biodeteriogens (Demarchi, et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioarchaeology; human; proteomics; minimally invasive sampling; mass spectrometry; lc-msms

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Haynes Lab, Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Australia

### Submitter
Dylan Multari

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Andrew Haynes
Haynes Lab, Department of Molecular Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Australia


