### Accession
PXD014272

### Title
Ariadne’s Thread in the Analytical Labyrinth of Membrane Proteins – Integration of Targeted and Shotgun Proteomics for Global Absolute Quantification of Membrane Proteins

### Description
The field of systems biology has been rapidly increasing in the past decade. However, the data produced by “omics” approaches is lagging behind the requirements of this field, especially when it comes to absolute abundances of membrane proteins. In the present study, a novel approach for large-scale absolute quantification of this challenging subset of proteins has been established and evaluated using osmotic stress management in the Gram-positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis as proof of principle precedent. Selected membrane proteins were labelled using a SNAP-tag, which allowed to visually inspect the enrichment of the membrane fraction by immunoassays. Absolute membrane protein concentrations were determined via shotgun proteomics by spiking crude membrane extracts of chromosomally SNAP-tagged and wild-type B. subtilis strains with protein standards of known concentration. Shotgun data was subsequently calibrated by targeted mass spectrometry using SNAP as an anchor protein, and an enrichment factor was calculated in order to obtain membrane protein copy numbers/µm2. The presented approach enabled the accurate determination of physiological changes resulting from imposed hyperosmotic stress, thereby offering a clear visualization of alterations in membrane protein arrangements and shedding light on putative membrane complexes. This straightforward and cost-effective methodology for quantitative proteome studies can be implemented by any research group with mass-spectrometry expertise. Importantly, it can be applied to the full spectrum of physiologically relevant conditions, ranging from environmental stresses to the biotechnological production of small molecules and proteins, which relies heavily on B. subtilis.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun MS Analysis. Digested protein mixture (0.75 μg) was separated on an Easy nLC 1200 coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 μm, o.d. 360 μm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.0 μm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) were first loaded and subsequently eluted with 12 μL of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a maximum pressure of 400 bar. For LC-MS/MS analysis, elution of peptides took place with a nonlinear 166 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Spectra for the eluting peptides were recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of R= 60,000 with lockmass correction activated. After acquisition of the Full-MS spectra, up to 20 dependent scans (MS/MS) according to precursor intensity were performed in the linear ion trap after collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID). Targeted MS Analysis. Prior to LC-MS analysis, a transition list of the SNAP protein was generated and optimized in order to keep only the six highest peak areas per peptide. After this selection, collision energies were optimized for each of these transitions and the final transition list was generated (Supporting Information Table S-4). Known amounts of the digested pure SNAP protein (New England Biolabs) (0.001 – 10 pmol on column) were used to generate a calibration curve and subsequently calculate absolute amounts of S5 native SNAP on the chromosomally tagged strains, for both whole cell and crude membrane extracts. Digested protein mixture of whole cell and membrane extract (0.75 μg) was separated on an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (TSQ Vantage, Thermo Scientific) operated in nano-electrospray mode. Peptide separation was carried out using in-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 μm, o.d. 360 μm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.0 μm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) and applying a nonlinear 81 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. For ionization 2400 V of spray voltage and 240 °C capillary temperature were used. The selectivity for both Q1 and Q3 were set to 0.7 Da (FWHM). The collision gas pressure of Q2 was set at 1.2 mTorr. TSQ Vantage was operated in SRM mode followed by data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
LC/MS Data Analysis of Shotgun MS and Global Absolute Quantification of Membrane Proteins. For data processing and protein identification, raw data were imported into MaxQuant (1.6.3.3)13 incorporated with an Andromeda search engine, and processed via the iBAQ algorithm. Database searches were carried out against a reversed B. subtilis 168 database with manually added SNAP and UPS2 sequences and with common contaminants added by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with the following parameters: peptide tolerance: default; min fragment ions matches per peptide: 1; match between runs was enabled with default settings; primary digest reagent: trypsin; missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl C (+57.0215); and variable modifications: oxidation M (+15.9949), acetylation N, K (+42.0106). Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on spectrum, peptide and protein levels. All identification and quantitation data are summarized in the Supporting Information (Table S-3). Only proteins quantified in four out of six biological replicates were considered for further analysis.  LC/MS Data Analysis of Targeted MS and Absolute Quantification of Native SNAP. Raw files were processed using Skyline 4.2 (MacCoss Lab Software). Based on the added amount of purified SNAP protein, the absolute amount of native SNAP protein in both measured fractions was calculated. Absolute protein abundances derived from selected reaction monitoring (SRM) were compared to shotgun MS absolute protein abundances and a correction factor was obtained by calculating a ratio between the targeted and the shotgun average concentration of native SNAP. In addition, an enrichment factor was attained by calculating the ratio between the median value of native SNAP in the membrane and total cell extract fraction. This value allowed the subsequent calculation of protein copy numbers per total surface area (molecules/µm2), as it accurately provides the percentage of enrichment of the hydrophobic fraction and, thus, allows to calculate back to the natural form of the membrane protein in the cell prior to enrichment. A final transition list for the SNAP protein is provided in the Supporting Information (Table S-4).

### Publication Abstract
The field of systems biology has been rapidly developing in the past decade. However, the data produced by "omics" approaches is lagging behind the requirements of this field, especially when it comes to absolute abundances of membrane proteins. In the present study, a novel approach for large-scale absolute quantification of this challenging subset of proteins has been established and evaluated using osmotic stress management in the Gram-positive model bacterium <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> as proof-of-principle precedent. Selected membrane proteins were labeled using a SNAP-tag, which allowed us to visually inspect the enrichment of the membrane fraction by immunoassays. Absolute membrane protein concentrations were determined via shotgun proteomics by spiking crude membrane extracts of chromosomally SNAP-tagged and wild-type <i>B. subtilis</i> strains with protein standards of known concentration. Shotgun data was subsequently calibrated by targeted mass spectrometry using SNAP as an anchor protein, and an enrichment factor was calculated in order to obtain membrane protein copy numbers per square micrometer. The presented approach enabled the accurate determination of physiological changes resulting from imposed hyperosmotic stress, thereby offering a clear visualization of alterations in membrane protein arrangements and shedding light on putative membrane complexes. This straightforward and cost-effective methodology for quantitative proteome studies can be implemented by any research group with mass spectrometry expertise. Importantly, it can be applied to the full spectrum of physiologically relevant conditions, ranging from environmental stresses to the biotechnological production of small molecules and proteins, a field heavily relying on <i>B. subtilis</i> secretion capabilities.

### Keywords
Snap-tag, Shotgun-ms, Bacillus subtilis, Targeted-ms, Absolute quantification, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald phone: +49 3834 420 5903 fax: +49 3834 420 5902
Institute of Microbiology University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Minia Antelo

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald Center of Functional Genomics of Microbes Institute of Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Felix-Hausdorff-Str.8 17489 Greifswald phone: +49 3834 420 5903 fax: +49 3834 420 5902


