### Accession
PXD006115

### Title
Proteomics identification of regulated proteins during cardyomyocyte differentiation

### Description
The rat cardio-myoblast cell line H9C2 has emerged as an important tool for studying cardiac development and toxicology. We present here a rigorous proteomic analysis that for the first time studied changes of proteins during H9C2 differentiation into cardiomyocyte-like cells over time. Quantitative mass spectrometry followed by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed early changes in protein pathways that enable cardiac muscle morphogenesis/contraction and suggested an involvement of proteins relevant to sphingolipid synthesis. This early differentiation was followed by differentiation-induced alterations in cation transport and beta-oxidation at later time points. Applying a two-way ANOVA to study the temporal profile of H9C2 differentiation in further detail revealed eight clusters of co-regulated proteins that could be associated to early, late, continuous and transient up- and downregulation. Subsequent Reactome pathway analysis based on these eight clusters further corroborated and detailed the results of the GO analysis. Specifically, this analysis confirmed proteins related to pathways in muscle contraction as early and transiently upregulated, and proteins relevant to ECM matrix organization as early downregulated, while changes related to cardiac metabolism occurred at later time points. Our results are in line with a ‘function follows form’ model of differentiation, whereby early and transient changes of cellular morphology enable subsequent changes that are relevant for the characteristic physiology of cardiac cells.

### Sample Protocol
H9C2 cells were washed twice with PBS and scrapped in lysis buffer (8 M urea; 20 mM HEPES; phosphostop) after 0, 6, 8 or 13 days of differentiation. For each time point, triplicate samples were prepared. Lysates were sonicated with 3 bursts of 15 s and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by a BCA assay and from each replicate, equal protein amounts were used for further analysis. Proteins were reduced by adding 4.5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Proteins were alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and the proteins were digested with 2 µg endoLysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 hours at room temperature. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on a SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge (Agilent) and from each replicate 100 µg vacuum dried peptides were used for LC-MS/MS analysis (D0 vs. D6 analysis) or strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation (D0 vs. D8 vs D13 analysis). For SCX fractionation, SCX tips were made by stacking 3 discs (1.5 mm diameter) of polystyrene divinylbenzene copolymer with sulfonic acid (EmporeTM, 3M) in a 200 µl pipette tip. First, the SCX tips were rinsed with 100 µl acetonitrile (ACN) by pipetting the solvent in the tip, flicking the tip so the ACN touches the discs, and pushing the solvent through with a syringe. Then, each sample was dissolved in 100 µl loading buffer (1% TFA in water/ACN (95:5, v/v)) and peptides were loaded on the SCX tips. After washing the tips with 50 µl loading buffer, the peptides were fractionated by subsequently pipetting up and down 20 µl of the following fractionation buffers: 100 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% FA (fraction 1); 175 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% formic acid (FA) (fraction 2); 375 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% FA (fraction 3). Remaining peptides were eluted in 2 x 20 µl of elution buffer (5% NH4OH in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)) (fraction 4). To prevent deamidation in this fraction, 2 µl 10% FA was added. Fractionated peptides were dried by vacuum drying.  Peptides were dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in trapping solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm trapping column (5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 400 mm, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 150 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10 minutes wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 (non-fractionated samples) or 13,000 (fractionated samples) were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms (non-fractionated samples) or 80 ms (fractionated samples). MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the Rattus norvegicus proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of April 2015 containing 9,535 rat protein sequences) as well as the Uniprot/TrEMBL database (database release version of April 2015 containing 27,867 rat protein sequences) downloaded from www.uniprot.org. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification, while a minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, t-tests were performed (FDR=0.01 and S0=1) for pairwise comparison of selected time points (D0 vs. D6 and D8 vs. D13). Furthermore, to reveal proteins of which the expression level was strongly affected during the differentiation process in the fractionation analysis, sample groups were defined based on differentiation (D0 vs. D8+D13) and differentiation time (D0 vs. D8 vs. D13) and a two-way ANOVA test was performed to compare the intensities of the proteins in the differentiation group with the differentiation time group. For each protein, this test calculated a p-value for differentiation and a p-value for differentiation time. This analysis revealed 843 significantly regulated proteins with a p-value < 0.05 in at least one of both groups. The intensities of these proteins were depicted in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical row clustering.

### Publication Abstract
The rat cardiomyoblast cell line H9C2 has emerged as a valuable tool for studying cardiac development, mechanisms of disease and toxicology. We present here a rigorous proteomic analysis that monitored the changes in protein expression during differentiation of H9C2 cells into cardiomyocyte-like cells over time. Quantitative mass spectrometry followed by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed that early changes in H9C2 differentiation are related to protein pathways of cardiac muscle morphogenesis and sphingolipid synthesis. These changes in the proteome were followed later in the differentiation time-course by alterations in the expression of proteins involved in cation transport and beta-oxidation. Studying the temporal profile of the H9C2 proteome during differentiation in further detail revealed eight clusters of co-regulated proteins that can be associated with early, late, continuous and transient up- and downregulation. Subsequent reactome pathway analysis based on these eight clusters further corroborated and detailed the results of the GO analysis. Specifically, this analysis confirmed that proteins related to pathways in muscle contraction are upregulated early and transiently, and proteins relevant to extracellular matrix organization are downregulated early. In contrast, upregulation of proteins related to cardiac metabolism occurs at later time points. Finally, independent validation of the proteomics results by immunoblotting confirmed hereto unknown regulators of cardiac structure and ionic metabolism. Our results are consistent with a 'function follows form' model of differentiation, whereby early and transient alterations of structural proteins enable subsequent changes that are relevant to the characteristic physiology of cardiomyocytes.

### Keywords
Labelfree shotgun proteomics, Rattus norvegicus, Cardiac development, H9c2 cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Systems Theory and Automatic Control, Institute for Automation Engineering (IFAT), Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Huber
Laboratory for Systems Theory and Automatic Control, Institute for Automation Engineering (IFAT), Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany


