### Accession
PXD025936

### Title
The termite fungal cultivar Termitomyces combines diverse enzymes and oxidative reactions for plant biomass conversion

### Description
Macrotermitine termites have domesticated fungi in the genus Termitomycesas their primary food source using predigested plant biomass. To access the full nutritional value of lignin-enriched plant biomass, the termite-fungus symbiosis requires the depolymerization of this complex phenolic polymer. While most previous work suggests that lignocellulose degradation is accomplished predominantly by the fungal cultivar, our current understanding of the underlying biomolecular mechanisms remains rudimentary. Here, we provide conclusive omics and activity-based evidence that Termitomyces employs not only a broad array of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) but also a restricted set of oxidizing enzymes (manganese peroxidase, dye decolorization peroxidase, an unspecific peroxygenase, laccases, and aryl-alcohol oxidases) and Fenton chemistry for biomass degradation. We propose for the first time that Termitomyces induces hydroquinone-mediated Fenton chemistry using a herein newly described 2-methoxy-1,4-dihy-droxybenzene (2-MH2Q, compound 19)-based electron shuttle system to complement the enzymatic degradation pathways. This study provides a comprehensive depiction of how efficient biomass degradation by means of this ancient insect’s agricultural symbiosis is accomplished.

### Sample Protocol
Termitomyces  sp.  T153  was  cultured  in  Potato-Dextrose  broth  (25  mL)  for  12 days  (20°C,  150  rpm). Secreted enzymes of Termitomyces culture supernatants, were prepared in two different buffer systems (NaOAc,  pH  4.5; KH2PO4,pH 6.5). Secreted proteins were enriched by solid phase extraction (SPE) using Supelclean LC-4 SPE tubes (Supelco): Samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH2. SPE columns were reconstituted with each 4 ml acetonitrile (ACN), equilibrated with 0.1% TFA, samples were loaded, and columns were washed with 0.1% TFA in 95:5 (v/v) water/methanol. Proteins were eluted with 0.1% TFA (v/v) in 20:80 water/ACN and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Subsequently proteins were resolubilized in 100 µl 100 mM TEAB mixed 1:1 with trifluoroethanol. Cystein thiols were reduced and alkylated in one step using final concentrations of 10mM TCEP and 12.5mM 2-chloroacetamide at 70°C for 30 min (500 rpm) incubation. Proteins were precipitated by the MeOH/chloroform/water method of Wessel and Flügge 1984 (Anal Biochem 138(1):141-143). Proteins were resolubilized in 100 mM TEAB and digested overnight (18h) at 37°C after addition of trypsin/LysC protease mix (Promega) at a ratio of 1:25 (enzyme:protein). Tryptic peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator, resolubilized in 30 µl of 0.05% TFA in 98:2 (v/v) water/ACN and filtered through 10kDa modified PES MWCO spin filters (VWR) at 14000g for 15 min. LC-MS/MS  analysis  was  performed  on  an Ultimate  3000  nano  RSLC  system  connected  to  a QExactive  Plus  mass  spectrometer  (both  Thermo Fisher  Scientific,  Waltham,  MA,  USA). Peptides were trapped for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm) at 5 μl/min followed by gradient elution separation on an Acclaim Pep Map RSLC column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm). Eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) was mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) as follows: 0-5 min at 4% B, 30 min at 7% B, 60 min at 10% B, 100 min at 15% B, 140 min at 25% B, 180 min at 45% B, 200 min at 65% B, 210-215 min at 96% B, 215.1–240 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter and a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The QExactive Plus was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 (Top10) mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300–1500 at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half-maximum (FWHM) using a maximum injection time (ITmax) of 120 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. Precursor ions with a charge state of z = 2–5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 1.6 amu for HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (NCE). MS2 ions were scanned at 17,500 FWHM (ITmax = 100 ms, AGC = 2e5). Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was set to 30 s. The LC–MS/MS instrument was controlled by QExactive Tune 2.9 and Xcalibur 3.0 (with Chromeleon Xpress) software.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database of Termitomyces sp. J132 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000053712; 2019/11/26, using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 (Thermo) and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT (version of PD2.2) and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Met oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for positive protein hits at both peptide and protein level. The Percolator node of PD2.2 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top-scored proteins were counted. Furthermore, only those proteins were included that reached either a Mascot score of >30, an MS Amanda score of >300 or a Sequest score >4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Termitomyces, Symbiosis, Biodegradation, Metabolites, Lignocellulose, Lignin degradation, Redox chemistry, Redox proteins, Secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany


