### Accession
PXD006908

### Title
DeltaFBA shotgun Francicella -  The metabolic enzyme fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase acts as a transcriptional regulator in pathogenic Francisella

### Description
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, a ubiquitous metabolic enzyme with regulatory functions in pathogenic Francisella

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion. FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) procedure for protein digestion was performed as previously described (Lipecka et al., 2016), using 30 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Microcon, Millipore, Cat No MRCF0R030). Briefly, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 2% final) was added to 30 µg of each lysate to increase solubility of the proteins, in a final volume of 120 µL. Proteins were reduced with 0.1 M dithiotreitol (DTT) for 30min at 60°C, then applied to the filters, mixed with 200 µL of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 (UA buffer) and finally centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 x g. In order to remove detergents and DTT, the filters were washed twice with 200 µl of UA buffer. Alkylation was carried out by incubation for 20 min in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Filters were then washed twice with 100 µl of UA buffer (15,000 x g for 15 min) followed by two washes with 100 µl of ABC buffer (15,000 x g for 10 min) to remove urea. All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:30 ratio and digestion was achieved by overnight incubation at 37°C.  NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification. Samples were vacuum dried, and resuspended in 30 µL of 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, for LC-MS/MS. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Thermo Scienfitic). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (10 min). At 131 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 30 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec duration. Three replicates of each sample were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing following nanoLC-MS/MS acquisition. The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the NCBI F. tularensis subsp. novicida database (release 28-04-2014, 1719 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008); protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.0.31) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org  (Tyanova et al., 2016). For statistical comparison, we set three groups, each containing biological triplicate. Each sample was run in technical triplicates as well. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 2 valid values out 3 in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, p<0.01, S0=1. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmic scaled LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
The enzyme fructose-bisphosphate aldolase occupies a central position in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis pathways. Beyond its housekeeping role in metabolism, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase has been involved in additional functions and is considered as a potential target for drug development against pathogenic bacteria. Here, we address the role of fructose-bisphosphate aldolase in the bacterial pathogen Francisella novicida. We demonstrate that fructose-bisphosphate aldolase is important for bacterial multiplication in macrophages in the presence of gluconeogenic substrates. In addition, we unravel a direct role of this metabolic enzyme in transcription regulation of genes katG and rpoA, encoding catalase and an RNA polymerase subunit, respectively. We propose a model in which fructose-bisphosphate aldolase participates in the control of host redox homeostasis and the inflammatory immune response.The enzyme fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) plays central roles in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Here, Ziveri et al. show that FBA of the pathogen Francisella novicida acts, in addition, as a transcriptional regulator and is important for bacterial multiplication in macrophages.

### Keywords
Francisella

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Necker Proteomics, SFR Necker, INSERM US24, Paris, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Necker Proteomics, SFR Necker, INSERM US24, Paris, France


