### Accession
PXD004548

### Title
Transcriptional control of lysosomal homeostasis by the disease-related CLN3 membrane protein

### Description
CLN3 is a type II transmembrane protein localized in the late endosomal/lysosomal compartment. A deficiency of CLN3 leads to the development of a certain type of Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis, a neurodegenerative disorder of childhood caused by aggregation of undegraded material in the lysosomal compartment. Cultured, immortalized wild type and Cln3(Δex7/8) cerebellar granule cells were used in this project to determine the influence of Cln3 deficiency on the proteome of the lysosomal compartment. For this purpose, cells were labelled by stable amino acid labelling in cell culture and lysosomes were isolated by magnetic beads.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of lysosomal fractions with magnetic beads For the isolation of lysosomes, cells were seeded with a density of 5 × 105 cells/cm2 in SILAC DMEM with 10 % FBS, 24 mM KCl, 200 µg/ml Geneticin, 110 mg/l Sodium Pyruvate and 10% magnetite particles (Liquids Research Ltd.) for 24 hours. Medium contained either light or heavy labeled lysine (Lys/ Lys(13C6) 181.2 mg/l).   The magnetic medium was removed and after three washing steps with PBS, heavy and light fresh medium was added for a 36 hour chase time, respectively. After this, cells were cooled on ice, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and the scraped and resuspended in buffer A (10 mM HEPES, 250 mM Sucrose, 15 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgAc, 1mM CaCl2 and 1 mM DTT). Light and heavy labeled cells were mixed and homogenized with a dounce homogenizer (tight pestle). Nuclei and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 1000 x g. A Miltenyi LS magnetic column was placed in a MACS Separator and equilibrated with 1 ml 0.5 % BSA in PBS. The postnuclear supernatant (PNS) was loaded onto the column, which was then allowed to empty by gravity flow and subsequently, a 10 min DNAse treatment with 10 U/1 ml Dnase 1 of buffer A was performed. The column was then removed from the MACS Separator and the lysosomes were eluted with 2 x 500 µl of buffer A.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry The lysosomal eluate was concentrated in Amicon Centrifugal Filters at 14000 x g and 4 x SDS-sample buffer (250 mM Tris, 8 % (w/v) SDS, 40 % (v/v) glycerol, 10 % (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 0.004 % (w/v) bromophenol blue) was added. After an incubation at 95 °C for 5 min, samples were cooled to RT and alkylation was performed by adding 1 % acrylamide and incubating the samples for 30 min at RT. The sample was separated by 10 % SDS-PAGE, the gel was then washed twice in HPLC water and stained with Coomassie Blue for one hour. After destaining the gel with destilled water, the eluate band profile was divided into 10 fragments.  Slices were excised and subjected to tryptic in gel digestion. In brief, slices were washed consecutively with water, 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and 100% ACN. Proteins were reduced with 20 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (in 50 mM bicarbonate). The slices were washed again and dehydrated with ACN. Dried slices were incubated with 400 ng sequencing grade trypsin at 37°C overnight. The peptide extract was separated and remaining peptides extracted with 50% ACN. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C. LC-MS analysis  Peptides were dissolved in 8 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. 1.5 µl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter) coupled to a C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter), made in house with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 4% to 40% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) within 60 min at a flow rate of 320 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Ions between 330 and 1800 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 30,000 (maximum fill time 400 ms, AGC target 106). The 25 most intense precursor ions (threshold intensity 5000) were subjected to collision induced dissociation and fragments analyzed in the linear ion trap. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in house Mascot server version 2.4 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against mouse sequences from SwissProt (release 2014_01). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 8 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were searched with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification (Cys). Oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-terminus), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), and 13C6 (Lys) were set as dynamic modifications. . Mascot results from searches against SwissProt were sent to the percolator algorithm[1] version 2.04 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra without high confident peptide match were sent to a second round of search with semi-tryptic specificity and phosphorylation as dynamic modification (Ser, Thr, Tyr). Only proteins with two peptides (maximum posterior error probability 1%) were considered identified.  [1] Kall, L., Storey, J.D., MacCoss, M.J., and Noble, W.S. (2008). Assigning significance to peptides identified by tandem mass spectrometry using decoy databases. J Proteome Res 7, 29-34. Data processing protocol The Proteome discoverer output was filtered for only unique used PSMs. For each Replicate, the median intensity was computed for all peptides for their corresponding  protein group accession.  Protein group intensities of  all Replicates were than combined into a feature table (2971 unique protein groups across all Replicates).  Proteins were excluded with only one Replicate support, leading to 2025 unique protein groups. The data was log2 transformed and median normalized to variance stabilize the data, allowing to apply statistical testing of differentially expressed features with the Null-hypothesis assumption that all proteins are equally distributed/expressed in the data. (Median normalization: per Sample subtraction of median intensity of all proteins intensities.) Statistical analysis was performed with the R package limma [1] applied on the protein heavy to light ratios. The applicability of this method on mass spectrometry data is described in [2]. Corrected p-values were computed with the R package qvalue [3] for false discovery rate estimation, using the p-values obtained from the limma output. All data processing steps are implemented in Perl and R scripts. [1] Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth G. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 2015;43 (preprint: http://www.statsci.org/smyth/pubs/limmaPreprint.pdf) [2] Schwämmle V, León IR, Jensen ON. Assessment and improvement of statistical tools for comparative proteomics analysis of sparse data sets with few experimental replicates. J Proteome Res 2013;12(9):3874-3883. [3] Storey JD. A direct approach to false discovery rates. J R Stat Soc B 2002;64,479-498.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Cerbellar cells, Lysosomal storage disease

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Section Biochemistry, Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Braulke
Section Biochemistry, Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


