### Accession
PXD033777

### Title
Proteotypic peptides for SARS-CoV-2 variant detection

### Description
The recent SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant presented significant challenges to the global effort to counter the pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 is predicted to remain prevalent in the coming months, making the ability to identify SARS-CoV-2 variants imperative in understanding and controlling the pandemic. The predominant variant discovery method, genome sequencing, is time-consuming, insensitive, and expensive. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) offers an exciting alternative detection modality provided that variant-containing peptide markers become well-established. This study demonstrates the potential to establish SARS-CoV-2 peptide markers by examining amino-acid variant-containing tryptic peptides, their MS fragmentation intensities, and their detection sensitivity in MS experiments. We have synthesized model tryptic peptides from of SARS-CoV-2 variants beta, gamma, delta, and omicron and evaluated their signal intensity, HCD spectra, and reverse phase retention time.

### Sample Protocol
Data-dependent analysis was performed with Exploris 240 mass spectrometer coupled with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The initial analysis of the individual peptides (data shown in Table 1) were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile, 0.2% acetic acid, and 0.05% HFBA and separated by Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC Column 75 µm x 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% Formic acid in water and 0.1% Formic acid in acetonitrile as A and B mobile phases. Sample (1 μL) was loaded containing 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.0125, and 0.00625 pmol with one replicate . The gradient was as follows: 1% B from 0-2 min, 1-12% B from 2-4, 12-60% B from 4-19 min, 60-80% B from 19-20 min, and 80% from 20-23 min at the flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The stainless-steel emitter was induced with 2.2 kV and the ion transfer tube temperature was 280oC. The MS1 full scan range was m/z 380-2010 with a resolution of 120,000-240,000. The MS/MS was acquired with a resolution of 240,000. The six selected model peptides (data shown in Table 2 and Figure 1) were constituted in 4% acetonitrile, 0.2% acetic acid, and 0.005% HFBA and separated by ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 100 mm (Waters) using 0.1% Formic acid in water and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water as A and B mobile phases. Sample (1 μL) was loaded containing 0.2, 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.0125, and 0.00625 pmol. The gradient was as follows: 1% B from 0-2 min, 1-35% B from 2-5 min, 35-70% B from 5-15 min, 70-80% B from 15-15.5 min, and 80-95% B from 15.5-22 min, 95% B from 22-31 min at the flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. In addition, the six selected model peptides were analyzed further create a calibration curve and to determine the LODs. Here, an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC Column 75 µm x 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% Formic acid in water and 0.1% Formic acid in acetonitrile as A and B mobile phases. Sample (1 μL) was loaded containing 6250, 3125, 1562.5, 781.25, 390.625, 195.313, 65.104, and 21.701 amol. The gradient was as follows: 1% B from 0-2 min, 1-8% B from 2-4 min, 4-12% B from 8-17.5 min, 17.5-50% B from 12-13 min, and 50-80% from 13-19 min, 80% from 19-25 min at the flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The experiments were performed with 5 replicates for each loading amount. An electrospray voltage of 2.2-2.8 kV was applied to the fused silica emitter and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 325oC. The MS1 full scan range was m/z 400-1600 with automatic gain control (AGC) target set at 300% and a resolution of 120,000. The top five scans were selected with MIPs (Monoisotopic Precursor Selection), intensity threshold of 5,000, potential charge state of 2-6, and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. The MS/MS spectra were acquired with an AGC target set at 50% and a resolution of 15,000. The isolation window was 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MetaMorpheus 0.0.320 (Smith research group, University of Wisconsin-Madison) for peptide identification with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and product mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant presented significant challenges to the global effort to counter the pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 is predicted to remain prevalent for the foreseeable future, making the ability to identify SARS-CoV-2 variants imperative in understanding and controlling the pandemic. The predominant variant discovery method, genome sequencing, is time-consuming, insensitive, and expensive. Ultraperformance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS) offers an exciting alternative detection modality provided that variant-containing peptide markers are sufficiently detectable from their tandem mass spectra (MS/MS). We have synthesized model tryptic peptides of SARS-CoV-2 variants alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and omicron and evaluated their signal intensity, HCD spectra, and reverse phase retention time. Detection limits of 781, 781, 65, and 65 amol are obtained for the molecular ions of the proteotypic peptides, beta (QIAPGQTGNIADYNYK), gamma (TQLPSAYTNSFTR), delta (VGGNYNYR), and omicron (TLVKQLSSK), from neat solutions. These detection limits are on par with the detection limits of a previously reported proteotypic peptide from the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, HTPINLVR. This study demonstrates the potential to differentiate SARS-CoV-2 variants through their proteotypic peptides with an approach that is broadly applicable across a wide range of pathogens.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lcms

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania 

### Submitter
Kantaphon Suddhapas

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Timperman
University of Pennsylvania


