### Accession
PXD018218

### Title
Causal integration of multi-omics data with prior knowledge to generate mechanistic hypotheses

### Description
The integration of multi-omic data sets can provide unique information about molecular processes in a cell. Despite the development of many tools to extract information from such data sets, there are limited strategies to systematically extract mechanistic hypotheses from them. We here present COSMOS (Causal Oriented Search of Multi-Omic Space), a method that integrates cell signaling pathways, transcriptional, and metabolics data sets. COSMOS leverages extensive prior knowledge of interactions between biomolecules with computational methods to estimate activities of transcription factors and kinases as well as network-level causal reasoning. COSMOS can provide mechanistic explanations for experimental observations across multiple omic data sets. We applied COSMOS to a dataset comprising transcriptomic, phosphoproteomic, and metabolomic data from nine renal cell carcinoma patients comparing healthy non affected kidney tissue and kidney cancer. We used COSMOS to generate novel hypotheses such as the impact of CDK7 on nucleoside metabolism and its influence on citrulline production, that we validated experimentally. We expect that our freely available method will be broadly useful to extract mechanistic insights from multi-omic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen tissues were heat-inactivated by Denator treatment and homogenized in 6M GndCl buffer. In-solution digestion was performed and peptides were desalted on Sep-paks. The samples were TMT-labeled and following mixing, phosphorylated peptides were enriched with two sequential steps of TiO2 beads. Phosphopeptides were fractionated using high pH reversed phase separation and concatenated into 12 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed with a 60 min gradient on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument using 45,000 resolution in MS2 mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.17 with settings specified in the manuscript

### Publication Abstract
Multi-omics datasets can provide molecular insights beyond the sum of individual omics. Various tools have been recently developed to integrate such datasets, but there are limited strategies to systematically extract mechanistic hypotheses from them. Here, we present COSMOS (Causal Oriented Search of Multi-Omics Space), a method that integrates phosphoproteomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics datasets. COSMOS combines extensive prior knowledge of signaling, metabolic, and gene regulatory networks with computational methods to estimate activities of transcription factors and kinases as well as network-level causal reasoning. COSMOS provides mechanistic hypotheses for experimental observations across multi-omics datasets. We applied COSMOS to a dataset comprising transcriptomics, phosphoproteomics, and metabolomics data from healthy and cancerous tissue from eleven clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) patients. COSMOS was able to capture relevant crosstalks within and between multiple omics layers, such as known ccRCC drug targets. We expect that our freely available method will be broadly useful to extract mechanistic insights from multi-omics studies.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Q exactive hf-x, Kidney

### Affiliations
Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Dorte Bekker-Jensen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


