### Accession
PXD010676

### Title
Mechanical force induces rapid phosphorylation-dependent signaling in Xenopus embryos

### Description
We inegrated quantitative phosphoproteome, proteome, a tergeted MS analysis, in conjunction with pathway perturbation to obtain a global view of the mechano-responses of embryonic tissues. This study provides mechanistic insights into mechanical force sensing pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos were lysed with a 0.3% Triton X-100 lysis buffer. The lysates were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetoamide, followed by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The proteins were digested with trypsin and phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2 resin.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were compared with protein sequence in Xenopus laevis Xenbase genome assembly (v9.1) and common contaminants with the use of the SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 Matched spectra were evaluated by Percolator for FDR calculation based on reverse sequence database searches. The PtmRS node was used to determine phosphosite localization. The Minora feature detector node was used to detect chromatographic peaks and features for label-free MS1 quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Xenopus laevis, Lc-ms/ms, Mechanosensing

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA

### Submitter
Yutaka Hashimoto

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, USA


