### Accession
PXD035978

### Title
Campylobacter jejuni MOMP carbene footprinting

### Description
Using carbene footprinting, we map the MOMP-QPLEX interaction and show by complementary in silico docking that QPLEX enters the porin channel through interactions at the extracellular face, translocates down the channel through a dipole transverse electric field towards the opposite end and is released into the periplasm at the intracellular face of MOMP. Our studies suggest a potential mechanism for the non-antibiotic anti-Campylobacter activity of these ferric chelates.

### Sample Protocol
Native MOMP was extracted and purified directly from C. jejuni NCTC11168 cells using a MonoQ HR anion exchange column (GE Healthcare), and verified by Western blots. Protein was carbene footprinted with 4-(3-Trifluoromethyl)-3H-diazirin-3-yl)benzoic acid in the presence and absence QPLEX ligand. Carbene labelled proteins were purified and visualized by SDS PAGE. Gel pieces were excised, destained and digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin prior to LC-MS(-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed with DDA data using SearchGUI and PeptideShaker. DDA experiments were searched against a FASTA database consisting of the C. jejuni (strain 11168) reference proteome: UP000000799 and common contaminants proteins (cRAP), with the signal peptide removed from the MOMP sequence (P80672). Searches were performed with the X!Tandem search engine (Vengeance) via SearchGUI (v4.1.11) with variable methionine oxidation, deamidation and protein N-terminal processing (methionine loss and/or acetylation). Peptide-level carbene footprinting was quantified using PepFoot (v1.2, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00238) from MS1-level data. MOMP protein lacking the signal-peptide was examined with a m/z tolerance of 0.02. The quality of peptide assignments was determined by isotope distribution fitting and mass accuracy; where possible peptide previously identified by DDA were selected.

### Publication Abstract
Ferric chelates like ferric tyrosinate (TYPLEX) and the closely related ferric quinate (QPLEX) are structural mimics of bacterial siderophores. TYPLEX has been trialled as a feed additive in farming of commercial broilers, reducing Campylobacter loads by 2-3 log<sub>10</sub> and leading to faster growth and better feed consumption. These ferric chelates offer a good alternative feed additive to antibiotics helping to reduce the indiscriminate use of preventative antibiotics in broiler farming to control Campylobacter infections. In this study, we show that QPLEX binds to the Major Outer Membrane Protein (MOMP) of <i>C. jejuni</i> NCTC11168. MOMP is an essential and abundant outer membrane porin on the surface of the bacteria, acting as an adhesin to help establish infection by mediating attachment of <i>C. jejuni</i> onto the gut epithelium of broilers and establish infection. Using carbene footprinting, we map the MOMP-QPLEX interaction and show by complementary <i>in silico</i> docking that QPLEX enters the porin channel through interactions at the extracellular face, translocates down the channel through a dipole transverse electric field towards the opposite end and is released into the periplasm at the intracellular face of MOMP. Our studies suggest a potential mechanism for the non-antibiotic anti-Campylobacter activity of these ferric chelates.

### Keywords
Carbene footprinting, Lc-ms/ms, Campylobacter jejuni

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Jeddidiah Bellamy-Carter

### Lab Head
Dr Neil J. Oldham
University of Nottingham


