### Accession
PXD034184

### Title
Improved Profiling of Low Molecular Weight Serum Proteome for Gastric Carcinoma by Data-independent Acquisition

### Description
Low molecular weight proteins (LMWPs) in the bloodstream participate in various biological processes and are closely associated with disease status, whereas identification of serous LMWPs remains a great technical challenge due to the wide dynamic range of protein components. In this study, we constructed an integrated LMWPs library by combining the LMWPs obtained by three enrichment methods (50% ACN, 20% ACN+20 mM ABC, and 30 kDa) and their fractions identified by data dependent acquisition method. With this newly constructed library, we comprehensively profiled LMWPs in serum using data-independent acquisition and reliably achieved quantitative results for 75% serous LMWPs. When applying this strategy to quantify LMWPs in human serum samples, we could identify 405 proteins on average per sample, of which 136 proteins were less than 30 kDa and 293 proteins were less than 65 kDa. Of note, pre- and post-operative gastric carcinoma (GC) patients showed differentially expressed serous LWMPs, which was also different from the pattern of LWMPs expression in healthy controls. In conclusion, our results showed that LMWPs could efficiently distinguish GC patients from healthy controls as well as between pre- and post- operative statuses, and more importantly, our newly developed LMWPs profiling platform could be used to discover candidate LMWPs biomarkers for disease diagnosis and status monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation For optimization of sample preparation method, modified acetonitrile (ACN) precipitation methods and centrifugal ultrafiltration approach were compared.  50% ACN Precipitation. The 50% ACN precipitation procedure was performed as previously described18, 20. Briefly, 50 μL of serum was diluted with 150 μL of deionized water and precipitated by addition of ACN to a final concentration of 50% (v/v) at 4 °C for 1 h. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected as LMWPs and lyophilized for further MS analysis. 20% ACN +25 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) Precipitation. 50 μL serum was diluted to 1:4 with 200 μL 20% ACN (v/v) in 25 mM ABC buffer (pH = 8.0) and vortexed for 10 s to disrupt the protein-peptide interactions. Then, 480 μL ice-cold ACN was added to precipitate large and abundant proteins at 4 °C for 1 h and then centrifuged at 3000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C. The subsequent procedures were the same as preparing 50% ACN precipitation23. Centrifugal Ultrafiltration. Centrifugal ultrafiltration-based enrichment of LMWPs from serum was performed with a 30 kDa MWCO filter according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 50 μL of serum was diluted with 450 μL of 2% ACN (v/v) with formic acid (FA) at 0.1% (v/v). After vortexing, the diluted serum sample was added to the ultrafiltration device and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The flowthrough was collected as LMWP fractions and lyophilized for further MS analysis. Sample Preparation for LC-MS/MS After quantified by BCA assay, all the enriched LMWPs were diluted with 50 mM ABC buffer containing 8 M urea (pH = 8.0) at a concentration of 1 μg/μL. A 25 μL aliquot of each LMWP solution was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37 °C followed by alkylation in 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for another 1 h. After that, urea concentration was reduced to 1 M by the addition of 50 mM ABC and 1 mM CaCl2. For digestion, trypsin was added with 1:25 (Wtrypsin/Wprotein) ratio and incubated at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
DDA Analysis DDA analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a homemade 20 cm column (100 μm i.d.) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 Å C18 resins 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) with mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The separation gradient was 0 min, 3% B; 2 min, 7% B; 52 min, 22% B; 62 min, 35% B; 64 min, 90% B; 80 min, 90% B. The DDA method consisted of a full MS scan over m/z range of 350-1550 at a resolution of 120,000 in the orbitrap mass analyzer followed by data dependent MS/MS scans with a top speed method (3 s). MS/MS was carried out in the orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 15,000 using an isolation window of 1.6 Da and high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The DDA data was searched using the Sequest HT node integrated in the Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (V.1.4, Thermo Scientific). The Homo sapiens fasta database (74,449 entries, downloaded from Uniprot on Sep 29, 2019) appended with iRT peptides sequence was used. Trypsin enzyme specificity was set, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. Mass tolerances for the precursor and fragment were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as dynamic modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as static modification. Peptide spectrum matches were validated using percolator node at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Label-free quantification analysis was performed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.2.8) with default settings. The same protein sequence database and same modification parameters were used as the PD search. The FDR was controlled as 1% for both peptide spectrum matches and proteins.  Generation of LMWPs Spectral Library Generation of high-quality spectral library that contains MS coordinate information for targeted data extraction is an important step for DIA experiments. For generation of comprehensive LMWPs specific library, the pooled sample that was achieved by mixing an aliquot of all samples was processed with different enriched methods and analyzed by DDA in three technical replicates as shown in Fig.1a. The other three pooled serum samples achieved by mixing one aliquot of blood collected from Ctrl, GC-BS or GC-AS, respectively, were analyzed in two ways as follows: 1) the samples were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase fractionation into 5 fractions and each fraction were analyzed by DDA; 2) the unfractionated samples were measured with DDA in three technical replicates. All the 33 DDA raw data were searched together by PD software, and the results were imported into Spectronaut 14.9 (Biognosys) for library generation with default settings. Fragment ions were selected over m/z range of 300 to 1800, fragments per peptide were restricted from 3 to 6. The FDR was controlled as 1% for both peptides and proteins. The generated library consisted of 629 protein groups, 5297 peptides, 7593 modified peptides, and 63,608 fragment ions.  DIA Acquisition and Data Analysis The DIA acquisition was carried out with the same instrument system and chromatograph conditions as DDA. DIA was performed with variable isolation windows specifically for LMWPs serum proteome samples. Notably, this variable window list was established based on the precursor m/z distribution according to the criteria of averaging precursor ion number in each isolation window (SI Table S2). The DIA method includes a full MS scan and 30 DIA scans with the following settings: MS1 scan range m/z 350-1550; MS1 resolution, 60,000; DIA scan resolution, 30,000; fragmentation type, HCD; NCE, 30%. DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut 14.9 with default settings as follows: peak detection, dynamic iRT; correction factor, 1; interference correction, enabled; cross run normalization, enabled; quantity MS-level, MS2; quantity type, Area. Protein inference was performed with the ID picker algorithm in Spectronaut. The FDR cutoff value was set as 1% for both peptide and protein levels.  Bioinformatics GO terms for biological process, cellular component, and molecular function, KEGG pathway and hierarchical clustering analysis of proteomics data were processed on the Wukong data analysis platform (https://www.omicsolution.com/wkomics/main/). To characterize the dynamic range of identified LMWPs, the absolute concentration values of protein were retrieved from the PaxDb database (http://www.plasmaproteomedatabase.org/)24. Noteworthy information was that we calculated the average protein concentration for proteins with several reported absolute concentrations. Other data visualization was done with GraphPad Prism version 7 or Origin 9.0.

### Publication Abstract
Low molecular weight proteins (LMWPs) in the bloodstream participate in various biological processes and are closely associated with disease status, whereas identification of serous LMWPs remains a great technical challenge due to the wide dynamic range of protein components. In this study, we constructed an integrated LMWP library by combining the LMWPs obtained by three enrichment methods (50% ACN, 20% ACN&#x2009;+&#x2009;20&#xa0;mM ABC, and 30&#xa0;kDa) and their fractions identified by the data-dependent acquisition method. With this newly constructed library, we comprehensively profiled LMWPs in serum using data-independent acquisition and reliably achieved quantitative results for 75% serous LMWPs. When applying this strategy to quantify LMWPs in human serum samples, we could identify 405 proteins on average per sample, of which 136 proteins were with a MW less than 30&#xa0;kDa and 293 proteins were with a MW less than 65&#xa0;kDa. Of note, pre- and post-operative gastric carcinoma (GC) patients showed differentially expressed serous LWMPs, which was also different from the pattern of LWMP expression in healthy controls. In conclusion, our results showed that LMWPs could efficiently distinguish GC patients from healthy controls as well as between pre- and post-operative statuses, and more importantly, our newly developed LMWP profiling platform could be used to discover candidate LMWP biomarkers for disease diagnosis and status monitoring.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Gastric carcinoma (gc), Mass spectrometer, Data-independent acquisition (dia), Low molecular weight proteins (lmwps)

### Affiliations
the First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Weifeng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Weifeng Li
the First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University


