### Accession
PXD034806

### Title
The human milk proteome: exploring associations with allergy of mother and child

### Description
The aim of this study was to investigate how the human milk proteome relates to allergy of the mother and allergy development in the infant.

### Sample Protocol
Human milk samples were thawed at 4°C and centrifuged at 10,000*g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The skimmed milk was centrifuged another time at 1,000*g for 10 minutes at 4°C, and the remaining lipids were removed. The protein concentration was determined with a bicinchonic acid (BCA) assay, and skimmed milk samples were diluted in 100 mM Tris to 1 µg/µL protein. To 100 µL diluted milk sample, a final concentration of 15 mM dithiothreitol was added and subsequently incubated at 45°C for 30 minutes. After this, urea was added to the sample to a final concentration of 6M. Next, 20 mM acrylamide was added, after which incubation took place for 10 min at room temperature. From this alkylated protein sample, 180 µL, containing 36 µg protein, was transferred to a Pall 3K omega filter (10–20 kDa cutoff, OD003C34; Pall, Washington, NY, USA), and the samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 min. Next, the filter was washed with a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and 100 µL 5 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin was added. Tryptic digestion took place overnight while mildly shaking at room temperature. After digestion, the filter with the tryptic peptides was centrifuged and washed with 100 µL of 1 mL/L HCOOH solution. The pH of the final peptide solution was set to around 3 using a 10% trifluoroacetic acid solution. The resulting tryptic peptides were measured by nLC - Q-Exactive HFX MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.977470.].

### Keywords
Homo sapiens; breast milk; proteomics; proteins; allergy; allergic disease; immunology

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


