### Accession
PXD036974

### Title
Mammalian oocytes store mRNAs in a mitochondria-associated membraneless compartment

### Description
Fully-grown oocytes are transcriptionally silent and must stably maintain mRNAs needed for oocyte  meiotic  maturation  and  early  embryonic  development.  However, where and how mammalian oocytes store maternal mRNAs is unclear. Here, we report that mammalian oocytes accumulate mRNAs in a mitochondria-associated ribonucleoprotein domain (MARDO). MARDO assembly around mitochondria was promoted by the RNA-binding protein ZAR1, and directed by an increase in mitochondrial membrane potential during oocyte growth. MARDO foci coalesced into hydrogel-like matrices that clustered mitochondria. Maternal mRNAs stored in the MARDO were translationally repressed. Loss of ZAR1 disrupted the MARDO, dispersed mitochondria, and caused a premature loss of MARDO-localized mRNAs. Thus, a mitochondria-associated membraneless compartment controls mitochondrial distribution and regulates maternal mRNA storage, translation and decay to ensure fertility in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis sample preparation Phosphorylated  HIS-SMT3-ZAR1(1-263)  was  denatured  with  1%  RapiGest.  Reduction  and alkylation of cysteine residues were performed using 25 mM DTT and 33 mM IAA, respectively. Proteins were then digested with Trypsin (Promega #V5111) at a 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio in 35 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 2% formic acid (FA) at 37°C for 2 h. Precipitated Rapigest was removed by centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 spin columns packed in-house as described previously (102). In brief, the column was equilibrated with buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% trifluoracetic acid (TFA)) and buffer A (5% glycerol in buffer B). Peptides were loaded onto the TiO2 column in 40 buffer A and washed several times with buffer A, B and BII (60% ACN and 0.1% TFA). Enriched phosphopeptides  were  eluted  with  0.3M  NH4OH  and  dried  in  a  speed  vac  evaporator.  Phosphopeptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.05 % TFA, and were then subjected to LC-ESI-MS/MS measurements. Identical numbers of GV oocytes were incubated at 37°C for 7 h either in medium supplemented with 10 μM RO-3306 or in medium supplemented with DMSO. Prophase arrested oocytes and in vitro matured MI oocytes were collected and resuspended in 150 μl lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 4% SDS , 2 mM DTT, and 0.5% NP-40). The cells were mechanically disrupted by a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 10 min with cycles of 30 s Off/ON at highest output level. Samples were then heated to 99°C for 10 min and diluted to 1% SDS with 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5. 500 U universal nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific #88700) and 1 mM MgCl2 were added followed by 30 min incubation at 37°C. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM DTT and 20 mM IAA, respectively. Residual IAA was quenched by adding another 5 mM DTT. Protein cleanup was performed using the SP3 method as described before (103). On-bead protein digestion and phosphopeptide enrichement were performed as described above. LC-ESI-MS/MS All peptide samples were measured on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were loaded on a Pepmap 300 C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min in buffer A (0.1% FA), and were then separated on an C18 column (30 cm; ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 1.9 μm, C18-AQ; inner diameter, 75 μm) packed in-house at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. ZAR1 phosphopeptides from the in vitro phosphorylation assay were analyzed over 58 min. A linear gradient from 10-45% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.08% FA) over 44 min was applied to elute peptides, followed by 5 min in 90% buffer B and 6 min in 5% buffer B. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent top 20 acquisition method. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120,000 and 30,000 FWHM, respectively, and AGC targets were 106 and 105. Precursors selected during MS1 scans (scan range m/z 350-1600) were fragmented using 30% normalized, higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Further MS/MS parameters were set as follows: isolation width, 1.6 m/z; dynamic exclusion, 9 sec; maximum injection times (MS1/MS2), 60 ms/120 ms.  The phosphopeptides from mouse oocytes were analyzed over 88 min. A linear gradient from 10-40% buffer B over 70 min was applied followed by 5 min in 90% buffer B and 5 min in 5% buffer B. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent top 30 acquisition method. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120,000 and 15,000 FWHM, respectively, and AGC targets were 3x106 and 5x104. Precursors (scan range m/z 350-1600) were fragmented using 28% normalized HCD fragmentation. Further MS/MS parameters were set as follows: isolation width, 1.6 m/z; dynamic exclusion, 30 sec; maximum injection times (MS1/MS2), 50 ms/54 ms. For all measurements, the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis MS  data  analysis  was  performed  using  MaxQuant  (software  version  1.6.5.0)  and  a  reviewed database  of  canonical  protein  sequences  from mus musculus  (downloaded  from  UniProt  on 09/10/21,  containing  17077  entries)  (104,   105).  For  phosphorylation  site  identification, carbamidomethylation  was  set  as  a  fixed  modification;  oxidation  of  methionine  and phosphorylation  of  serine,  threonine  and  tyrosine  were  set  as  variable  modifications.  Default settings were used apart from the above mentioned.

### Publication Abstract
Full-grown oocytes are transcriptionally silent and must stably maintain the messenger RNAs (mRNAs) needed for oocyte meiotic maturation and early embryonic development. However, where and how mammalian oocytes store maternal mRNAs is unclear. Here, we report that mammalian oocytes accumulate mRNAs in a mitochondria-associated ribonucleoprotein domain (MARDO). MARDO assembly around mitochondria was promoted by the RNA-binding protein ZAR1 and directed by an increase in mitochondrial membrane potential during oocyte growth. MARDO foci coalesced into hydrogel-like matrices that clustered mitochondria. Maternal mRNAs stored in the MARDO were translationally repressed. Loss of ZAR1 disrupted the MARDO, dispersed mitochondria, and caused a premature loss of MARDO-localized mRNAs. Thus, a mitochondria-associated membraneless compartment controls mitochondrial distribution and regulates maternal mRNA storage, translation, and decay to ensure fertility in mammals.

### Keywords
Dda, Mouse, Mrna storage, Lc-esi-ms/ms, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Department of Meiosis, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Göttingen,  Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Luisa Welp

### Lab Head
Dr Melina Schuh
Department of Meiosis, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Göttingen,  Germany


