### Accession
PXD037285

### Title
Decrypting drug actions and protein modifications by dose- and time-resolved chemical proteomics

### Description
Measuring dose-dependent effects of drugs on post-translational modifications on a proteome-wide scale reveals how these drugs work in cells.  Here, we present a quantitative chemical proteomic approach termed decryptM, able to assess target and pathway engagement as well as the mode of action (MoA) of diverse cancer drugs in cells by measuring their dose- (and time-) resolved modulation of PTMs on a proteomic scale. Data collected for 31 drugs, representing six drug classes in 13 human cell lines, demonstrate that the approach is widely applicable. The body of data represents ~1.8 million quantitative cellular drug assays (dose-response curves) including 47502 regulated p-peptides (of 124660 detected on 11982 proteins), 7316 Ubi-peptides (of 9173 detected on 3006 proteins), and 546 Ac-peptides (of 2478 detected on 1377 proteins). Most PTMs were not regulated by most drugs, which is highly valuable information for understanding which pathways are addressed (or not) by each drug in cells. The decryptM data have been incorporated into ProteomicsDB and can be explored interactively. The raw files, searches, curves files, and result PDFs can be downloaded here. For details, have a look at the Experiment_summary.xlsx.

Paper: doi/10.1126/science.ade3925

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were treated with increasing concentrations of a drug and its vehicle control(s) for various time spans, ranging from 30 minutes to 1 day. Cells were then lysed and processed in a bottom-up proteomic approach (reduced, alkylated, trypsinated), were stable-isotope labeled (TMT), and PTM-enriched. Depending on the specific post-translational modification (PTM), the order may be different. Different fractionation techniques were applied to increase peptide depth, including high-pH-RP on C18 or RPS material. PTM samples were then identified and quantified by LC/MS2 or LC/MS3.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Uniprot Human Protein Database (97086 known isoforms from Nov. 2020) using MaxQuant (v1.6.12.0) at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) level. ddPTM curves per modified peptide were fit against a 4-parameter sigmoidal curve. A set of strict filters were applied to extract regulated curves from each experiment. The set of regulated ddPTMs directly yields a potency- and effect-size-resolved fingerprint of the drug in the cell line. Second, these regulated PTMs were further analyzed to explore the mode of action of drugs and the specific responses of different cell lines.

### Publication Abstract
Although most cancer drugs modulate the activities of cellular pathways by changing posttranslational modifications (PTMs), little is known regarding the extent and the time- and dose-response characteristics of drug-regulated PTMs. In this work, we introduce a proteomic assay called decryptM that quantifies drug-PTM modulation for thousands of PTMs in cells to shed light on target engagement and drug mechanism of action. Examples range from detecting DNA damage by chemotherapeutics, to identifying drug-specific PTM signatures of kinase inhibitors, to demonstrating that rituximab kills CD20-positive B cells by overactivating B cell receptor signaling. DecryptM profiling of 31 cancer drugs in 13 cell lines demonstrates the broad applicability of the approach. The resulting 1.8 million dose-response curves are provided as an interactive molecular resource in ProteomicsDB.

### Keywords
Dose-resolved, Inhibitors, Decryptm, Proteome-wide, Post-translational modifciation, Kinase, Screen, Time-resolved, Hdac, Drug mode of action, Kat

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Florian P Bayer

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich


