### Accession
PXD002467

### Title
Integrated Transcriptome and Proteome Analyses Reveal Organ-Specific Proteome Deterioration in Old Rats

### Description
Aging is associated with the decline of protein, cell, and organ function. Here, we use an integrated approach to characterize gene expression, bulk translation, and cell biology in the brains and livers of young and old rats. We identify 468 differences in protein abundance between young and old animals. The majority are a consequence of altered translation output, that is, the combined effect of changes in transcript abundance and translation efficiency. In addition, we identify 130 proteins whose overall abundance remains unchanged but whose sub-cellular localization, phosphorylation state, or splice-form varies. While some protein-level differences appear to be a generic property of the rats’ chronological age, the majority are specific to one organ. These may be a consequence of the organ’s physiology or the chronological age of the cells within the tissue. Taken together, our study provides an initial view of the proteome at the molecular, sub-cellular, and organ level in young and old rats. The corresponding dataset in Gene Expression Omnibus is <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE66715">GSE66715</a>.

### Sample Protocol
Liver and brain nuclei were purified according to previously described protocols (Blobel and Potter, 1966; Lovtrup-Rein and McEwen, 1966). Further fractionation was based on previous descriptions (Toyama et al., 2013). Briefly, nuclei pellets were resuspended in corresponding nuclei purification buffers, and the supernatant was saved for further fractionation (S1). Mitochondria-enriched fractions were achieved by diluting nuclei pellet supernatants (S1) 5x in corresponding nuclei purification buffers with no sucrose and spinning at 13,000x g for 15 min. Supernatants (S2) were saved for future fractionation, and pellets were washed again with nuclei purification buffer and spun 13,000x g for 15 min. Pellets were resuspended in nuclei purification buffer and spun at 800x g for 5 min to pellet large insoluble materials and remaining nuclei. The supernatant was taken as the mitochondria enriched fraction (pn1). Cytosolic membrane enriched fractions were achieved by taking the initial mitochondrial supernatant (S2) and spinning again at 13,000x g for 15 min to remove any remaining mitochondria. The supernatant was taken and spun at 100,000x g for 20 min. The supernatant was taken as the cytoplasmic fraction (sol) and the pellet was resuspended in nuclei purification buffer and respun at 100,000x g for 20 min.  The pellet was resuspended in nuclei purification buffer and taken as the ER-enriched fraction (pn2). Subcellular fraction samples were solubilized in 4 M urea, 0.2% (v/v) Rapigest (Waters), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate by 1 min sonication, cysteines reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37Â°C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested for 4h at 37Â°C using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals GmbH) followed by overnight incubation with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega GmbH) upon dilution of urea to 1.5 M with HPLC-grade water. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 Macro-Spin columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer instructions.  Samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 Âµm x 250 mm, 1.7 Âµm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3% and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode using a TOP-20 strategy where survey MS scans (m/z range 375-1,600) were acquired in the orbitrap (R = 30,000 FWHM) and up to 20 of the most abundant ions per full scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35, activation Q = 0.250) and analyzed in the LTQ. Ion target values were 1,000,000 (or 500 ms maximum fill time) for full scans and 10,000 (or 50 ms maximum fill time) for MS/MS scans. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count = 1, exclusion duration = 60 s, list size = 500 and mass window Â± 15 ppm. Data acquisition for phosphoproteomic analysis was performed using identical parameters with the exception of: stepwise gradient length: 115 min; TOP-15 strategy; multistage activation enabled using five phospho neutral loss masses (24.494, 32.659, 48.988, 65.318, and 97.977); ion target values MS/MS = 30,000; dynamic exclusion time = 30 s; repeat count = 2.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The search was performed using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against the Ensembl Rnor_5.0 protein database. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications, if applicable; for phosphoproteomic analysis, phosphorylation (STY) was applied as variable modification in addition; mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor ions) and 0.5 Da (fragment ions). The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007). For the quantitative label-free analysis of protein abundance, the “peptides.txt” output file of the MaxQuant search was used to calculate protein abundance scores from the summed intensities of proteotypic peptides normalized by the protein molecular weight, as described in (Ori et al., 2013). Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were retained for quantitative analysis. For phosphoproteome analysis, search results were filtered using Andromeda score >= 60, Delta score > 5 and location probability of > 0.75. Only mono-phosphorylated peptides were retained for quantitative analysis. All comparative analyses were performed using R version 3.0.1 (R Core Team, 2012). Only proteins and phosphosites quantified in at least two replicates were used for relative quantification. To reduce technical variation, data was first log2-transformed and then quantile-normalized using the preprocessCore library (Gentleman et al., 2004). Differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Smyth et al., 2005) and q values calculated using fdrtool (Strimmer, 2008). Two phosphopeptide samples (one each for nuc brain and pn2 brain) were detected as outliers by hierarchical clustering and excluded from downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with the decline of protein, cell, and organ function. Here, we use an integrated approach to characterize gene expression, bulk translation, and cell biology in the brains and livers of young and old rats. We identify 468 differences in protein abundance between young and old animals. The majority are a consequence of altered translation output, that is, the combined effect of changes in transcript abundance and translation efficiency. In addition, we identify 130 proteins whose overall abundance remains unchanged but whose sub-cellular localization, phosphorylation state, or splice-form varies. While some protein-level differences appear to be a generic property of the rats' chronological age, the majority are specific to one organ. These may be a consequence of the organ's physiology or the chronological age of the cells within the tissue. Taken together, our study provides an initial view of the proteome at the molecular, sub-cellular, and organ level in young and old rats.

### Keywords
Brain, Rat, Liver, Aging

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


