### Accession
PXD006429

### Title
PPT1 binding proteins -  The Interactome of Palmitoyl-Protein Thioesterase 1 (PPT1) Affects Neuronal Morphology and Function

### Description
Binding of proteins from mouse brain lysates to GFP-PPT1

### Sample Protocol
Binding of proteins from brain lysates to GFP-PPT1 and GFP (GFP-PPT1 and GFP were overexpressed in HEK293 and then immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP, and then incubated with brain lysates. Each brain was split to half, one half was incubated with GFP control and the other half with GFP-PPT1). Bound proteins were separated on a 12% SDS PAGE, sliced into fractions and in-gel digested with trypsin. The samples were analyzed on a nanoLC system attached to a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using Proteowizard and uploaded to Proteios Software Environment. MGF files were searched in Mascot and X!Tandem against the mouse UniProt database (version 2.3 2012). Peptide spectrum matches were combined in Proteios and filtered at a 1% peptide spectrum FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 (PPT1) is a depalmitoylation enzyme that is mutated in cases of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL). The hallmarks of the disease include progressive neurodegeneration and blindness, as well as seizures. In the current study, we identified 62 high-confident PPT1-binding proteins. These proteins included a self-interaction of PPT1, two V-type ATPases, calcium voltage-gated channels, cytoskeletal proteins and others. Pathway analysis suggested their involvement in seizures and neuronal morphology. We then proceeded to demonstrate that hippocampal neurons from <i>Ppt1-/-</i> mice exhibit structural deficits, and further investigated electrophysiology parameters in the hippocampi of mutant mice, both in brain slices and dissociated postnatal primary cultures. Our studies reveal new mechanistic features involved in the pathophysiology of this devastating neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Immunoprecipitation, Gfp-ppt1

### Affiliations
Lund University

### Submitter
Karin Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Lund University


