### Accession
PXD023528

### Title
TEST TEST Biofilm formation by the environmental and clinical contaminant Mycobacterium fortuitum causes economic losses and serious TEST TEST TEST

### Description
Biofilm formation by the environmental and clinical contaminant Mycobacterium fortuitum causes economic losses and serious threat to human health, as a consequence of its increasing contribution to nosocomial infections. There are no reports that elucidate physiological adaptations taking place during its planktonic to biofilm transition. The present study was hence carried out considering the global proteome of the mycobacterium. This is the first description of a global proteomic investigation into M. fortuitum biofilm. Scrutiny of biological functions in the two states provided insights into the phenotypic switch, and fundamental pathways associated with M. fortuitum pathobiology.

### Sample Protocol
25 microlitre samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP. These were further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt, and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).All the experiment was performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1.0 µg of the peptide mixture was resolved using 25 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 1.9 µm of C18-resin (Dr Maeisch, Germany). The peptides were loaded with buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
All samples were processed and RAW files generated were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against the Uniprot M. fortuitumreference proteome database. For SEQUEST search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pathogenesis, Mycobacterium fortuitum, Proteomics, Biofilm, Label-free

### Affiliations
EBI

### Submitter
Deepti Jaiswal Kundu

### Lab Head
Dr Deepti Jaiswal Kundu
EBI


