### Accession
PXD023355

### Title
Tolerogenic effect elicited by protein fraction derived from different formulas for dietary treatment of cow’s milk allergy in human cells

### Description
Comparative evaluation of tolerogenic effect elicited by the protein/peptide fraction of different formulas available for the dietary treatment of CMA. Peptides from digests of extensively hydrolyzed casein formula (EHCF) elicited tolerogenic effects. Peptides from EHCF and relevant digests (in vitro gastroduodenal simulated digestion with "infant" model) were charaterized by HPLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Five different commercially available formulas were analyzed: extensively hydrolyzed casein formula (EHCF), extensively hydrolyzed whey protein formula (EHWF), hydrolyzed rice formula (HRF), soy formula (SF), and amino acid-based formula (AAF). The commercially available study formulas were reconstituted in tap water according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots corresponding to 500 mg of protein fraction were subjected to an in vitro simulated infant gut digestion using a harmonized sequential gastric and duodenal static model. Immediately after duodenal incubation, the digests were centrifuged (3000 g, 15 min, 4°) and the floating lipid layer was removed. The resulting protein digests were purified using C18 reversed phase pre-packed cartridges (Sep-Pak, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Protein fractions were recovered in 70% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and finally vacuum-dried.   The protein fraction purified from three different batches of EHCF and relevant gastro-duodenal digests (EHCF_GD) were analyzed by nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Ultimate 3000 (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid qualtified with a modified micro-Lowry assay (kit from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA), and nearly 2 μg was loaded through Acclaim PepMap 100 trap columns (75μm inner diameter×2 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a FAMOS autosampler (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated with an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column (2 μm, 25 cm×75 μm) with 2μm particles and 100 Å pore size (Thermo Scientific), applying a 2−50% gradient of B over 120 min after 10 min of isocratic elution at 2% B and a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluent A was 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in LC−MS-grade water, and eluent B was 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in 80% acetonitrile. MS1 precursor spectra were acquired in the positive ionization mode, scanning the m/z 1600−200 range with a resolving power of 70 000 full width at half maximum (fwhm), an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1×106 ions, and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 120 ms. The spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, selecting up to the 10 most intense ions for MS/MS fragmentation and applying a 12 s dynamic exclusion. The fragmentation of monocharged ions was allowed, while selection of background ions was impeded with an exclusion list, which was prepared based on the peak list obtained from a blank HPLC−MS/MS analysis. Spectra were elaborated using the software Xcalibur, version3.1 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the merged replicate analyses using the Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). A home-built protein database was built with the 30 most abundant proteins of bovine milk. Database searching parameters were the following in all cases: no modification of cysteins, Met oxidation and pyroglutamic acid at the N terminus of Gln as variable modifications. “No enzyme” cleavage specificity was set-up. Mass tolerance default Andromeda values were used for the tolerance of precursor ion and MS/MS fragments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infant formulas, T regulatory cells, Mucosal immune barrier, Milk peptides, Intestinal epithelium, Infant simulated digestion.

### Affiliations
Institute of Food Sciences - National Research Council (CNR), Avellino, Italy
Institute of Food Sciences - National Research Council (CNR)

### Submitter
Gianluca Picariello

### Lab Head
Dr Gianluca Picariello
Institute of Food Sciences - National Research Council (CNR), Avellino, Italy


