### Accession
PXD007691

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of polarized RPE secretome

### Description
To investigate the impact of serine protease HtrA1 on the polarized RPE secretome.

### Sample Protocol
CCM were harvested and proteins were precipitated with 15% TCA. After trypsin digestion, samples were isotopically labeled with formaldehyde, respectively. Samples were mixed in an equal amount followed by SCX fractionized and desalted with C18 column.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 was applied to identify and quantify protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly population. Variants in the HTRA1-ARMS2 locus have been linked to increased AMD risk. In the present study we investigated the impact of elevated HtrA1 levels on the retina pigment epithelial (RPE) secretome using a polarized culture system. Upregulation of HtrA1 alters the abundance of key proteins involved in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling. Thrombospondin-1, an angiogenesis modulator, was identified as a substrate for HtrA1 using terminal amine isotope labeling of substrates in conjunction with HtrA1 specificity profiling. HtrA1 cleavage of thrombospondin-1 was further corroborated by in vitro cleavage assays and targeted proteomics together with small molecule inhibition of HtrA1. While thrombospondin-1 is anti-angiogenic, the proteolytically released N-terminal fragment promotes the formation of tube-like structure by endothelial cells. Taken together, our findings suggest a mechanism by which increased levels of HtrA1 may contribute to AMD pathogenesis. The proteomic data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier. For quantitative secretome analysis, project accession: PXD007691, username: reviewer45093@ebi.ac.uk, password: 1FUpS6Yq. For TAILS analysis, project accession: PXD007139, username: reviewer76731@ebi.ac.uk, password: sNbMp7xK.

### Keywords
Age-related macular degeneration, Rpe, Secretome, Htra1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University Freiburg

### Submitter
Chia-yi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University Freiburg


