### Accession
PXD016244

### Title
Inhibition of Collagen XI alpha 1–induced Fatty Acid Oxidation Triggers Apoptotic Cell Death in Cisplatin-Resistant Ovarian Cancer

### Description
Collagen type XI alpha 1 (COL11A1) is a novel biomarker associated with cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying how COL11A1 confers cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer are poorly understood. We identified that fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) is upregulated by COL11A1 in ovarian cancer cells and that COL11A1-driven cisplatin resistance can be abrogated by inhibition of FAO. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that COL11A1 also enhances the expression of proteins involved in fatty acid synthesis. Interestingly, COL11A1-induced upregulation of fatty acid synthesis and FAO is modulated by the same signaling molecules. We identified that binding of COL11A1 to its receptors, α1β1 integrin and discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2), activates Src-Akt-AMPK signaling to increase the expression of both fatty acid synthesis and oxidation enzymes, although DDR2 seems to be the predominant receptor. Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis downregulates FAO despite the presence of COL11A1, suggesting that fatty acid synthesis might be a driver of FAO in ovarian cancer cells. Taken together, our results suggest that COL11A1 upregulates fatty acid metabolism in ovarian cancer cells in a DDR2-Src-Akt-AMPK dependent manner. Therefore, we propose that blocking FAO might serve as a promising therapeutic target to treat ovarian cancer, particularly cisplatin-resistant recurrent ovarian cancers which typically express high levels of COL11A1.

### Sample Protocol
Gene knockdown was conducted using short-hairpin RNAs. Proteins were extracted from cell pellets using lysis buffer containing 80 mM Tris–HCl, 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, pH 7.4, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (PMID: 19377485). Samples were then labeled with the TMT6plex Reagents (Thermo Scientific) and fractionated using the poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) approach (PMID: 24487582). Peptide fractions were separated using a 50 cm EASY-Spray analytical column on an EASY nLC 1000 ultraperformance LC system and analyzed by an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4) using the SEQUEST algorithm. A stringent 1% false discovery rate was set to filter peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen type XI alpha 1 (COL11A1) is a novel biomarker associated with cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying how COL11A1 confers cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer are poorly understood. We identified that fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation (FAO) is upregulated by COL11A1 in ovarian cancer cells and that COL11A1-driven cisplatin resistance can be abrogated by inhibition of FAO. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that COL11A1 also enhances the expression of proteins involved in fatty acid synthesis. Interestingly, COL11A1-induced upregulation of fatty acid synthesis and FAO is modulated by the same signaling molecules. We identified that binding of COL11A1 to its receptors, &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;1 integrin and discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2), activates Src-Akt-AMPK signaling to increase the expression of both fatty acid synthesis and oxidation enzymes, although DDR2 seems to be the predominant receptor. Inhibition of fatty acid synthesis downregulates FAO despite the presence of COL11A1, suggesting that fatty acid synthesis might be a driver of FAO in ovarian cancer cells. Taken together, our results suggest that COL11A1 upregulates fatty acid metabolism in ovarian cancer cells in a DDR2-Src-Akt-AMPK dependent manner. Therefore, we propose that blocking FAO might serve as a promising therapeutic target to treat ovarian cancer, particularly cisplatin-resistant recurrent ovarian cancers which typically express high levels of COL11A1.

### Keywords
Proteomics; tmt; collagen; fatty acid oxidation; ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


