### Accession
PXD007837

### Title
Enrichment, proteome analysis and transplantation of human embryonic stem cell derived dopaminergic progenitors expressing LMX1a

### Description
Despite the progress in safety and efficacy of cell therapy with pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), the presence of residual undifferentiated stem cells or proliferating neural progenitor cells (NPCs) with rostral identity has remained a major challenge. Here we reported the generation of an LMX1A knock-in GFP reporter human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line that marks the early dopaminergic progenitors during neural differentiation. Purified GFP positive cells in vitro exhibited expression of mRNA and proteins that characterized and matched the midbrain dopaminergic identity. Further proteomic analysis of enriched LMX1A+ cells identified several membrane associated proteins including CNTN2, enabling prospective isolation of LMX1A+ progenitor cells. Transplantation of hPSC-derived purified CNTN2+ progenitors enhanced dopamine release from transplanted cells in the host brain and alleviated Parkinson’s disease symptoms in animal models. Our study establishes an efficient approach for purification of large numbers of hPSC-derived dopaminergic progenitors for therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicates from hESC and differentiated samples (at least 5x106 cells/sample) were used in the shotgun proteomics. Samples washed twice with 5 ml ice-cold PBS. The samples were then centrifuged at 450 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Next, we added 1 ml of the lysis buffer (Qiagen) that contained 1 unite benzonase nuclease and 10 µl of protease inhibitor (100x) to the cell precipitates, which were subsequently incubated at 4°C. Cells were disrupted by subjecting them to sonication (three times) on ice, each for 5 min (45 sec pulses with 15 sec intervals). The insoluble debris was then pelleted by centrifugation at 14000 x g at 4°C for 10 min. The protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified by the Bradford Assay Kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) using BSA as the standard. We treated the extracted proteins with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) sample buffer (160 µg per well). Proteins were separated on 12% bis-tris polyacrylamide gels at 100 V for 1 h and visualized using colloidal Coomassie blue. Finally, the gels were washed twice in water (10 min per wash) and the individual lanes were then cut into 12 slices of equal size from top to bottom.  Each stained gel lane was cut into 16 pieces. Each piece was cut again and diced into smaller pieces, then placed into individual wells of a 96-well plate. For destaining, the gel pieces were first briefly washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3, followed by washing twice with 200 µL of 50% ACN/100 mM of 50% NH4HCO3 for 20 min each time. Then, the pieces were dehydrated with 100% ACN, air-dried, and reduced with 50 µL of 10 mM DTT/NH4HCO3 (50 mM) at 37°C for 1 h. Finally, the samples were alkylated in the dark with 50 µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature for 1 h. Next, samples were briefly washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and 200 µL of 50% ACN/100 mM of 50% NH4HCO3 for 10 min, dehydrated with 100% ACN, and air-dried. Finally, samples were digested with 20 µL of trypsin (12.5 ng/µl of trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3) on ice for 30 min, then left overnight at 37°C. Peptide extractions were carried out for three times with 30 µL of 50% ACN/2% formic acid. Extracted peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted into 10 µl with 2% formic acid.  The resultant peptides from the SDS-PAGE gel slices were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using an LTQ-XL ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Fremont, CA, USA). Reversed phase columns were packed in-house to approximately 9 cm (100 μm i.d.) using 100 Å, 5 μM Zorbax C18 resin (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) and 5 µM Zorbax C18 resin (Agilent Technologies Santa Clara, CA, USA) in a fused silica capillary with an integrated electrospray tip. A 1.8 kV electrospray voltage was applied via a liquid junction upstream of the C18 column. Samples were then injected into the C18 column using a Surveyor autosampler (Thermo, Fremont, CA, USA). The column was washed with buffer A that consisted of 5% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 10 min at 1 µl/min before each loading. The peptide elution was carried out with 0–50% buffer B that consisted of 95% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v formic acid over 58 min at 500 nL min−1 followed by 50%–95% buffer B over 5 min at 500 nL min−1.  The eluted peptides were then directed into a nanospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were scanned over the range of 400–1500 amu. Automated peak recognition, dynamic exclusion window set to 90s, and tandem MS of the top six most intense precursor ions at 35% normalization collision energy were performed using Xcalibur software (version 2.06; Thermo, Fremont, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to the mzXML format using the ReAdW program and processed through Global Proteome Machine (GPM) software with version 2.1.1 of the X!Tandem algorithm (available in the public domain at: http://www.thegpm.org). For each experiment, 16 fractions were processed sequentially with output files for each individual fraction and we generated a merged, non-redundant output file for protein identification with log (e) values less than −1. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the NCBI database (RefSeq protein database that contained 99 871 sequences as of August 2013) with the search parameters that included MS and MS/MS tolerances ±2 Da or ±0.2 Da and K/R–P cleavages and allowed for up to two missed tryptic cleavages. The database contained a list of common human tryptic peptide contaminants. Fixed modifications were set for carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation. For each condition, we combined the GPM outputs from each of the three biological replicates to produce a single non-redundant/high-confidence shotgun proteomic analysis output. The final data set contained all proteins common to each of the three replicates that had a total spectral count of at least six for at least one condition. False discovery rates (FDRs) of identification were calculated using a reversed sequence decoy database: Protein FDR = (#reverse proteins identified)/(total protein identifications) × 100 and Peptide FDR = 2 × (#reverse peptide identifications)/(total peptide identifications) × 100 (Krijgsveld et al., 2006; Mirzaei et al., 2014). We used normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) as previously described by Zybailov et al. (2007) to estimate protein abundance data(Zybailov et al., 2007) For each protein k in sample i, the number of spectral counts that identified the protein were divided by the estimated protein length. The protein length was determined by dividing the molecular weight of the protein by the average amino acid molecular weight. SpCk/Length values were normalized to the total by dividing by the sum (SpCk/Lengthk) over all proteins, which yielded NSAFi values for each sample i. When plotting or summarizing the overall protein abundance for a particular condition, we use the average of the NSAF values for all replicates as a measure of protein abundance. A spectral fraction of 0.5 was initially added to all spectral counts to compensate for null values and allow for log transformation of the NSAF data prior to statistical analysis(Mirzaei et al., 2012).  Student t-tests on log-transformed NSAF data were used to determine differentially accumulated proteins. Only proteins present in all three replicates for at least one condition were included in the final data set. Proteins with t-test p-values <0.05 were considered to be significantly changed between the two conditions. Additionally, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) was also performed to identify proteins that changed in abundance among those proteins present and reproducible under all conditions. The analysis was performed on log-transformed NSAF data and proteins with an ANOVA p-value <0.05 were considered to show a significant change between the different experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the progress in safety and efficacy of cell replacement therapy with pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), the presence of residual undifferentiated stem cells or proliferating neural progenitor cells with rostral identity remains a major challenge. Here we report the generation of a LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha (LMX1A) knock-in GFP reporter human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line that marks the early dopaminergic progenitors during neural differentiation to find reliable membrane protein markers for isolation of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Purified GFP positive cells <i>in vitro</i> exhibited expression of mRNA and proteins that characterized and matched the midbrain dopaminergic identity. Further quantitative proteomics analysis of enriched LMX1A<sup>+</sup> cells identified several membrane-associated proteins including a polysialylated embryonic form of neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) and contactin 2 (CNTN2), enabling prospective isolation of LMX1A<sup>+</sup> progenitor cells. Transplantation of human-PSC-derived purified CNTN2<sup>+</sup> progenitors enhanced dopamine release from transplanted cells in the host brain and alleviated Parkinson's disease-related phenotypes in animal models. This study establishes an efficient approach for purification of large numbers of human-PSC-derived dopaminergic progenitors for therapeutic applications.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Parkinson disease, Pluripotent stem cells, Hesc

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran
macquarie university

### Submitter
Mehdi Mirzaei

### Lab Head
Dr Ghasem Hosseini Salekdeh
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran


