### Accession
PXD036611

### Title
Human complement factor 3 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Purification of native complement factor 3 from human serum and proteolytic generation of activation fragments

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis: The gel band was cut, chopped into small pieces, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel and separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Mass Spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were trapped and desalted with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 μL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 column (5 μm, 5 mm by 300-μm internal diameter (ID); Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (2 μm, 50-cm by 75-μm ID; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 65-min elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min was set to 5% phase B (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile) and 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) for the first 1 min. Then, the content of acetonitrile was increased gradually. The orbitrap mass range was set from m/z 350 to 2000, in the MS mode, and the instrument acquired fragmentation spectra for ions of m/z 100 to 2000. Intact mass measurement: Samples were diluted with 0.1% Formic acid to 0.2 mg/ml. 5 μl were injected onto a desalting column (MassPREP desalting, Waters) and desalted using a fast gradient (4 min) of acetonitrile in water with 0.1% Formic acid. The separation was carried out by an LC system (I-class, Waters) that is on-line coupled to a mass spectrometer (Synapt G2, Waters) to acquire protein masses by electrospray ionization.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification using Sequest and Amanda as search engines and databases of Homo sapiens and common contaminants. Intact mass measurement The raw spectrum was subtracted and deconvoluted (MaxEnt 1, Waters) to produce the final spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
African Trypanosomes have developed elaborate mechanisms to escape the adaptive immune response, but little is known about complement evasion particularly at the early stage of infection. Here we show that ISG65 of the human-infective parasite Trypanosoma brucei gambiense is a receptor for human complement factor C3 and its activation fragments&#xa0;and that it takes over a role in selective inhibition of the alternative pathway C5 convertase and thus abrogation of the terminal pathway. No deposition of C4b, as part of the classical and lectin pathway convertases, was detected on trypanosomes. We present the cryo-electron microscopy (EM) structures of native C3 and C3b in complex with ISG65 which reveal a set of modes of complement interaction. Based on these findings, we propose a model for receptor-ligand interactions as they occur at the plasma membrane of blood-stage trypanosomes and may facilitate innate immune escape of the parasite.

### Keywords
C3, Human serum, Complement

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, CAS
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubálek
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, CAS


