### Accession
PXD039209

### Title
Breast cancer identity is determined by glucocorticoid receptor activity status

### Description
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor with an intricate role in cancer biology. Using an in silico designed GR activity signature we show that GR is a tumor suppressor across diverse primary cancers. In breast cancer, GR activity status determines luminal identity, and importantly, relates to patients’ outcomes. We illustrate that GR suppresses tumor growth, mediated through its engagement with the estrogen receptor-α (ER). This steroid hormone receptor cross-talk leads to redistribution of ERα on chromatin, ultimately leading to expression of ZBTB16 gene. We define ZBTB16 as a transcriptional repressor and a tumor suppressor in ER-positive breast cancer. Importantly, highly aggressive ER-positive breast cancer cells displaying absence of GR activity can be eradicated if GR-induced gene repression is mimicked by inhibitors of the epigenetic pathway. In line with this, epigenetic regulators are highly expressed upon GR activity loss, leading to vulnerability of aggressive breast cancer cells to clinically available epigenetic inhibitors. Our findings indicate that GR functions as a tumor suppressor by repositioning ER to specific sites on chromatin, modulating targetable pathways, which has important implications for patients’ prognosis and therapeutic interventions.

### Sample Protocol
RIME: For mass spectrometry, peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously described [01], with the following exceptions. Peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly onto the analytical column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. For #501, peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 120-min gradient, containing a 105-min stepped increase from 7% to 34% solvent B, followed by an 15-min wash at 80% solvent B. For #522, peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 140-min gradient, containing a 115-min stepped increase from 6% to 32% solvent B, followed by an 25-min wash at 80% solvent B.  Proteome: For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl)  lysisbuffer as described by Jersie-Christensen et al [04]. Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, aliquots corresponding to 200 uG of protein were digested twice (overnight and 4h) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of FA (final concentration 5%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 2% formic acid for MS analysis.  All spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-independent mode (DIA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. For #562, Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 90-min gradient, containing a 78-min linear increase from 6% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 12-min wash at 90% solvent B. For #615, Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 70-min gradient, containing a 58-min linear increase from 7% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 12-min wash at 90% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
RIME: Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) [02] using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot Human database (#501: 20,379 entries, release 2021_01; #522: 20,375 entries, release 2021_04) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) [03], after which proteins were filtered for at least 65% valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (minimal threshold: FDR: 5% and S0: 0.1).  Proteome: Raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN (version 1.8) [05] without a spectral library and with “Deep learning” option enabled. The Swissprot human database (#562: 20,375 entries, release 2022_02; #615: 20,398 entries, release 2022_08) was added for the library-free search. The Quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) and MBR option was enabled. The other settings were kept at the default values. The protein groups report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis in Perseus (#562: version: 1.6.15.0; #615: version: 2.0.7.0))  Values were Log2-transformed, after which proteins were filtered for at least 75% valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a minimal downshift of 2. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (minimal threshold: FDR: 5% and S0: 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Zbtb16, Glucocorticoid receptor gr, Breast cancer, Estrogen receptor-alpha (er)

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
1 Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 2 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
1 Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 2 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


