### Accession
PXD006287

### Title
In culture cross-linking of bacterial cells reveals large scale dynamic protein-protein interactions at the peptide level.

### Description
Identification of dynamic protein-protein interactions at the peptide level on a proteomic scale is a challenging approach that is still in its infancy. We have developed a system to cross-link cells directly in culture with the special lysine cross-linker bis(succinimidyl)-3-azidomethyl-glutarate (BAMG). We used the Gram positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis as an exemplar system. Within 5 min extensive intracellular cross-linking was detected, while intracellular cross-linking in a Gram-negative species, Escherichia coli, was still undetectable after 30 min, in agreement with the low permeability in this organism for lipophilic compounds like BAMG. We were able to identify 82 unique inter-protein cross-linked peptides with less than a 1% false discovery rate by mass spectrometry and genome-wide data base searching. Nearly 60% of the inter-protein cross-links occur in assemblies involved in transcription and translation. Several of these interactions are new, and we identified a binding site between the δ and βʹ subunit of RNA polymerase close to the downstream DNA channel, providing a clue into how δ might regulate promoter selectivity and promote RNA polymerase recycling. Our methodology opens new avenues to investigate the functional dynamic organization of complex protein assemblies involved in bacterial growth.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo cross-linking, protein extraction, protein fractionation and protein digestion  To an exponentially growing culture of B. subtilis strain 168 (trp-) in a MOPS minimal medium supplemented with 0.2 % glucose, 1.2 mM glutamine and 0.2 mM tryptophan, was added 2 mM BAMG (bis(succinimidyl)-3-azidomethyl-glutarate). Cross-linking was for 5 min in the shaking water bath at 37°C. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by the addition of 1M Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 50 mM. Cross-linked cells were harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 4000 g and cell pellets were stored frozen at -20°C. Cells were lysed by sonication. Supernatant after centrifugation was subjected to gel filtration and proteins in the size range 400 to 2000 kDa were digested with trypsin. Digests enriched in cross-linked peptides were obtained by diagonal strong cation exchange chromatography, using reduction by TCEP of the azido group in the spacer of the cross-linker in fractions after the primary SCX run to induce the required change in chromatographic behavior in the secondary runs.   LC-MS/MS for protein identification Identification of proteins by LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides in primary SCX fractions was performed with an amaZon Speed Iontrap with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker) coupled with an EASY-nLC II (Proxeon,Thermo Scientific) chromatographic system. About 200 ng peptides from the first 12 fractions obtained by SCX chromatography were injected and separated at flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-Column 10 cm (SC 200 Thermo Scientific coupled with an SC001 2 cm precolumn) using a 30 min gradient of 0 − 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MS1 scans were recorded in enhanced mode (resolution about 3000) at an MS1 mass range m/z 400 − 1500; CID was performed in SmartFrag mode with variable energy. MS/MS scan were recorded in extreme mode in a mass window starting from m/z 100. Five precursor ions per scan cycle were selected at a mass window of m/z 4 using data-dependent acquisition with active exclusion for 30 s.   LC-MS/MS for identification of cross-linked peptides Identification of cross-linked peptides enriched by diagonal SCX chromatography by LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Eksigent Expert nanoLC 425 system connected to the Nano spray source of a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded onto an Eksigent trap column (Nano LC trap set, ChromXP C18, 120 Å, 350 µm x 0.5 mm) in a solution containing 0.1 % TFA, and 2 % acetonitrile and desalted with 3% TFA and 0.1 % formic acid at 2 µL/min. After loading, peptides were separated on an in-house packed 7 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (Magic C18 resin, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm) at 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient consisted of 5% B for 5 min, then 5-10 % B over 10 min, followed by 10-35 % B over 60 min and then the gradient was constant at 80 % B for 10 min. After each run the column was equilibrated for 20 min at starting conditions. The TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer was operated with nebulizer gas of 6 PSI, curtain gas of 30 PSI, an ion spray voltage of 2.4 kV and an interface temperature of 150°C. The instrument was operated in high sensitivity mode. For information-dependent acquisition, survey scans were acquired in 50 ms in the m/z range 400-1250 Da. In each cycle, 20 product ion scans were collected for 50 ms in the m/z range 100-1800 Da, if exceeding 100 counts per seconds and if the charge state was 3+ to 5+. Dynamic exclusion was used for half of the peak width (15s) and rolling collision energy was used.  Before acquisition of two samples the mass spectrometer was calibrated using the built-in autocalibration function of Analyst 1.7. For MS calibration, 25 fmol of β-galactosidase digest (Sciex) was injected. For TOF MS calibration, ions with the following m/z values were selected: 433.88, 450.70, 528.93, 550.28, 607.86, 671.34, 714.85 and 729.40 Da. The ion at m/z 729.4 Da was selected for fragmentation and product ions were used for TOF MS/MS calibration. For 27 out of 29 LC-MS/MS runs, average mass deviations from calculated values of identified components varied from -4.0 ± 2.4 to 15.3 ± 4.1 ppm. For data processing of MS/MS (MS1MS2) data by Reang (described below) and database searching of MS/MS (MS1MS2) data by Mascot, 25 ppm mass tolerance was allowed in these cases for both M1 and MS2. In the two remaining runs average mass deviations of identified components were 31.9 ± 12.0 and 62.5 ± 7.8 ppm, respectively. In these cases, a mass tolerances of 50 ppm and 75 ppm, respectively, was allowed for both MS1 and MS2

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data (ion trap) for protein identification Raw data were processed with the Bruker Daltonics DataAnalysis software version 4.2. The processed data from the 12 SCX fractions combined into one mgf file were searched with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 against B. subtilis strain 168 protein database from the UniProt consortium (January, 2014, release; 4244 entries in total). Trypsin was used as the enzyme, with missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification. Both peptide and MS/MS fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.3 Da. A threshold peptide ions score and a protein score of 20 were applied as criteria for peptide assignment and protein identification.  LC-MS/MS data (triple TOF) for identification of ross-linked peptides Raw LC- MS1MS2 data were processed with Mascot Distiller version 2.2.6.0 and MS2 data were deconvoluted to MH+ values at the QStar default settings using the option to calculate masses for 3+ to 6+ charged precursor ions in case the charge state could not be assessed unambiguously.  Identification of candidate cross-linked peptides For cross-link identification using the entire B. subtilis sequence database, a software tool named Reang was used for further MS1MS2 data processing. The rationale of the processing by Reang described below is based on the notion that an MS1MS2 spectrum of BAMG-cross-linked peptides provides both the information for the masses of the candidate composing peptides as well as the fragment ions for identification of the composing peptides. In brief, using mgf files as input, Reang identifies precursor ions with mass > 1500 Da, potentially corresponding to a BAMG-cross-linked peptide pair A and B with the azide reduced to an amine, showing evidence for cleavage of the cross-linked amide bonds in the presumed cross-link. Such cleavage events result in product ions of the unmodified peptides A and B and in modified peptides Am and Bm fulfilling the following mass relationships  MAm−MA = MBm−MB = 125.0477 (equation 1) MA + MBm = MAm + MB = MP (equation 2) where MAm and MBm, resp., are the masses of peptides A and B modified with the remnant m of the cross-linker in the form of a γ-lactam with elemental composition C6H7NO2, corresponding to a mass of 125.0477 Da, MA and MB are the masses of peptide A and peptide B, resp., and MP is the mass of the precursor P.  Reang identifies among the 30 product ions of highest signal intensity within a mass error of 25, 50 or75 ppm depending on the LC-MS/MS run (see chapter LC-MS/MS) (i) pairs of mass values of fragment ions > 500 Da differing 125.0477 Da, i.e., a candidate A and Am pair or B and Bm pair, (ii) pairs of mass values for A and B fulfilling the equation MA + MB + 125.0477 = MP, and (iii) pairs of mass values for Am and Bm fulfilling the equation MAm + MBm -125.0477 = MP. The mass values of the other pairs in the cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are calculated from eq. 1 and eq. 2. MS1 values of entries in the MS1MS2 data files with MS2 data fulfilling at least one of the equations 1 or 2 are replaced by MS1 values corresponding to MA, MAm, MB and MBm. Furthermore, fragment ions corresponding to MA, MAm, MB and MBm are removed from the new MS1MS2 entries as well as fragments ions larger than the new MS1 values. The new MS1MS2 files in pkl format are input for Mascot to nominate candidate peptides for A, Am, B and Bm by interrogating the B. subtilis strain 168 database containing both forward and reversed sequences. Reang combines the nominated peptides with a Mascot score ≥ 1 into candidate cross-linked peptides and assigns these candidates with a mass tolerance of 25, 50 or75 ppm (depending on the LC-MS/MS run, see chapter LC-MS/MS) to precursor ions in the original MS1MS2 data file. Candidates are validated based on the original MS1MS2 data files. The principle of our approach is that an MS1MS2 spectrum of cross-linked peptides provides both the information for the masses of the candidate composing peptides as well as the fragment ions for identification of the composition of the peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of dynamic protein-protein interactions at the peptide level on a proteomic scale is a challenging approach that is still in its infancy. We have developed a system to cross-link cells directly in culture with the special lysine cross-linker bis(succinimidyl)-3-azidomethyl-glutarate (BAMG). We used the Gram-positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis as an exemplar system. Within 5 min extensive intracellular cross-linking was detected, while intracellular cross-linking in a Gram-negative species, Escherichia coli, was still undetectable after 30 min, in agreement with the low permeability in this organism for lipophilic compounds like BAMG. We were able to identify 82 unique interprotein cross-linked peptides with &lt;1% false discovery rate by mass spectrometry and genome-wide database searching. Nearly 60% of the interprotein cross-links occur in assemblies involved in transcription and translation. Several of these interactions are new, and we identified a binding site between the &#x3b4; and &#x3b2;' subunit of RNA polymerase close to the downstream DNA channel, providing a clue into how &#x3b4; might regulate promoter selectivity and promote RNA polymerase recycling. Our methodology opens new avenues to investigate the functional dynamic organization of complex protein assemblies involved in bacterial growth. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006287.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Translation, Transcription., In vivo cross-linking, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Membrane permeability, Bamg (bis(succinimidyl)-3-azidomethyl-glutarate)

### Affiliations
Mass spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, SILS, Universiteit van Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Universiteit van Amsterdam

### Submitter
Winfried Roseboom

### Lab Head
Dr Chris de Koster
Mass spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, SILS, Universiteit van Amsterdam, The Netherlands


