### Accession
PXD042384

### Title
Peptide-Based Covalent Inhibitors Bearing Mild Electrophiles to Target a Conserved His Residue of the Bacterial Sliding Clamp

### Description
Bacterial infections caused by drug-resistant pathogens represent a major threat against which effective antibiotics acting via new mechanisms and engaging new biological targets are highly needed. The sliding clamp (SC), an essential component of the bacterial DNA replication machinery, has been identified as a new target. This processivity factor operates through multiple protein-protein interactions with conserved peptide motifs in multiple proteins involved in DNA replication and repair. Herein, we report the structure-guided design of targeted covalent inhibitors (TCIs) able to bind covalently and selectively to the E. coli SC (EcSC). The inhibitors target His175, a well-conserved SC residue located on the edge of the peptide-binding pocket. Thermodynamic and kinetic analyses confirmed the higher efficiency of the chloroacetamide warhead compared to Michael acceptors. High-resolution X-ray structures of two different covalent inhibitor–SC adducts revealed the canonical ligand orientation and confirmed the formation of the covalent bond with His175. Proteomic studies were consistent with a selective EcSC engagement by the chloroacetamide-based TCI. Finally, the TCI of SC was substantially more active than the parent non-covalent inhibitor in an in vitro SC-dependent replicative assay, suggesting the potential of the approach to target the SC of priority pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down samples were precipitated twice with glacial 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, and proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After a reduction-alkylation step (dithiothreitol 5 mM – iodoacetamide 10 mM), proteins were digested overnight with 200 ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). The resulting vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A). The peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Easy-nanoLC-1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operating in positive mode with a nanoelectrospray source.  One quarter of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (75 μm ID × 20 mm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 800 bars in solvent A. After desalting and concentration, the pre-column was switched online with the analytical C18 analytical column (75 μm ID × 25 cm nanoViper, 3µm Acclaim PepMap; Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equilibrated in 5% of solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v)). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 5% B to 20% B in 120 min, from 20% B to 32% B in 15min, from 32% B to 95% B in 1min and 95% B to 95% B during 24min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with Xcalibur software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Survey MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70K at 200 m/z (mass range 350-1250), with a maximum injection time at 100ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) set at 3e6. Up to 10 of the most intense multiply charged ions (≥2) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set at 27, at 17.5K resolution, with a maximum injection time at 100ms and AGC set at 1e3. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was applied during the peak selection process.

### Data Protocol
MS datasets generated by the QExactivePlus mass spectrometer were searched against the E. coli section of the Swissprot database with a decoy strategy (Swissprot release 2022_04). We used the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) to perform the database search with a decoy strategy. The following parameters were used: maximum 3 missed cleavages, fully-tryptic peptides, mass tolerance of 10ppm and 0.02Da on the MS precursors and MS/MS fragments respectively. The following variable modifications were searched: Acetyl (protein N-term), Oxidation (Met), Carbamidomethylation (Cys), +753.302 Da mass increment (C34 H49 N7 O8 Cl2 on His). The resulting .dat Mascot files were then imported into Proline v2.1 package for further post-processing. Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, a PSM score above, and 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein sets (based on Mascot score).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sliding clamp, Peptide inhibito, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR 9002, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, 2 allée K. Roentgen 67084 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Jérôme Wagner
Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l’ARN, UPR 9002, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, 2 allée K. Roentgen 67084 Strasbourg, France


