### Accession
PXD011251

### Title
AML1-ETO induced leukemia stem cell self-renewal depends on Plcg1

### Description
High-resolution proteomic analysis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) stem cells identified phospholipase C- and Ca++-signaling pathways to be differentially regulated in AML1-ETO (AE) driven leukemia. Phospholipase C gamma 1 (Plcg1) could be identified as a direct target of the AE fusion. Genetic Plcg1 inactivation abrogated disease initiation by AE, reduced intracellular Ca++-release and inhibited AE-driven self-renewal programs. In AE-induced leukemia, Plcg1 deletion significantly reduced disease penetrance, number of leukemia stem cells and abrogated leukemia development in secondary recipient hosts. In human AE-positive leukemic cells inactivation of Plcg1 reduced colony formation and AML development in vivo. In contrast, Plcg1 was dispensable for maintenance of murine and human hematopoietic stem- and progenitor cells (HSPCs). Pharmacologic inhibition of Ca++-signaling downstream of Plcg1 resulted in impaired proliferation and self-renewal capacity in AE-driven AML. Thus, the Plcg1 pathway represents a novel specific vulnerability of AE-driven leukemia and poses an important new therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
For global proteome profiling, leukemia development was initiated with AML1-ETO (AE9a) or MLL-AF9 (MA9) containing constructs. Murine stem-and progenitor cells (LSK cells: Lin-Sca+Kit+) from 6-8 weeks-old C57BL/6 donors were sorted and infected by co-localization of virus supernatant (containing one of the oncogenes) with LSK cells on retronectin-coated plates. 72 hours after infection equal numbers of GFP+ cells were injected into sub-lethally irradiated recipient hosts (7 Gy, single dose). 2x 105 LSC-enriched (GFP+Kit+) cells (4 replicates per oncogene) were sorted directly into 2x lysis buffer (for a final concentration: 1% SDS, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT; volume of lysis buffer added to collection tube was estimated to be equal to the volume of the sheath buffer). For analysis of human samples, 2x 105 CD34+ cells from bone marrow aspirates from AML1-ETO+ (4 technical replicates) versus 4 AML1-ETO- (4 technical replicates) AML patients were isolated by FACS sorting and applied to mass spectrometry. Samples were sonicated using a Diagenode Bioruptor for 10 cycles, heated at 95°C for 10 minutes, before being subjected to another round of sonication. The lysates were incubated with 15 mM iodacetamide at room temperature 20 minutes. Each sample was treated with 8 volumes ice cold acetone and left overnight at -20°C to precipitate the proteins. The protein pellets were then washed twice with ice cold 80 % acetone, allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in digestion buffer (3M urea in 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8).  A 1:100 w/w amount of LysC (Wako sequencing grade) was added to each sample incubated for 4 h at 37 °C on a shaker, before diluting 1:1 with milliQ water, then incubated with a 1:100 w/w amount of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37 °C and 650 rpm. Digests were and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates were dried down and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid to a final volume of 10 µL and HRM kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) were spiked into each sample prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC MClass system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The samples (either a subset of the samples (mouse) or a pool of samples, injected in triplicate (human)) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 minutes.  Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0 % to 40 % in 60 minutes. Total runtime was 75 minutes, including clean-up and column re-equilibration.  The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF ion funnel was set to 40%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000.  The top 15 most intense ions from the full scan MS were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation and a window of 1.6 Da. MS2 data were acquired in profile, with a resolution of 15000 with fixed first mass of 120 m/z. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 30 sec and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were also excluded.  For the DIA, peptides were separated on the same LC gradient as for the DDA library creation. MS acquisition was performed with the same source settings as for DDA and the following method changes for the data acquisition. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000.  The default charge state was set to 3+. DIA scans were acquired with 22 (human samples) or 30 (mouse samples) mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For library creation, the DDA and DIA data were searched independently using Pulsar in Spectronaut Professional+ (version 11.0.15038, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific (Mus musculus or Homo sapiens) Swissprot database. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. For each species analysis, a DpD (DDA plus DIA) library was then created by merging the respective DDA and DIA libraries together in Spectronaut. These libraries contained 47291 (mouse); 45357 (human) precursors, corresponding to 3781 (mouse); 3580 (human) protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R-studio (version 0.99.902) using in-house pipelines and scripts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem cells, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Professor for Stem Cell Aging Faculty of Medicine Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena Erlanger Allee, 07747 Jena; Germany

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Florian H. Heidel
Professor for Stem Cell Aging Faculty of Medicine Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena Erlanger Allee, 07747 Jena; Germany


