### Accession
PXD018329

### Title
Quantitative proteomics in G1 cells reveals the insulin receptor adaptor IRS2 as an APC/CCdh1 substrate

### Description
The anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a ubiquitin ligase that controls progression through the eukaryotic cell cycle by targeting key substrates for degradation through the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. During G1, the APC/C works in concert with its co-activator Cdh1 to recognize and ubiquitinate specific substrates during this phase of the cell cycle. While many APC/CCdh1 substrates play a role cell cycle regulation, others are involved in distinct cellular processes, indicating that diverse biological pathways are subject to APC/C-mediated control. To identify novel pathways and substrates regulated by APC/CCdh1, we conducted an unbiased proteomic screen in G1-arrested RPE1 cells acutely treated with small molecule APC/C inhibitors. Combining these results with degron prediction analysis, we discovered a range of putative APC/C substrates. We validated IRS2, a key adaptor protein involved in signaling downstream of the insulin and IGF1 receptors, as a novel direct APC/CCdh1 target. We demonstrate that genetic deletion of IRS2 reduces the expression of proteins involved in cell division and functionally impairs the spindle assembly checkpoint. Together, these findings reveal a novel connection between the insulin/IGF1 signaling network and the cell cycle regulatory machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested, resuspended in lysis buffer [8 M urea, 2% SDS w/v, 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), 1 x protease inhibitor tablet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 x phosphatase inhibitor tablet (Thermo Fisher Scientific)], and lysed by 20 pumps through a 21-gauge needle. After removing cell debris by centrifugation, lysates were transferred to new tubes and protein concentration was determined with BCA assay. Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide that was quenched with 10 mM DTT. A total of 100 μg of protein from each sample was chloroform−methanol precipitated. Protein was reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS at pH 8.5 and digested by Lys-C overnight and trypsin for 6 h, at a 1:50 and a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio respectively. Resulting peptides were labeled with TMT10 at a ratio of 2:1 (TMT:Peptide) by mass. Labeling was quenched by adding a final volume of 0.5% hydroxylamine (Sigma). Peptides were then combined at a 1:1 across all channels and desalted using a 100 mg SepPak cartridge. The combined peptides were fractionated with basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, collected in a 96-well format and consolidated to a final of 24 fractions, out of which only alternating fractions (a total of 12) were analyzed (Navarrete-Perea et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Data for APCi experiment with G1 phase arrested cells were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific), whereas data for IRS2 KO cells were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump. The 100 μm capillary column was packed with 30 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). Mobile phases were 5% acetonitrile, 0.125% formic acid (A) and 95% acetonitrile, 0.125% formic acid (B). Peptides from APCi experiment were separated using a 2.5 h gradient from 4% to 26% B and analyzed with a SPS-MS3 method (McAlister et al., 2014). Peptides from IRS2 KO cells were separated using a 2 h gradient from 4% to 30% B and analyzed with a real-time search strategy (Erickson et al., 2019; Schweppe et al., 2019).  Raw data were converted to mzXML format using a modified version of RawFileReader and searched against a human protein target-decoy database. Searches were performed with a 50 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.9 Da fragment mass tolerance, trypsin digest with up to 2 missed cleavages. Allowed modifications include cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146), static TMT on lysine and peptide N-temini (+229.16293) and up to 3 variable methionine oxidation (+15.99491).  Peptide spectral matches were filtered with a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) method to a 1% FDR (Huttlin et al., 2010) and a protein-level FDR of 1% was also implemented (Savitski et al., 2015). For peptide quantification, we extracted the TMT signal-to-noise and column normalized each channel to correct for equal protein loading. Peptide spectral matches with summed signal-to-noise less than 100 were excluded from final result. Lastly, each protein was scaled such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2) is an essential adaptor that mediates signaling downstream of the insulin receptor and other receptor tyrosine kinases. Transduction through IRS2-dependent pathways is important for coordinating metabolic homeostasis, and dysregulation of IRS2 causes systemic insulin signaling defects. Despite the importance of maintaining proper IRS2 abundance, little is known about what factors mediate its protein stability. We conducted an unbiased proteomic screen to uncover novel substrates of the Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C), a ubiquitin ligase that controls the abundance of key cell cycle regulators. We found that IRS2 levels are regulated by APC/C activity and that IRS2 is a direct APC/C target in G<sub>1</sub> Consistent with the APC/C's role in degrading cell cycle regulators, quantitative proteomic analysis of IRS2-null cells revealed a deficiency in proteins involved in cell cycle progression. We further show that cells lacking IRS2 display a weakened spindle assembly checkpoint in cells treated with microtubule inhibitors. Together, these findings reveal a new pathway for IRS2 turnover and indicate that IRS2 is a component of the cell cycle control system in addition to acting as an essential metabolic regulator.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Irs2, Apc substrate

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Qing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P Gygi
Harvard Medical School


