### Accession
PXD019516

### Title
Reprograming of sRNA target specificity by the leader peptide peTrpL in response to antibiotic exposure

### Description
Trans-acting regulatory RNAs have the capacity to base pair with more mRNAs than experimentally detected under given conditions. This raises the question whether the sRNA target specificity can change upon metabolic or environmental changes. In Sinorhizobium meliloti, the sRNA rnTrpL is derived from a tryptophan (Trp) transcription attenuator, which is located upstream of the Trp biosynthesis gene trpE(G) and harbors the small ORF trpL. When Trp is available, efficient trpL translation causes transcription termination and liberation of rnTrpL, which then downregulates the trpDC operon. On the other hand, the trpL-encoded leader peptide peTrpL has a Trp-independent role in posttranscriptional regulation of antibiotic resistance. Here, we show that upon tetracycline (Tc) exposure, rnTrpL accumulates independently of Trp availability. Further, we provide evidence that both rnTrpL and peTrpL act together in the Tc-dependent destabilization of rplUrpmA mRNA encoding ribosomal proteins L21 and L27. rnTrpL, peTrpL and rplUrpmA mRNA were copurified in an antibiotic- dependent ribonucleoprotein complex (ARNP). In vitro ARNP reconstitution with competing trpD and rplU transcripts revealed that peTrpL and Tc reprogram the rnTrpL specificity in favor of rplU. In vivo, this probably supports bacterial adaptation to antibiotics. Our findings provide evidence for sRNA reprograming in response to antibiotic exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains were cultivated semiaerobically to an OD600 nm of 0.6 as previously described (Melior H, Li S, Madhugiri R, Stötzel M, Azarderakhsh S, Barth-Weber S, Baumgardt K, Ziebuhr J, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2019. Transcription attenuation-derived small RNA rnTrpL regulates tryptophan biosynthesis gene expression in trans. Nucleic Acids Res 47: 6396-6410.; Melior H, Maaß, S, Li, S, Förstner KU, Azarderakhsh S, Varadarajan AR, Stötzel M, Elhossary M, Barth-Weber S, Ahrens CH, Becher D, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2020. The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. mBio, accepted. DOI:10.1128/mBio.01027-20). Tc was used at final concentration of 20 µg/ml when strains harboring Tc resistance plasmids were cultivated. Strains lacking such plasmids were exposed to the subinhibitory Tc concentration of 1.5 µg/ml Tc. The same volume of the solvent ethanol (60 µl) was added to the 50 ml control cultures.  For MS2-MBP affinity chromatography, S. meliloti 2011 (pRK-MS2-rnTrpL) was used as described (Melior H, Maaß, S, Li, S, Förstner KU, Azarderakhsh S, Varadarajan AR, Stötzel M, Elhossary M, Barth-Weber S, Ahrens CH, Becher D, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2020. The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. mBio, accepted. DOI:10.1128/mBio.01027-20). Mock purification was performed with strain 2011 (pRK-MS2), in which the MS2 aptamer was transcribed instead of MS2-rnTrpL. Amylose beads were non-covalently bound to the MS2 coat protein fused to maltose-binding protein (MS2-MBP), which was purified from E. coli. Chromatography was performed as described (Smirnov A, Förstner KU, Holmqvist E, Otto A, Günster R, Becher D, Reinhardt R, Vogel J. 2016. Grad-seq guides the discovery of ProQ as a major small RNA-binding protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113: 11591-11596.) with the following modification: For washing, the beads were split into two portions, and one of them was washed with buffer B (20 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT) containing 2 µg/ml Tc, while the second one was washed with the buffer without Tc.  Proteins were analyzed in Tricine- or Glycine-SDS-PAGE according to Schägger  (Schägger H. 2006. Tricine-SDS-PAGE. Nat Protoc 1: 16-22) and Sambrook et al. (Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. 1989. Molecular cloning: A laboratory manual. 2. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.), respectively.  Digestion of proteins in a gel slice stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue was performed as reported elsewhere (Bonn F, Bartel J, Büttner K, Hecker M, Otto A, Becher D. 2014. Picking vanished proteins from the void: how to collect and ship/share extremely dilute proteins in a reproducible and highly efficient manner. Anal Chem 86: 7421–7427). After recovery of peptides those were separated by liquid chromatography and injected online into an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described elsewhere (Melior H, Maaß, S, Li, S, Förstner KU, Azarderakhsh S, Varadarajan AR, Stötzel M, Elhossary M, Barth-Weber S, Ahrens CH, Becher D, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2020. The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. mBio, accepted. DOI:10.1128/mBio.01027-20). For quantification of peTrpL abundance by targeted MS samples where digested in solution and spiked with labelled synthetic peptides as described before (Melior H, Maaß, S, Li, S, Förstner KU, Azarderakhsh S, Varadarajan AR, Stötzel M, Elhossary M, Barth-Weber S, Ahrens CH, Becher D, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2020. The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. mBio, accepted. DOI:10.1128/mBio.01027-20). LC-MS-analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to  a TSQ Vantage (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described in detail (Melior H, Maaß, S, Li, S, Förstner KU, Azarderakhsh S, Varadarajan AR, Stötzel M, Elhossary M, Barth-Weber S, Ahrens CH, Becher D, Evguenieva-Hackenberg E. 2020. The leader peptide peTrpL forms antibiotic-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes for posttranscriptional regulation of multiresistance genes. mBio, accepted. DOI:10.1128/mBio.01027-20).

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides from MS-spectra, a database search was performed with Sorcerer-SEQUEST (4.0.4 build, Sage-N Research) using the Sequest algorithm against a target-decoy integrated proteogenomic database (iPtgxDB; https://iptgxdb.expasy.org/), which also contained sequences of common laboratory contaminants and FLAG-tagged peTrpL (total entries: 320,482).  All raw files from targeted MS were processed using Skyline 4.2 (MacLean B, Tomazela DM, Shulman N, Chambers M, Finney GL, Frewen B, Kern R, Tabb DL, Liebler DC, MacCoss MJ. 2010. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26: 966–968). A peptide ratio of native and heavy peTrpL peptide was based on five transitions. Peptide ratios of three biological replicates were averaged if their Dot product was > 0.7. The concentration of peTrpL in the sample was calculated based on the peptide ratios and the added amount of heavy peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Trans-acting regulatory RNAs have the capacity to base pair with more mRNAs than generally detected under defined conditions, raising the possibility that sRNA target specificities vary depending on the specific metabolic or environmental conditions. In Sinorhizobium meliloti, the sRNA rnTrpL is derived from a tryptophan (Trp) transcription attenuator located upstream of the Trp biosynthesis gene trpE(G). The sRNA rnTrpL contains a small ORF, trpL, encoding the 14-aa leader peptide peTrpL. If Trp is available, efficient trpL translation causes transcription termination and liberation of rnTrpL, which subsequently acts to downregulate the trpDC operon, while peTrpL is known to have a Trp-independent role in posttranscriptional regulation of antibiotic resistance mechanisms. Here, we show that tetracycline (Tc) causes rnTrpL accumulation independently of Trp availability. In the presence of Tc, rnTrpL and peTrpL act collectively to destabilize rplUrpmA mRNA encoding ribosomal proteins L21 and L27. The three molecules, rnTrpL, peTrpL, and rplUrpmA mRNA, form an antibiotic-dependent ribonucleoprotein complex (ARNP). In vitro reconstitution of this ARNP in the presence of competing trpD and rplU transcripts revealed that peTrpL and Tc cause a shift of rnTrpL specificity towards rplU, suggesting that sRNA target prioritization may be readjusted in response to changing environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Multiresistance, Quantification, Small proteins, Attenuator, Posttranscriptional regulation, Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany


