### Accession
PXD023356

### Title
S. pombe Bin3 immunoprecipitation

### Description
Here we report that the methyl phosphate capping enzyme Bin3, a homolog of the human methyl phosphate capping enzyme (MePCE), is a stable component of the S. pombe telomerase complex. Bin3 associates with the telomerase complex through an interaction with the recently described LARP7 family member and telomerase component Pof8, and we demonstrate that these two factors share an evolutionarily conserved relationship in fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Native cell lysates (lysis buffer: 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 55 mM KoAC, 0.5% Triton X, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1:100 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo, 78430), and 0.004 U/uL RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen, AM2694)) were incubated with rabbit IgG-conjugated dynabeads to enrich for PrA-tagged proteins. After washes with lysis buffer, beads were washed with 0.1 M NH4OAc and 0.1 mM MgCl2 and eluted with 0.5 M NH4OH for 20 minutes at room temperature. Eluates were lyophilized and subject to in-solution tryptic digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by the IRCM Proteomics Discovery Platform.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed and analyzed using the MaxQuant software package 1.5.1.2 and the fission yeast UP000002485 reference proteome (24/11/2019). Settings used for MaxQuant analysis were as reported (Lemieux et al., 2016).  Proteins present in immunoprecipitations from both biological replicates and absent from control immunoprecipitations were considered genuine Bin3 interacting partners and ranked by peak intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bin3, S. pombe

### Affiliations
York University Department of Biology
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Jennifer Porat

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A Bayfield
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Canada


