### Accession
PXD030282

### Title
Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 proteomics

### Description
The first comparative proteomics is to understand protein profile differences between high limonene production phase and low limonene production phase in limonene producing strain L1118. The second comparative proteomics is to understand protein profile differences between L1118 and sucrose mutant Lsps.

### Sample Protocol
50 Fifty mL cultures from each strain were harvested by centrifugation at 8000 rpm, 4 °C for 10 min. The pellets were then washed with 10 mL of 0.9% NaCl. Cells were suspended in 2 mL 50 mM Tris∙HCl, 10 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Nonidet P-40, pH = 7.6 supplemented with 20 µL protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, USA). Cells were lysed by tip-probe sonication through 20 cycles of sonication with 15s on and 60s off on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected and stored at -80 °C for future proteomics. The protein concentration was measured through Pierce Bradford Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher) with standards following the manufactures instructions. Samples from each strain were prepared from three biological replicates.  One hundred microgram total proteins from each sample were denatured under conditions of 8 M urea and 5 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 1 hour. The denatured proteins were then treated with iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15 mM followed by an incubation period of 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted 4 times to a final concentration of 2 M urea. One µg trypsin (Promega, Medison, WI) was added into each sample and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptide was desalted through a sep-pak C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA). A SpeedVac (Brinkmann Instruments, Westbury, NY) was used to lyophilize samples. The digested proteins were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged for 10 min at 12000 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant was harvested and stored at -80 °C for future use. The desalted samples were loaded into an in-house packed 150 µm capillary column.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were collected with a LTQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and searched against a composite database containing proteins of S. elongatus, common contaminants, and reversed sequences using ProLuCID algorithm. The output files were filtered through PatternLab 4.0 for the following data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic terpene production represents one of the most carbon and energy-efficient routes for converting CO<sub>2</sub> into hydrocarbon. In photosynthetic organisms, metabolic engineering has led to limited success in enhancing terpene productivity, partially due to the low carbon partitioning. In this study, we employed systems biology analysis to reveal the strong competition for carbon substrates between primary metabolism (e.g., sucrose, glycogen, and protein synthesis) and terpene biosynthesis in <i>Synechococcus elongatus</i> PCC 7942. We then engineered key "source" and "sink" enzymes. The "source" limitation was overcome by knocking out either sucrose or glycogen biosynthesis to significantly enhance limonene production <i>via</i> altered carbon partitioning. Moreover, a fusion enzyme complex with geranyl diphosphate synthase (GPPS) and limonene synthase (LS) was designed to further improve pathway kinetics and substrate channeling. The synergy between "source" and "sink" achieved a limonene titer of 21.0&#x2009;mg/L. Overall, the study demonstrates that balancing carbon flux between primary and secondary metabolism can be an effective approach to enhance terpene bioproduction in cyanobacteria. The design of "source" and "sink" synergy has significant potential in improving natural product yield in photosynthetic species.

### Keywords
Logarithmic phase stationary phase sucrose mutant

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, United States
Texas A&M University

### Submitter
Bin Long

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua S. Yuan
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, United States


