### Accession
PXD009712

### Title
Pacific Ocean metaproteomics, METZYME KM1128

### Description
Global metaproteomic analyses of microbial biomass from the upper water column of the Central Pacific Ocean. This dataset was used as a discovery dataset to identify peptide biomarkers for cyanobacterial populations for use in targeted metaproteomic calibrated multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) analyses published in in Saito et al., 2014 and 2015. Saito, M. A., McIlvin, M. R., Moran, D. M., Goepfert, T. J., DiTullio, G. R., Post, A. F., and Lamborg, C. H.: Multiple nutrient stresses at intersecting Pacific Ocean biomes detected by protein biomarkers, Science, 345, 1173-1177, 2014. Saito, M. A., Dorsk, A., Post, A. F., McIlvin, M., Rappé, M. S., DiTullio, G., and Moran, D.: Needles in the Blue Sea: Sub‐Species Specificity in Targeted Protein Biomarker Analyses Within the Vast Oceanic Microbial Metaproteome, PROTEOMICS, 15, 3521-3531, 2015.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected during the KM1128 METZYME research expedition (Metals and Enzymes in the Pacific) on the R/V Kilo Moana October 1-25, 2011 from Oahu, Hawaii to Apia, Samoa. Microbial biomass for protein analyses was collected on vertical profiles using in situ high volume particle filtration pumps (4 L/min and 8 L/min McLane Pumps, WTS-LV; McLane Research Laboratories Inc., Falmouth MA, USA). The 0.2-3.0 micron size fraction was collected on 142 mm filters (Supor, Pall Corp.) for analyses used in this study. Extracted proteins were purified from SDS detergent, reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested while embedded within a polyacrylamide tube gel. Trypsin digested samples were analyzed using a Michrom Advance HPLC system with reverse phase chromatography coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a Thermo Flex source. Each sample (1µg protein measured before tryptic digestion) was concentrated onto a trap column (0.2 x 10 mm ID, 5 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and rinsed with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 97.9% water before gradient elution through a reverse phase C18 column (0.1 x 400 mm ID, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography consisted of a nonlinear 220 min gradient from 2% to 95% buffer B, where A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN (all solvents were Fisher Optima grade). The mass spectrometer monitored MS1 scans from 380 m/z to 1580 m/z at 240K resolution. MS2 scans were performed using the ion trap in HCD and CID mode on the top N ions with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and a 15 second exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Search results were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and Scaffold 4.8 (Proteome Software Inc.). Mass spectra were matched against a metaproteomic sequence database generated from a metagenome assembly of the transect.

### Publication Abstract
Ocean metaproteomics is an emerging field enabling discoveries about marine microbial communities and their impact on global biogeochemical processes. Recent ocean metaproteomic studies have provided insight into microbial nutrient transport, colimitation of carbon fixation, the metabolism of microbial biofilms, and dynamics of carbon flux in marine ecosystems. Future methodological developments could provide new capabilities such as characterizing long-term ecosystem changes, biogeochemical reaction rates, and in situ stoichiometries. Yet challenges remain for ocean metaproteomics due to the great biological diversity that produces highly complex mass spectra, as well as the difficulty in obtaining and working with environmental samples. This review summarizes the progress and challenges facing ocean metaproteomic scientists and proposes best practices for data sharing of ocean metaproteomic data sets, including the data types and metadata needed to enable intercomparisons of protein distributions and annotations that could foster global ocean metaproteomic capabilities.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics proteomics oceanography oceanic proteome

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, US
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Makoto Saito
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, US


