### Accession
PXD034157

### Title
Combining affinity purification and mass spectrometry to define the network of the nuclear proteins interacting with the N-terminal region of FMRP

### Description
We identified a nuclear interactome of FMRP by combining subcellular fractionation of rat brains at the post-natal day 14 with pull down affinity purification and mass spectrometry analysis. By this approach, we have listed 55 candidate nuclear partners.

### Sample Protocol
50ug of GST or 100ug of GST-FNT purified recombinant proteins were incubated one hour at 4°C under soft rotation with 25ul of Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads (GE HealthCare). Beads were washed twice with PBS and bound recombinant proteins were cross-linked to the beads according to the previously published protocol {Pronot, 2021 #3954}. 6mg of proteins from nuclear lysates were incubated with 25ul of GST-FNT or GST cross-linked beads overnight at 4°C under soft rotation. Beads were washed three times for 5min at 4°C in wash buffer. To decrease unspecific or indirect bindings, the beads were further washed in high stringency wash buffer containing 500mM NaCl. Proteins bound to the beads were then eluted in 30ul of laemmli buffer for 10min at 95°C.

### Data Protocol
Proteins samples were separated on SDS-PAGE on Bis-Tris gradient gel (4-15%, Mini-PROTEAN®, BioRad) and colored by Coomassie staining (Imperial blue). Proteins in gel pieces were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested over night at 37°C with trypsin at 10 ng/µL (PIERCE, ThermoFisher) in 50mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate in water. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 1% formic acid and after acetonitrile, dryed and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and injected into a liquid nano chromatography system (nanoRSLC U3000, ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, 3µm particle size from ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear fractionation, Fmrp, Nuclear protein network, Proteomics, Mrna metabolism

### Affiliations
Université Côte d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
Institut de Pharmacie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Universite Cote d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France

### Submitter
Carole Gwizdek

### Lab Head
Dr Stephane MARTIN
Institut de Pharmacie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Universite Cote d'Azur, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France


