### Accession
PXD017721

### Title
Proteomics profiling of KAIMRC1 in comparison to MDA-MB231 and MCF-7

### Description
Proteomics characterization of KAIMRC1 cell line, a naturally immortalized breast cancer cells, is described in comparison to MCF7 and MDA-231 breast cancer cells. Quantitative proteomics analysis using the tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled technique in conjunction with phosphopeptide enrichment method was used to perform comparative profiling of proteins and phosphoproteins in the three cell lines. In total, 673 proteins and 33 Phosphoproteins were differentially expressed among these cell lines. These proteins are involved in several key cellular pathways that include DNA replication and repair, Splicing machinery, amino acid metabolism, cellular energy, and Estrogen signaling pathway. Many of the differentially expressed proteins are associated with different types of tumors including breast cancer. For validation, 4 highly significant expressed proteins including MTAP, KCTD12, PARP 1, and Prelamin-A/C were subjected to western blotting and the results were consistent with proteomics analysis. Unlike MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, KAIMRC1 showed different phospho- and non-phosphoproteomic phenotypes which make it a potential model to study breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
TMT peptides labeling   Two biological replicates for each cell line in the absence or present of FBS were labeled with TMT 6 plex following the manufacturer's procedure. Briefly, 41µl of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each 0.8mg TMT reagent and left for 5 min in room temperature to be completely dissolved. The digested peptides samples were then added to the correspondent TMT vial and then incubated for one hour at room temperature. Afterward, the reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine. The labeled peptides in all TMT 6 channels were first equally combined and then split into 2 samples; (1) for high PH reverse-Phase peptide fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS, and (2) for TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment analysis.  2.4. High pH reverse-Phase peptide fractionation    Each TMT pooled labeled sample was fractionated offline on the basis of high pH (basic) reversed-phase chromatography prior to LC-MS/MS. Following the manufacture instruction peptide sample was fractionated into 8 fractions using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). Briefly, TMT samples were first evaporated using a speed vacuum and then resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. Reversed-Phase Fractionation Spin Columns were first conditioned with Acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid twice. The sample then loaded to the  column and centrifuged at 3,000 x g for 2 minutes. Subsequently, the column was washed with water and then centrifuged at speed of 3,000 x g for 2 minutes. Finally, the sample was eluted into 8 fractions by changing the ratio of Acetonitrile and 0.1% Triethylamine.  2.5. TiO2 phosphopeptide Enrichment The enrichment of phosphopeptide was performed on lyophilized TMT labeled peptide sample following the manufacturer's procedure in High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit. Briefly, the sample was first suspended in Binding/Equilibration buffer. TiO2 Spin Tip was washed and equilibrated with wash and binding/Equilibration buffers followed by centrifugation for 2 minutes at speed of 3000 x g. labeled peptide sample was then loaded to TiO2 Spin Tip and spin at 1000x g for two minutes, the step was repeated twice. Subsequently, TiO2 Spin Tip was washed twice with Binding/Equilibration and wash buffer. Finally, Phosphopeptide Elution buffer was added to the spin Tip and centrifuged for 5 min at 1000x g. the sample was dried and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid to be subjected to LC-MS/MS.      NanoLC-MS/MS analysis  The TMT labeled samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected directly onto a 25 cm, 100 μm ID column packed with BEH 1.7 μm C18 resin (Waters). Samples were separated at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a nLC 1000 (Thermo). Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. A gradient of 1–30% B over 160 min, an increase to 90% B over 60 min, and held at 90% B for a 20 min was used for a 240 min total run time. The column was re-equilibrated with 20 μL of buffer A prior to the injection of the sample. Peptides were eluted directly from the tip of the column and nanospray directly into the mass spectrometer by application of 2.8 kV voltage at the back of the column. The Fusion was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were collected in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution. The cycle time was set to 3 s, and within this 3 s the most abundant ions per scan were selected for CID MS/MS in the ion trap. MS3 analysis with multi-notch isolation (SPS3) was utilized for detection of TMT reporter ions at 30k resolution. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled and dynamic exclusion was used with an exclusion duration of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/Protein identification and quantification were performed using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline–IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications). The MS raw data files were converted into mzXML format using RawConverter[13]. For Protein identification, tandem mass spectra were searched against a database including the Uniprot human database, reversed sequences, and contaminates using ProLuCID[14]. The search was set with 50 and 600 ppm for precursor and fragments mass tolerance, respectively. The precursor mass range was set from 600 to 6000 and selecting trypsin as a protease enzyme. The N-term static modification was considered as (+229.1629) for TMT labeling and the amino acid residue specific static modifications were (+57.02146) on cysteine for Carbamidomethylation and (+229.1629) on lysine for TMT labeling. The differential modification in the phosphopeptide enrichment analysis was set as (+79.9663) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine for phosphorylation. Identified proteins were further filtered with 1% FDR using DTASelect[15]. Protein quantitative analysis was achieved by Census tool[16]. The statistical analysis for the quantitative results was done by quantitativeCOMPARE, part of IP2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Breast cancer; cell lines; tmt; proteomics; phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
king abdullah international medical research center
King Abdullah international medical research center

### Submitter
Bandar Alghanem

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Boudjelal
King Abdullah international medical research center


