### Accession
PXD022453

### Title
Small molecule endoplasmic reticulum proteostasis regulator acts as a broad-spectrum inhibitor of Dengue and Zika virus infections

### Description
Flaviviruses, including Dengue and Zika, are widespread human pathogens; however, no broadly active therapeutics exist to fight infection. Recently, remodeling of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteostasis by pharmacologic regulators, such as compound 147, was shown to correct pathologic ER imbalances associated with protein misfolding diseases. Here, we establish a new activity of compound 147 as an effective host-centered antiviral agent against flaviviruses. Compound 147 reduces infection by attenuating the infectivity of secreted virions without causing toxicity in host cells. 147 is a preferential activator of the ATF6 pathway of the ER unfolded protein response, which requires targeting of cysteine residues primarily on protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs). We find that the antiviral activity of 147 is independent of ATF6 induction but does require modification of reactive thiols on protein targets. Targeting PDIs and additional non-PDI targets using RNAi and other small molecule inhibitors was unable to recapitulate the antiviral effects, suggesting a unique polypharmacology may mediate the activity. Importantly, 147 can impair infection of multiple strains of Dengue and Zika virus, indicating that it is suitable as a broad-spectrum antiviral agent.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysate from DENV infected and non-infected Huh7 cells (for whole cell lysate samples, 10 µg of protein as measured using Bio-Rad protein assay dye reagent) was aliquoted and purified using methanol/chloroform precipitation. Streptavidin-enriched samples for target identification were used without normalization and purified by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Mass spectrometry samples were prepared as described previously (3). Briefly, protein was resuspended in 3 µL 1% Rapigest (Waters) and diluted with water and 0.5 M HEPES. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific) and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Proteins were digested in sequencing-grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific) overnight at 37ºC while shaking at 750 rpm. Peptides were labeled for 1 hour at room temperature using 11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Scientific) resuspended in 40% acetonitrile. Labeling reactions were quenched with 0.4% ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at room temperature. Samples were combined and acidified to pH 2 by addition of 5% formic acid. Pooled samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac and resuspended in 94.9% water/5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Rapigest cleavage products were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 30 minutes. Digested peptides (up to 20 µg) were loaded onto a triphasic column filled sequentially with 1.5 or 2.5 cm layers of 5 µm 100 Å C18 resin (Phenomenex), Luna 5 µm 100 Å strong cation exchange resin (Phenomenex) and a second layer of C18 resin using a high pressure chamber (4). The column was washed for 30 minutes in 95% water/5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and attached to an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system connected to a 20 cm, 100 µm ID fused-silica microcapillary column with a laser-pulled tip filled with 3 µm 100 Å C18 resin (Phenomenex). Mass spectrometry was carried out on a Q-Exactive HF or an Exploris 480 instrument (ThermoFisher). For whole cell lysate samples, multidimensional peptide identification technology (MuDPIT) analysis was performed with 10 µL sequential injections of 0 - 100% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate, diluted in buffer A), each injection increasing by 10%, followed by an injection of 90% buffer C/10% buffer B (100% acetonitrile/1% formic acid). For target ID samples, only the 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 and 90%C/10%B injections were carried out. Peptides were separated on a 90 min gradient from 5% to 40% buffer B at a flow rate of 500nL/min, followed by a 5 min ramp to 60 - 80% buffer B. Electrospray ionization was performed from the tip of the microcapillary column at a voltage of 2.2 kV with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275º C. Data-dependent mass spectra were collected by performing a full scan from 300 – 1800 m/z (Q-Exactive HF) or 375 – 1500 (Exploris 480) at a resolution of 120,000 and AGC target of 1e6. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed using TopN (15 cycles, Q-Exactive) or TopSpeed (3 sec, Exploris 480) from each full scan using HCD collision energy of NCE 38 (Q-Exactive HF) or NCE 36 (Exploris 480), isolation window of 0.7 (Q-Exactive HF) or 0.4 (Exploris 480), with automatic maximum injection time, a resolution of 45,000 (Q-Exactive HF) or 30,000 + TurboTMT setting (Exploris 480), fixed first mass of 110 m/z, and dynamic exclusion of 10s (Q-Exactive HF) or 45s (Exploris 480).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification, and TMT reporter ion quantification was analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.4. Searches were carried out with the SEQUEST node using a human proteome database (UniProt) with DENV proteins added manually and the following parameters: 20ppm precursor mass tolerance, minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, trypsin cleavage with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, static modifications of +57.0215Da (carbamidomethylation at C) and +229.1629 (TMT6/11plex), and dynamic modification of +15.995 (oxidation at M), N-terminal methionine loss (-131.040), and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011). Search results were filtered with Percolator using a decoy database of reversed sequences with a peptide false discovery rate of 1% and a minimum of 2 peptides for protein identification. TMT intensities were quantified using the reporter ion quantification node with TMT intensities from each channel being normalized using the total peptide amount, quantitative value correction enabled to correct for TMT impurities, and co-isolation threshold set to 25%. Intensities for each protein were calculated by summing the intensities of each peptide. A reference TMT channel of pooled samples was included for scaling of protein abundances across multiple mass spectrometry runs. For Target ID samples, Proteome Discoverer searches were identical to the whole cell lysate searches, except the normalization of TMT intensities was omitted in the reporter ion quantification node. Log2 transformations were performed on all TMT reporter ion intensities, and averages were determined for four 147-20 replicates and the four 147-20/147 competition replicates. Fold enrichment was determined as the log2 fold difference of the two averages. The log2 fold enrichment was fitted to a gaussian distribution and targets were defined as proteins with log2 fold difference greater than two standard deviations.

### Publication Abstract
Flaviviruses, including dengue and Zika, are widespread human pathogens; however, no broadly active therapeutics exist to fight infection. Recently, remodeling of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteostasis by pharmacologic regulators, such as compound 147, was shown to correct pathologic ER imbalances associated with protein misfolding diseases. Here, we establish an additional activity of compound 147 as an effective host-centered antiviral agent against flaviviruses. Compound 147 reduces infection by attenuating the infectivity of secreted virions without causing toxicity in host cells. Compound 147 is a preferential activator of the ATF6 pathway of the ER unfolded protein response, which requires targeting of cysteine residues primarily on protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs). We find that the antiviral activity of 147 is independent of ATF6 induction but does require modification of reactive thiols on protein targets. Targeting PDIs and additional non-PDI targets using RNAi and other small-molecule inhibitors was unable to recapitulate the antiviral effects, suggesting a unique polypharmacology may mediate the activity. Importantly, 147 can impair infection of multiple strains of dengue and Zika virus, indicating that it is suitable as a broad-spectrum antiviral agent.

### Keywords
Er proteostasis; flavivirus; activating transcription factor 6 (atf6)

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Jonathan Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University


