### Accession
PXD015163

### Title
HPLC-MS/MS analysis of plasma samples from patients with colorectal cancer

### Description
We sought to identify a characteristic profile of proteins in blood plasma samples taken from patients with colorectal cancer using mass spectrometry. We obtained mass spectrometry data of 38 samples from patients with colorectal cancer and 41 samples from healthy volunteers and the data analysis were carried out using panoramic ultra-high resolution mass spectrometry. We carried out a comparative analysis for two series "case" and "control" of protein profiles, differently expressed proteins and proteins with posttranslational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS analysis The blood plasma in the volume of 40 µl was then brought to the final volume of 160 µl by adding the solution 15 mM MOPS, рН 7.4. Minor proteins were supplemented using the method of immunoaffinity chromatography on column MARS® Hu-14 100 mm х 4.6 mm (Agilent). For alkylation, the denatured protein solution was added with a solution of 0.2% 4-vinylpyridine in 30% propan-2-ol up to a final concentration of 0.02% (V/V). Enzymatic cleavage of proteins was performed using a trypsin protease. Upon the time expiry the enzyme reaction was inhibited by adding the formic acid up to the final concentration of 0.5%, which also caused precipitation of insoluble desoxycholeic acid. After sample application the columns were washed twice with 1 ml of 0.1% formic acid solution, and then peptides were eluted from the carrier using the solution of 70% methanol with 5% formic acid in the volume of 1 ml. The collected Eliot was dried at 30 оC for 45 minutes in a vacuum. The dry residue was restored in 40 µl of 0.5% formic acid solution and transferred into vials of deactivated glass for mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry protein registration The mass spectrometric analysis of the peptide composition of plasma samples was conducted for depleted plasma samples. HPLC-MS/MS registration of peptides was carried out using high resolution mass spectrometer Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA) by chromatographic separation using Ultimate 3000 Nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides in the volume of 5 µl were applied on enrichment column PepMap C18 for 4 minutes in the isocratic flow of the mobile phase C (2% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid, 0.015% trifluoroacetic acid) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. peptides were separated using Acclaim PepMap C18 analytical column (75 mm × 150 µm, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 A) in the nano-flow mode in the linear gradient of the mobile phase A (0.08% formic acid, 0.015% trifluoroacetic acid) and the mobile phase B (0.08% formic acid, 0.015% trifluoroacetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min at initial ratio А: В as 98:2. Separation was performed in the elution gradient from 2% to 35% of mobile phase B content for 80 minutes, followed by column washing at 90% of phase B for 10 minutes with subsequent system equilibration at initial gradient conditions for 20 minutes. Registration of peptide signal was carried out in the dependent tandem scan mode with ionization source NSI (Thermo Scientific, USA). After prescanning of precursor ions with maximum accumulation time not more than 80 ms (or maximum accumulation value 3е6) with resolution R=70K in the range of 420-1250 m/z, 20 sequential tandem scans were made with maximum accumulation time not more than 120 ms (or maximum accumulation value 1е5) with resolution R=17.5K a with fixed minimum range value (from 220 m/z) and varying maximum range value depending on the resolved charge state. Ions with charge state z=2+…5+ were selected. Fragmentation was performed in the high-energy activation mode (HCD – Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with rating 27% (per weight of 400 m/z and charge z=2+) and variation per each scanning within ±15%.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification HPLC-MS/MS spectra in RAW format were processed in Mass Hunter version В 2.0. Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA version 2.1.9. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens complement of the UniProtKB. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin specific with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.05 Da as MS2 tolerances; variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.sf post-translational modifications in proteins, the following were selected as variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term), Acetyl (K), Phospho (ST), Phospho (T), Phospho (Y), GlyGly (K). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.11. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Colorectal cancer (CRC) at a current clinical level is still hardly diagnosed, especially with regard to nascent tumors, which are typically asymptotic. Searching for reliable biomarkers of early diagnosis is an extremely essential task. Identification of specific post-translational modifications (PTM) may also significantly improve net benefits and tailor the process of CRC recognition. We examined depleted plasma samples obtained from 41 healthy volunteers and 28 patients with CRC at different stages to conduct comparative proteome-scaled analysis. The main goal of the study was to establish a constellation of protein markers in combination with their PTMs and semi-quantitative ratios that may support and realize the distinction of CRC until the disease has a poor clinical manifestation. <b>Results:</b> Proteomic analysis revealed 119 and 166 proteins for patients in stages I-II and III-IV, correspondingly. Plenty of proteins (44 proteins) reflected conditions of the immune response, lipid metabolism, and response to stress, but only a small portion of them were significant (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) for distinguishing stages I-II of CRC. Among them, some cytokines (Clusterin (CLU), C4b-binding protein (C4BP), and CD59 glycoprotein (CD59), etc.) were the most prominent and the lectin pathway was specifically enhanced in patients with CRC. Significant alterations in Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chains (ITIH1, ITIH2, ITIH3, and ITIH4) levels were also observed due to their implication in tumor growth and the malignancy process. Other markers (Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 2 (ORM2), Alpha-1B-glycoprotein (A1BG), Haptoglobin (HP), and Leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein (LRG1), etc.) were found to create an ambiguous core involved in cancer development but also to exactly promote tumor progression in the early stages. Additionally, we identified post-translational modifications, which according to the literature are associated with the development of colorectal cancer, including kininogen 1 protein (T327-p), alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (S138-p) and newly identified PTMs, i.e., vitamin D-binding protein (K75-ac and K370-ac) and plasma protease C1 inhibitor (Y294-p), which may also contribute and negatively impact on CRC progression. <b>Conclusions:</b> The contribution of cytokines and proteins of the extracellular matrix is the most significant factor in CRC development in the early stages. This can be concluded since tumor growth is tightly associated with chronic aseptic inflammation and concatenated malignancy related to loss of extracellular matrix stability. Due attention should be paid to Apolipoprotein E (APOE), Apolipoprotein C1 (APOC1), and Apolipoprotein B-100 (APOB) because of their impact on the malfunction of DNA repair and their capability to regulate mTOR and PI3K pathways. The contribution of the observed PTMs is still equivocal, but a significant decrease in the likelihood between modified and native proteins was not detected confidently.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Colorectal cancer, Protein

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Biobanking Group, Branch Of IBMC "Scientific and Educactional Center"

### Submitter
Anna Kaysheva

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kaysheva
Biobanking Group, Branch Of IBMC "Scientific and Educactional Center"


