### Accession
PXD028536

### Title
Idiopathic focal segmental glomerulosclerosis plasmas increase lipid droplet formation and perilipin-2 expression in human podocytes

### Description
Background: Many patients with idiopathic focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) develop recurrence of proteinuria after kidney transplantation. Several circulating permeability factors (CPFs) responsible for recurrence have been suggested, but there is no consensus about the identity of CPFs in FSGS. We aimed to find proteins involved in the mechanism of action of the CPF(s) and/or potential biomarkers for the presence of CPF(s). Methods: Cultured human podocytes were exposed to plasma from patients with FSGS with presumed CPF(s), or from (disease) controls. Podocyte proteomes were analyzed by mass spectrometry and differentially expressed proteins were validated using flow cytometry, RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence. Changes in podocyte granularity were examined using flow cytometry, electron microscopy imaging and BODIPY staining. Results: Perilipin-2 protein expression was increased in podocytes exposed to presumed CPF-containing plasmas, which was related to disease state and capacity of plasma to induce granularity in podocytes. Elevated perilipin-2 levels were confirmed at protein and mRNA level. The granules observed in podocytes actually are lipid droplets. Importantly, increased perilipin-2 staining was also detected in glomeruli of the FSGS patients whose active disease plasmas induced lipid droplets in podocytes. Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that presumably CPF-containing plasma from FSGS patients alter podocyte lipid metabolism and increase perilipin-2 protein and lipid droplet accumulation. Future research should address the mechanism underlying CPF-induced alterations in podocyte lipid metabolism in the context of the pathogenesis of (recurrent) FSGS, which ultimately may result in novel leads for treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested using trypsin/EDTA and pellets were resuspended and washed in ice cold phosphate-buffered saline for 3 times. Cells were lysed in 200 µl 10 mM Tris containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate and transferred to Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). Lysates were heated for 5 min at 95° C and cooled to room temperature (RT). Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (Sigma). Cellular lysates were prepared for mass spectrometry using the Single Pot solid-phase enhanced sample Preparation Protocol (SP3) as previously described for glomerular sections. Briefly, a volume equaling 5 µg protein was supplemented with lysis buffer to a final volume of 125 µl. Protein was reduced in 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (Sigma) and alkylated in 5 mM 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma) prior to digestion, and stored at -80° C until further processing. After thawing, samples were transferred to 0.2 ml PCR strip tubes (Ratiolab) and a 5 µl mixture of 50 µg hydrophilic and 50 µg hydrophobic beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBead Carboxylate-Modified, GE Healthcare) was added. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% as organic solvent. Mixtures were incubated for 8 min and then placed on a magnetic stand for 3 min for the beads to settle. After rinsing with 70% ethanol (2x) and 100% acetonitrile (1x) on a magnetic stand, beads were air-dried and reconstituted in 5 µl digestion solution containing 0.1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), 0.1 µg Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC, Wako Chemicals) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (Sigma), and incubated at 37° C for 16 hours. Peptides were recovered by incubation and washing in acetonitrile, and finally eluted in 9 µl water containing 5% dimethylsulfoxide. Samples were sonicated to improve recovery from beads and peptide-containing supernatant was collected while keeping the tubes in the magnetic stand. Peptide mixtures were acidified and desalted using Stagetips (3M).The digested samples were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific), loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and separated over a reversed-phase C18 column (30 cm / 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID, particle size 1.9 µm, pore size 120 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 60 min gradient with 200 nl/min: 10-18% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 6 minutes, 18-40% B for 39 minutes, 40-65% B for 3 minutes, 65-95% B for 3 minutes, 95% B for 3 minutes, down to 5% B for 3 minutes, then 5% B for 3 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 using default parameters, including the match between runs and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) features. Proteins flagged as ‘contaminants’, ‘reverse identifications’, or ‘only identified by site’ were filtered out in proteomics data processing software Perseus. Data from triplicate samples were grouped and only proteins reproducibly quantified in at least one of the sets of triplicates were retained. In addition, only proteins that were quantified in at least 10 samples were maintained. Missing values were imputed using default parameters. Two cluster analyses were performed: (1) Proteomes of hPod exposed to 14 active disease FSGS plasmas of 9 patients (indicated with * in Table 1) were compared to proteomes of hPod exposed to FCS, healthy, IgA, and 2 non-recurrent FSGS plasmas. Remission plasmas were not included in this cluster analysis. (2) Proteomes of hPod exposed to 4 granularity-inducing FSGS plasmas (side scatter different from healthy plasma with p<0.001, indicated with # in Table 1) were compared to proteomes of hPod exposed to 16 plasmas that did not induce granularity (side scatter not different from healthy plasma with p>0.850). Differentially expressed proteins were determined in R using a t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment for multiple testing, with false discovery rate (FDR)<0.10 for analysis (1), and FDR<0.05 for analysis (2). Data visualization and further processing was also performed in R. Functional classification of the gene names of the differentially expressed proteins was performed with online tool PANTHER, using Biological Process Complete as output.

### Publication Abstract
Many patients with primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) develop recurrence of proteinuria after kidney transplantation. Several circulating permeability factors (CPFs) responsible for recurrence have been suggested, but were never validated. We aimed to find proteins involved in the mechanism of action of CPF(s) and/or potential biomarkers for the presence of CPF(s). Cultured human podocytes were exposed to plasma from patients with FSGS with presumed CPF(s) or healthy and disease controls. Podocyte proteomes were analyzed by LC-MS. Results were validated using flow cytometry, RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence. Podocyte granularity was examined using flow cytometry, electron microscopy imaging, and BODIPY staining. Perilipin-2 protein expression was increased in podocytes exposed to presumed CPF-containing plasmas, and correlated with the capacity of plasma to induce podocyte granularity, identified as lipid droplet accumulation. Elevated podocyte perilipin-2 was confirmed at protein and mRNA level and was also detected in glomeruli of FSGS patients whose active disease plasmas induced podocyte perilipin-2 and lipid droplets. Our study demonstrates that presumably, CPF-containing plasmas from FSGS patients induce podocyte lipid droplet accumulation and perilipin-2 expression, identifying perilipin-2 as a potential biomarker. Future research should address the mechanism underlying CPF-induced alterations in podocyte lipid metabolism, which ultimately may result in novel leads for treatment.

### Keywords
Circulating permeability factor, Lipid droplets, Idiopathic focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (fsgs), Podocytes, Perilipin-2

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Guido van Mierlo

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


