### Accession
PXD009868

### Title
Prostate cancer progression: From non-malignant to bone metastasisProstate cancer progression: From non-malignant to bone metastasis

### Description
Proteome characterization of gland confined prostate tumors and non-malignant prostate tissue. Whole cell protein extracts were purified from FFPE radical prostatectomy specimens for a total of 28 tumor samples and 8 adjacent non-malignant prostate tissues. Associated ProteomeXchange identifiers: PXD003430, PXD003452, PXD003515, PXD004132, PXD003615, PXD003636.  Quantitative proteomic analysis of adjacent non-malignant prostate tissue (n=8) and  gland confined prostate tumors (n=28) obtained from radical prostatectomy procedures; and bone metastatic prostate tumors (n=22) obtained from patients operated to relief spinal cord compression. At the time of surgery, most metastatic patients had relapsed after androgen-deprivation therapy, while 5 were previously untreated.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were fixed in 4% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin according to clinical routines. Bone metastases were further decalcified in 20% formic acid for 1-3 days before paraffin embedding. Protein extracts were obtained from approximately 20 microtome sections of 10 µm thick 25-50 mm2 tumor enriched areas. Protein extracts of SILAC (heavy Arg10, Lys8) labelled LNCaP, PC-3, 22rv1 and WPMY-1 cells lines of prostatic origin were mixed in a 27:27:27:19 ratio and used as spike-in standard.  25 to 40 micro-g of protein were mixed in equimolar amounts with the isotopicaly labelled protein standard (Geiger et al 2010. Nature Methods) and trypsin digested following the Filter-Aid Sample Preparation (FASP) methodology (Ostasiewicz et al. 2010, J. Proteome Res)   The resulting peptides were fractionated by Strong Anion Exchange chromatography (SAX) into five fractions to reduce sample complexity and maximize depth of proteome coverage. Each fraction was then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific). Peptides were separated using a 4h gradient of water:acetonitrile, on a 30 cm C18 column. MS spectra acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode, after Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, at a resolution of 17,500 (Olsen et al. 2009, Mol. Cell. Proteomics).

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment, version 1.3.7.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nat Biotechnology) with the integrated Andromeda searching engine and false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off for peptide identification of 0.1 (Cox et al, 2011, J. Proteome Res). Proteins were identified by searching MS/MS data against the human proteome sequences from UniProt (UniprotKB, 2012). Normalized light (tissue) to heavy (SILAC standard) intensity ratios were used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose:</b> Bone is the most predominant site of distant metastasis in prostate cancer, and patients have limited therapeutic options at this stage.<b>Experimental Design:</b> We performed a system-wide quantitative proteomic analysis of bone metastatic prostate tumors from 22 patients operated to relieve spinal cord compression. At the time of surgery, most patients had relapsed after androgen-deprivation therapy, while 5 were previously untreated. An extended cohort of prostate cancer bone metastases (<i>n</i> = 65) was used for immunohistochemical validation.<b>Results:</b> On average, 5,067 proteins were identified and quantified per tumor. Compared with primary tumors (<i>n</i> = 26), bone metastases were more heterogeneous and showed increased levels of proteins involved in cell-cycle progression, DNA damage response, RNA processing, and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation; and reduced levels of proteins were related to cell adhesion and carbohydrate metabolism. Within bone metastases, we identified two phenotypic subgroups: BM1, expressing higher levels of AR canonical targets, and mitochondrial and Golgi apparatus resident proteins; and BM2, with increased expression of proliferation and DNA repair-related proteins. The two subgroups, validated by the inverse correlation between MCM3 and prostate specific antigen immunoreactivity, were related to disease prognosis, suggesting that this molecular heterogeneity should be considered when developing personalized therapies.<b>Conclusions:</b> This work is the first system-wide quantitative characterization of the proteome of prostate cancer bone metastases and a valuable resource for understanding the etiology of prostate cancer progression. <i>Clin Cancer Res; 24(21); 5433-44. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Prostate cancer bone metastasis; localized prostate cancer; prostatectomy; non-malignant prostate tissue; castration; crpc; lc-ms/ms; silac; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen. Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Diego Iglesias-Gato

### Lab Head
Dr Diego Iglesias-Gato
University of Copenhagen. Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology


