### Accession
PXD027142

### Title
Renal cell-derived extracellular vesicles as a modulator of tubuloid functional maturation

### Description
Tubuloids are adult stem cell-based kidney organoids with promising application in kidney disease modelling and drug screening. However, tubuloids still present limited transepithelial transport capacity, which is essential for the kidney’s function. The extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-derived vesicular structures known to regulate several cellular processes, including development and maturation. This study explores the potential of EVs derived from renal cells to support tubuloid functional maturation by increasing the levels of organic anion transport 1 (OAT1), a protein involved in renal waste handling.

### Sample Protocol
EVs from conditionally immortalized proximal tubule epithelial cells overexpressing OAT1 (ciPTEC-OAT1) were isolated with 100 K filters, quantified by Nanosight. Gene expression was determined by qPCR and Western blotting. Proteomic analysis were performed by Orbitrap LC-MS System. Tubuloid monolayer integrity and cell polarity were analyzed by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. The functional assay was assessed by measurement of fluorescein uptake.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.17.0. Downstream data analysis and statistics were carried out using R and Perseus

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) is rapidly increasing with the need for regenerative therapies. Adult stem cell derived kidney tubuloids have the potential to functionally mimic the adult kidney tubule, but still lack the expression of important transport proteins needed for waste removal. Here, we investigated the potential of extracellular vesicles (EVs) obtained from matured kidney tubular epithelial cells to modulate in vitro tubuloids functional maturation. We focused on organic anion transporter 1 (OAT1), one of the most important proteins involved in endogenous waste excretion. First, we show that EVs from engineered proximal tubule cells increased the expression of several transcription factors and epithelial transporters, resulting in improved OAT1 transport capacity. Next, a more in-depth proteomic data analysis showed that EVs can trigger various biological pathways, including mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, which is crucial in the tubular epithelial maturation. Moreover, we demonstrated that the combination of EVs and tubuloid-derived cells can be used as part of a bioartificial kidney to generate a tight polarized epithelial monolayer with formation of dense cilia structures. In conclusion, EVs from kidney tubular epithelial cells can phenotypically improve in vitro tubuloid maturation, thereby enhancing their potential as functional units in regenerative or renal replacement therapies.

### Keywords
Kidney organoids, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Organic ion transporter 1, Tubuloids

### Affiliations
Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Franziska Voellmy

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalinde Masereeuw
Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands


