### Accession
PXD033018

### Title
Regulation of mRNA localization during the oocyte-to-embryo transition by regulated mRNA-endoplasmic reticulum association and remodeling of the endoplasmic reticulum

### Description
As an important post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism, asymmetric localization of mRNAs is essential for cell polarity and cell fate determination during early development. In an effort to understand localization of mRNAs encoding proteasome components during Xenopus oocyte-to-embryo transition, we discovered that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which is thought to mainly serve “house-keeping” roles in the cell, plays a multifaceted role in controlling localization of maternal RNAs. Our RNA-seq analysis of fractionated transcripts reveals that more than 40% of RNAs, including proteasome mRNAs, are present on the ER in Xenopus oocytes. After meiotic maturation, a large fraction of ER-associated RNA is released into the cytosol. The release of proteasome RNAs from the ER into the cytosol is conserved during mouse oocyte maturation. Our comparative proteomic analysis and ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation demonstrate that the majority of ER-associated RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) remain associated with the ER after oocyte maturation. However, all ER-associated RBPs analyzed exhibit reduced binding to some of their target RNAs after oocyte maturation, providing a mechanistic explanation for the dynamic regulation of RNA-ER association. We further show that the ER is remodeled massively during Xenopus oocyte maturation, leading to the formation of a widespread tubular ER network in the animal hemisphere that is required for the asymmetric localization of proteasome mRNAs in mature eggs. To our knowledge, our findings demonstrate for the first time that dynamic regulation of RNA-ER association and remodeling of the ER are fundamentally important for asymmetric localization of RNAs during development.

### Sample Protocol
Xenopus oocytes were obtained from the ovary by a Collagenase treatment. To obtain mature eggs, oocytes were treated with 2 uM progesterone overnight. The oocytes and eggs were homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer in buffer A (40mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.9), 250mM Sucrose and 1mM DTT). The suspension was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 10,000 x g at 4oC. The supernatant was layered over buffer B (40mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.9), 1.3M Sucrose and 1mM DTT). An approximately 3:1 ratio of Supernatant to buffer B was taken and centrifuged for 150 minutes at 140,000 x g at 4oC. The supernatant from this centrifugation was discarded and the pellets were submitted for Mass Spectrophotometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray and analyzed in the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The peptide-spectrum matching was performed using the SEQUEST program with the Xenopus laevis proteome database from Uniprot (Proteome ID: UP000186698).

### Publication Abstract
Asymmetric localization of mRNAs is crucial for cell polarity and cell fate determination. By performing fractionation RNA-seq, we report here that a large number of maternal RNAs are associated with the ER in Xenopus oocytes but are released into the cytosol after oocyte maturation. We provide evidence that the majority of ER-associated RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) remain associated with the ER after oocyte maturation. However, all ER-associated RBPs analyzed exhibit reduced binding to some of their target RNAs after oocyte maturation. Our results further show that the ER is remodeled massively during oocyte maturation, leading to the formation of a widespread tubular ER network in the animal hemisphere that is required for the asymmetric localization of mRNAs in mature eggs. Thus, our findings demonstrate that dynamic regulation of RNA-ER association and remodeling of the ER are important for the asymmetric localization of RNAs during development.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis, Microsome. oocyte maturation

### Affiliations
Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

### Submitter
Hyojeong Hwang

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign


