### Accession
PXD033257

### Title
Unveiling the mechanism of action of nature-inspired anti-cancer compounds using a multi-Omics approach

### Description
MCF-7 breast cancer cells were treated with two novel anti-cancer compounds, SIMR_3058 and SIMR_3066, and the metabolome and proteome analysed by LC-MS/MS using a timsTOF.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture   Human breast cancer cells MCF-7 were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% foeatal bovine serum (FBS). Penicillin and streptomycin antibiotics combination was added to DMEM/FBS growth media. Cells were maintained in humidified incubator with conditions of 37?  temperature and 5% CO2.  Protein extraction  Cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, Protease inhibitor cocktail tablets and lysozyme 5 µg/ml) and incubated on ice for 30 min with gentle shaking. Proteins were then precipitated with chloroform/methanol sample:methanol:chloroform (1v:1v:0.75v) and collected precipitates were resuspended in denaturation buffer (10 mM Tris, 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea (pH 8)). Precipitated proteins were quantified with the modified Bradford protein quantification method.    Tryptic Digestion   In-solution digestion was carried out on 100 µg total protein. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature (RT) with gentle agitation and then alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at RT for 1 hour in the dark, to prevent the formation of disulfide bonds. Proteins were pre-digested with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:100) for 3 hours at 30°C before being diluted four times with HPLC-grade water to a final concentration of ~1.5 M urea. The diluted samples were then digested overnight with trypsin (1:100 ratio) at 30°C. The digestion was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide preparations were then desalted using PIERCE C18 stage tips (100µL) as per manufacter instructions and dried before resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN).    Tandem mass liquid chromatography (Q-TOF MS)  Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using a Elute UHPLC and autosampler (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) on an orthogonal time-of-flight (TOF) (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer employed to separate and detect the cell peptides. After being desalted as described above, peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of solvent A 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN), of which 10 µL was loaded per injection into the LC-MS/MS system. Peptides were chromatographically separated using a analytical C18 column (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). Samples were loaded onto the column with a starting mobile phase of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 85 minute gradient (5%-35% ACN). The flow rate was constant at 300 µL/min. Mass spectra were acquired with TIMS-TOF mass spectrometer in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans and a cycle time of ~3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing: RAW data files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 19 for protein and peptide identification using the Andromeda search engine and the Uniprot proteome for Homo sapiens (Proteome ID: UP000005640, 29th January 2020, (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640 )). Default parameter settings were used for the MS/MS database search, with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered at a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR), and the precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Trypsin/P was selected as protease, and the MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
The 2020 global cancer registry has ranked breast cancer (BCa) as the most commonly diagnosed type of cancer and the most common cause of cancer-related deaths in women worldwide. Increasing resistance and significant side effects continue to limit the efficacy of anti-BCa drugs, hence the need to identify new drug targets and to develop novel compounds to overcome these limitations. Nature-inspired anti-cancer compounds are becoming increasingly popular since they often provide a relatively safe and effective alternative. In this study, we employed multi-omics techniques to gain insights into the relevant mechanism of action of two recently identified new nature-inspired anti-cancer compounds (SIMR3066 and SIMR3058). Discovery proteomics analysis combined with LC-MS/MS-based untargeted metabolomics analysis was performed on compound-treated vs DMSO-treated (control) MCF-7 cells. Downstream protein functional enrichment analysis showed that most of the responsive proteins were functionally associated with antigen processing and neutrophil degranulation, RNA catabolism and protein folding as well as cytoplasmic vesicle lumen and mitochondrial matrix formation. Consistent with the proteomics findings, metabolomic pathway analysis suggested that the differentially abundant compounds indicated altered metabolic pathways such as glycolysis, the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Furthermore, metabolomics-based enriched-for-action pathway analysis showed that the two compounds associate with mercaptopurine, thioguanine and azathioprine related pathways. Lastly, integrated proteomics and metabolomics analysis revealed that treatment of BCa with SIMR3066 disrupts several signaling pathways including p53-mediated apoptosis and the circadian entertainment pathway. Overall, the multi-omics approach we used in this study indicated that it is a powerful tool in probing the mechanism of action of lead drug candidates. SIGNIFICANCE: In this study we adopted a multi-omics (proteomics and metabolomics) strategy to learn more about the molecular mechanisms of action of nature-inspired potential anticancer drugs. Following treatment with SIMR3066 or SIMR3058, the integration of these multi-omics data sets revealed which biological pathways are altered in BCa cells. This study demonstrates that combining proteomics with metabolomics is a powerful method to investigate the mechanism of action of potential anticancer lead drug candidates.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Anti-cancer, Timstof, Cells

### Affiliations
University of Sharjah
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Alexander Giddey

### Lab Head
Dr Mohammad Semreen
University of Sharjah


