### Accession
PXD002917

### Title
Proteome validation for novel full-length genes in the giant panda

### Description
we applied RNA-seq to detect novel expressed transcripts in 12  tissues of giant pandas, using a transcriptome reconstruction strategy combining reference-based and de novo methods. Then we used mass spectrometry method to identify proteomes of five selected tissues, aiming at validating these novel full-length genes we identified.

### Sample Protocol
For each tissue, 100 μg were ground with liquid nitrogen and suspended in 500 μl lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 30 mM Tris, 4% ChAPS, 1 mM PMSF), followed by 5 min of ultrasonication. After 15 min of centrifuging (at 12,000 × g, 4°C), the supernatant protein concentration was measured using the Bradford assay43. Proteins of different molecular weights were separated using 12.5% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. According to differences in protein molecular weight and concentration, the PAGE gels were cut into different gel slices for separate proteomic analyses. The protein gels were sliced into fragments 2mm3 in size and were de-colored with NH4HCO3/acetonitrile and an acetonitrile solution. Then, the colorless gel slices were consecutively treated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM IAM. After the removal of water and vacuum drying, the gel slices were protease-digested overnight and then the digestion was terminated with the addition of 10% formic acid. After vacuum drying, 0.1% formic acid was added to obtain a soluble polypeptide solution, which was analyzed using a nano-LC-LTQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data were analyzed by BioWorks 3.3.1 SP1 (Thermo Scientific) and then was searched with the full-length novel protein-coding gene set  to identify peptide hits. After dataset searching, peptide hits were filtered with parameters as follows: ≥2 distinct peptides, Sp ≥500, RSp ≤5, and xc (± 1, 2, 3, 4) =1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
High-quality and complete gene models are the basis of whole genome analyses. The giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) genome was the first genome sequenced on the basis of solely short reads, but the genome annotation had lacked the support of transcriptomic evidence. In this study, we applied RNA-seq to globally improve the genome assembly completeness and to detect novel expressed transcripts in 12 tissues from giant pandas, by using a transcriptome reconstruction strategy that combined reference-based and de novo methods. Several aspects of genome assembly completeness in the transcribed regions were effectively improved by the de novo assembled transcripts, including genome scaffolding, the detection of small-size assembly errors, the extension of scaffold/contig boundaries, and gap closure. Through expression and homology validation, we detected three groups of novel full-length protein-coding genes. A total of 12.62% of the novel protein-coding genes were validated by proteomic data. GO annotation analysis showed that some of the novel protein-coding genes were involved in pigmentation, anatomical structure formation and reproduction, which might be related to the development and evolution of the black-white pelage, pseudo-thumb and delayed embryonic implantation of giant pandas. The updated genome annotation will help further giant panda studies from both structural and functional perspectives.

### Keywords
Testis, Brain, Ovary, Tongue, Pituitary, Lc-ltq, Giant panda

### Affiliations
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Institute of Zoology, CAS

### Submitter
Yibo Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Fuwen Wei
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China


