### Accession
PXD022277

### Title
Viral lncRNA upregulates multiple A+U-richViral lncRNA upregulates multiple A+U-rich transcripts to promote cell motility and viral dissemination transcripts to promote cell motility and viral dissemination

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs are frequently associated with broad modulation of gene expression and thus provide the cell with the ability to synchronize entire metabolic processes. We used transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to investigate whether the most abundant human cytomegalovirus-encoded lncRNA, RNA2.7, has this characteristic. By comparing RNA2.7 deletion mutants with wild-type virus, RNA2.7 was found to regulate a large number of cellular genes late in infection. Pathway analysis indicated that >100 RNA2.7-regulated cellular genes are associated with promoting cell movement, and ten of the most highly regulated were verified in further experiments. Morphological analysis and live cell tracking showed that RNA2.7 promotes the movement and detachment of infected cells late in infection, and plaque assays using sparse cell monolayers demonstrated that RNA2.7 promotes cell-to-cell dissemination and spread of virus. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that RNA2.7-upregulated mRNAs are relatively A+U-rich, which is a trait associated with transcript instability, and that they are also enriched in motifs associated with mRNA instability. Experiments involving transcriptional inhibition showed that transcripts from four RNA2.7-regulated cellular genes were longer-lived in the presence of RNA2.7. These findings demonstrate that RNA2.7 promotes cell movement and viral dissemination late in infection and indicate that this may be due to general stabilization of A+U-rich transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent HFFF2 cells in 175 cm2 flasks were infected for 2 h with WT, ΔRNA2.7 or ΔTATA (MOI=5). The medium was then replaced with fresh medium after washing the cells once with fresh medium. At 72 h p.i., the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), after which lysis buffer (6 M guanidine and 50 mM HEPES pH 7) was added, and the lysed cells were harvested by scraping. The samples were sonicated (30 s on and 30 s off for 10 cycles), and the debris was pelleted by low-speed centrifugation. The cell lysate samples were processed for multistage MS3-based mass spectrometry using isobaric 10-plex tandem-mass tags, and the data were analysed as described previously. A single experiment was conducted, in which 7871 infected cell proteins were screened, including 115 specified by HCMV. Proteins that were differentially expressed in mutant-infected cells compared to WT-infected cells were identified by calculating Benjamini-Hochberg corrected Significance B values, and those with p<0.05 were considered to be significant.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, ‘‘MassPike’’, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. This has been fully described in Nightingale et al., 2018.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell motility, Viral dissemination, Transcriptomics, Gene regulation, A+u rich, Lncrna, Human cytomegalovirus

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Sir Michael Stoker Building, Garscube Campus, 464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland (UK)

### Submitter
Katie Nightingale

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Davison
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Sir Michael Stoker Building, Garscube Campus, 464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, Scotland (UK)


