### Accession
PXD034028

### Title
Activation loop phosphorylation tunes conformational dynamics underlying Pyk2 tyrosine kinase activation

### Description
Pyk2 is a multidomain non-receptor tyrosine kinase that undergoes a complex, multi-stage activation process. Ca2+-flux induces conformational rearrangements that relieve autoinhibitory FERM domain interactions. The kinase domain phosphorylates a key linker residue to recruit Src kinase. Pyk2 and Src mutually phosphorylate activation loop residues to confer full activation. While the mechanisms of autoinhibition are established, the conformational dynamics associated with autophosphorylation and Src recruitment remain unclear. Here, we employ hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to map the conformational changes associated with Src-mediated activation segment phosphorylation in a Pyk2 construct encompassing FERM and kinase domains (residues 20-692).  Results reveal increased dynamics at regulatory interfaces spanning FERM and kinase domains. Phosphorylation of the activation segment stabilizes two antiparallel beta strands linking activation and catalytic loops. Increased dynamics of the C-terminal end of the activation loop propagate to the F-helix, explaining how phosphorylation prevents reversion to the autoinhibitory FERM interaction. HDX-guided site-directed mutagenesis and kinase activity profiling establish a mechanism for phosphorylation-induced active site sculpting to confer high activity.

### Sample Protocol
HDX timecourses were performed in parallel for the following three treatments: Src/ATP-treated, phosphorylated Pyk2 FERM–kinase; adenylyl-imidodiphosphate (AMPPNP)-bound Pyk2 FERM–kinase; and untreated, autoinhibited Pyk2 FERM–kinase. Phosphorylated Pyk2 FERM–kinase was generated by pre-treatment with sub-stoichiometric Src (3:1 Pyk2:Src) and 4 mM ATP. AMPPNP-bound Pyk2 was pre-incubated with 4 mM AMPPNP (Sigma). Autoinhibited Pyk2 was incubated with buffer. All pre-exchange treatments were performed for 30 min at 22 °C in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 5 mM TCEP, 8 mM MgCl2 (final concentrations).  Deuterium exchange reactions (65 uL) were initiated with a ten-fold dilution of 20 pmol of Pyk2 FERM–kinase from each pretreatment into D2O exchange buffer composed of 50 mM HEPES pD 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 5mM DTT and 90% D2O (final concentrations). Exchange reaction mixtures were incubated at 22 °C. At various time points (12 s, 1 min, 2.5 min, 11 min, and 122 min), labeling reactions were quenched to pH 2.5 by addition of 20% TFA, 0.15% n-dodecylphosphocholine (fos-12; Avanti Polar Lipids) and snap-frozen in liquid N2. Quenched exchange reaction mixtures were stored at −80 °C until LC-MS analysis. All exchange reactions were performed as three technical replicates. For HDX-MS analysis, frozen exchange samples were quickly thawed and immediately injected (50 μL) into a temperature-controlled (4 °C) ACQUITY UPLC M-class HDX platform coupled in-line to an ESI-Q-TOF Synapt G2-Si instrument (Waters). Mobile phases consisted of solvents A (HPLC-grade aqueous 0.1% formic acid) and B (HPLC-grade acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Samples were digested into uniquely identifiable peptide fragments by flow through an in-line Enzymate BEH-immobilized pepsin column (5 μm particle, 300 Å pore, 2.1 × 30 mm; Waters) at 25 °C with a flow rate of 50 μL/min with 100% solvent A. Peptide products accumulated on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard trap column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 2.1 mm × 5 mm; Waters) and desalted with 100% solvent A for 0.3 min at a flow rate of 120 μL/min. Pepsin-derived peptides were subsequently resolved on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 1 × 100 mm; Waters) using a 7 min linear gradient from 6% to 35% solvent B. MS data were collected in positive ion, MSE continuum, resolution mode with an m/z range of 50− 2000. Glu1-fibrinopeptide B was used for lock mass correction of all spectra. Ion mobility was used to further resolve peptides in the gas phase. Peptides were fragmented by argon gas collision for data-independent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Peptic products were identified by fragmentation data using the ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS version 3.0.3, Waters) with phosphorylation as an allowed variable modifier. Deuterium uptake was analyzed with DynamX version 3.0 (Waters). Peptides identified by PLGS were manually curated after establishing identifications thresholds in two of three unlabeled samples, minimum intensity of 4000, minimum sum of fragment intensities of 470, minimum score of 6.62, and 0.25 fragment per residue (Sørensen and Salbo, 2018). Relative deuterium incorporation for each peptide and treatment was calculated by DynamX after manual inspection of spectra of each isotope envelope. Differences in deuterium incorporation between HDX treatments were assessed for representative time points approximating the actively exchanging regime of the time course. Statistical significance was determined using a two-tailed, unpaired t test. HDX-MS summary statistics and … are listed in Supporting Information HDX Summary and Data tables in accordance with HDX-MS community standards (Masson et al., 2019).   Masson, G.R., Burke, J.E., Ahn, N.G., Anand, G.S., Borchers, C., Brier, S., Bou-Assaf, G.M., Engen, J.R., Englander, S.W., Faber, J., et al. (2019). Recommendations for performing, interpreting and reporting hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) experiments. Nat Methods 16, 595-602.  Sørensen, L., and Salbo, R. (2018). Optimized Workflow for Selecting Peptides for HDX-MS Data Analyses. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 29, 2278-2281.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hdx-ms, Kinase

### Affiliations
Iowa State University
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA USA

### Submitter
Eric Underbakke

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Steven Underbakke
Roy J. Carver Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA USA


