### Accession
PXD013279

### Title
Rational Design of High Affinity Peptides Validates Histone Chaperone ASF1 as a New Epigenetic Target in Cancer

### Description
Starting from the structure of the human ASF1-histone complex, we developed a rational design strategy combining epitope tethering and optimization of interface contacts to identify a potent peptide inhibitor with a dissociation constant of 3 nM. LC-MS/MS was used to identify in vivo targets of the most prominent peptide inhibitor.

### Sample Protocol
Hela S3 total extracts were pre-incubated with biotinilated peptides, tethering (ip4) or control (ip3mut). Peptide-bound proteins were purified using Strep-tactin beads (IBA), washed 5 times with buffer containing 150 mM NaCl. Proteins on sepharose beads were digested with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC and then desalted using. homemade C18 StageTips. Eluted peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 55°C with a linear gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens Swiss-Pro database using SEQUEST proteome discoverer (version 2.2), one by one or merged per conditions for emPAI abundance evaluation. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.6. FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Anti-silencing function 1 (ASF1) is a conserved H3-H4 histone chaperone involved in histone dynamics during replication, transcription, and DNA repair. Overexpressed in proliferating tissues including many tumors, ASF1 has emerged as a promising therapeutic target. Here, we combine structural, computational, and biochemical approaches to design peptides that inhibit the ASF1-histone interaction. Starting from the structure of the human ASF1-histone complex, we developed a rational design strategy combining epitope tethering and optimization of interface contacts to identify a potent peptide inhibitor with a dissociation constant of 3&#xa0;nM. When introduced into cultured cells, the inhibitors impair cell proliferation, perturb cell-cycle progression, and reduce cell migration and invasion in a manner commensurate with their affinity for ASF1. Finally, we find that direct injection of the most potent ASF1 peptide inhibitor in mouse allografts reduces tumor growth. Our results open new avenues to use ASF1 inhibitors as promising leads for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Peptide design, Inhibitory peptides

### Affiliations
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Platfmorm
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Platfmorm


