### Accession
PXD004639

### Title
RhoA inhibitor treatment of spinal cord injury: Deep inside mechanism understanding for a better use

### Description
The present study shows by in vivo experiments, the impact of RhoA inhibitor treatment using a functionalized alginate scaffold and the beneficial results at the early stage by increasing neurites outgrowth and synaptic contact. However, 7 days after treatment a plateau is obtained in BBB score. We thus performed an in vitro and proteomic associated to systemic biology analyses of secreted factors from ND7/23 DRG cell line incubated with secreted factors from different segments after spinal cord lesion treated wih RhoA inhibitor. We then performed a time course proteomic study from the DRG cells in same conditions as for the secretome. The results taken together allow  a better understanding of the mechanisms occurring in both side of the lesion and led a positive impact of the treatment on growth cone guidance in both sides of the lesion (Rostral 1 and Caudal 1). We identified the transcription factors involved in time course at the beginning of the treatment and the growth cone factors (receptors, ligands, signaling pathways) implicated in this time course. We also demonstrate the involvement of immunoglobulins (IgG1, IgG2) in this process. Anti-GFAP seem to bind to its own receptor in DRG cells when neurite outgrowth is initiated and thus modulate the process like in traumatic brain injury.  These results open the door of a concomitant treatment at both sides of the lesion with RhoA inhibitor. However, we also pointed that RhoA inhibitor treatment led to an inhibition of several factors implicated in neurogenesis reflecting a global inhibition at term as detected in vivo that reached 2 weeks after treatment. RhoA inhibitor treatment is useful to initiate the neurogenesis process but needs to be supplied by a second treatment for increasing synaptic connections and the neuron reconnections.

### Sample Protocol
ND7/23 cells were plated in 6 wells plate until confluent. The cells were starved overnight with DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, 1% L-Glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were first stimulated with 1/3 of R1 or lesion or C1 CM 3 days post injury and 2/3 DMEM + 1% L-Glu + 1% antibiotics, or left untreated. After 24h of CM stimulation, 1µg/mL of RhoA inbihitor is added to the media. 24h after RhoAi stimulation, the cell supernatants were collected, centrifuged (1000 rpm, 5minutes) and immediately frozen at -80°C, and the cells were collected and then lysed with RIPA buffer for total protein extraction (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM PMSF, 1X protease inhibitors). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (20000 g, 10 minutes, 4°C). For the time course experiment after RhoA inhibitor, the cells were starved overnight. Cells were stimulated with RhoA inhibitor for 30 minutes (T30), 1 hour (T1) and 4 hours (T4) followed by the same protocol for total proteins extraction. The supernatants were collected and the protein concentrations were measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay.

### Data Protocol
Samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Proxeon Easy-nLC1000 system equipped with a Proxeon trap column (100 μm ID x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 packed-tip column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm ID x 15 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile (5%-35% over 120 minutes) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC eluent was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column and a voltage of 1.7 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-exactive mass spectrometer programmed to acquire in a data-dependent mode Top 10 most intense ion method. The survey scans were done at a resolving power of 70,000 FWHM (m/z 400), in positive mode and using an AGC target of 3e6. Default charge state was set at 2, unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 25s. The scan range was set to 300-1600 m/z. For ddMS², the scan range was between 200-2000m/z, 1 microscan was acquired at 17,500 FWHM and an isolation window of 4.0 m/z was used. All the MS data were processed with MaxQuant(47) using the Andromeda (48) search engine. Secretome and protein extract from ND7/23 cell line were processed in two different files.  Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against Decoy version of the complete proteome for Rattusnorvegicus of the UniProt database (49) (Release June 2014, 33,675 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for the digestion mode with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as the variable. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, with up to two missed cleavages. For MS spectra, an initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (50) integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spinal cord lesion, Anti-gfap, Rhoa inhibitor, Immunoglobulins, In vivo studies, Neurites outgrowth, Proteomic, Transcriptomic factors, Growth cone, Functionalized alginate, Cd32

### Affiliations
University of Lille
Univ. Lille, Inserm, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Univ. Lille, Inserm, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France


