### Accession
PXD020473

### Title
The RB/E2F pathway controls expression of the cancer genomic DNA deaminase APOBEC3B

### Description
Mutations in cancer are due in part to DNA cytosine deamination by APOBEC3B (A3B). While low in healthy tissues, A3B expression and activity are elevated in tumors and further increase in metastases. However, molecular mechanisms responsible for A3B transcriptional regulation are poorly understood. Here, we address whether the RB/E2F pathway, which is often dysregulated in breast cancer, is a molecular trigger of A3B overexpression. First, an A3B promoter-driven luciferase reporter was used to demonstrate reporter activation by disruption of only one out of five predicted E2F binding sites. Second, A3B-luciferase reporter activation was also triggered by expressing the BK polyomavirus T-antigen, which inactivates RB and thereby alleviates repression of E2F regulated genes. Importantly, A3B-luciferase reporter induction by BK polyomavirus T-antigen could not be further increased by mutating the functional E2F binding site. Third, both CRISPR disruption and targeted base substitutions in the endogenous E2F binding site caused strong A3B upregulation and confirmed importance of this regulatory element. Fourth, proteomics experiments showed that members of the DREAM and PRC1.6-complexes including multiple E2F family members are able to bind to wild-type but not E2F mutant promoter sequences. Finally, a combination of genetic and biochemical studies implicated E2F4 and E2F6 in endogenous A3B gene repression. Altogether, our studies demonstrate that A3B expression is suppressed in normal cells by the RB/E2F axis and that viral or mutational disruption of this pathway causes overexpression of this DNA deaminase in cancer and contributes mutational fuel to tumor evolution.

### Sample Protocol
DNA pull-down samples were separated on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Thermo) for 30min at 170 V in 1× MOPS buffer (Thermo), followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase PicoFrit column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter; New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
APOBEC3B (A3B)-catalyzed DNA cytosine deamination contributes to the overall mutational landscape in breast cancer. Molecular mechanisms responsible for <i>A3B</i> upregulation in cancer are poorly understood. Here we show that a single E2F cis-element mediates repression in normal cells and that expression is activated by its mutational disruption in a reporter construct or the endogenous <i>A3B</i> gene. The same E2F site is required for <i>A3B</i> induction by polyomavirus T antigen indicating a shared molecular mechanism. Proteomic and biochemical experiments demonstrate the binding of wildtype but not mutant E2F promoters by repressive PRC1.6/E2F6 and DREAM/E2F4 complexes. Knockdown and overexpression studies confirm the involvement of these repressive complexes in regulating A3B expression. Altogether, these studies demonstrate that <i>A3B</i> expression is suppressed in normal cells by repressive E2F complexes and that viral or mutational disruption of this regulatory network triggers overexpression in breast cancer and provides fuel for tumor evolution.

### Keywords
Polyoma virus t antigen, Dna pull-down, Silac, Apobec3b, Cancer

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


