### Accession
PXD017882

### Title
Identification and characterization of novel peptide components in the venom of Indian marine cone snails

### Description
The project is aimed at the identification of conotoxins and conopeptides from the venom of marine cone snails found in the Indian coastal waters. Peptides of novel sequences will be further characterized in terms of structural and physico-chemical properties by NMR spectroscopy and other biophysical methods and will be studied for the abilities to elicit pharmacological responses against cellular targets.

### Sample Protocol
The whole venom was solvent extracted from dissected venom ducts and peptides components were identified by either of MALDI-TOF, ESI-Q-TOF or LC-ESI-Q-TOF MS and (MS)n mass spectrometry. De novo sequence determination was carried out by (MS)n analysis of natural and chemically modified peptides (which includes, reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds, esterification and acetylation reactions).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the Flex Analysis software provided by the instrument manufacturer (Bruker Daltonics). Individual spectra were interpreted manually to decipher linear sequences of the peptides of interest.

### Publication Abstract
Conopeptides are neurotoxic peptides in the venom of marine cone snails and have broad therapeutic potential for managing pain and other conditions. Here, we identified the single-disulfide peptides Czon1107 and Cca1669 from the venoms of <i>Conus zonatus</i> and <i>Conus caracteristicus</i>, respectively. We observed that Czon1107 strongly inhibits the human &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;4 (IC<sub>50</sub> 15.7 &#xb1; 3.0 &#x3bc;m) and &#x3b1;7 (IC<sub>50</sub> 77.1 &#xb1; 0.05 &#x3bc;m) nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subtypes, but the activity of Cca1669 remains to be identified. Czon1107 acted at a site distinct from the orthosteric receptor site. Solution NMR experiments revealed that Czon1107 exists in equilibrium between conformational states that are the result of a key Ser<sup>4</sup>-Pro<sup>5</sup><i>cis-trans</i> isomerization. Moreover, we found that the X-Pro amide bonds in the inter-cysteine loop are rigidly constrained to <i>cis</i> conformations. Structure-activity experiments of Czon1107 and its variants at positions P5 and P7 revealed that the conformation around the X-Pro bonds (<i>cis-trans</i>) plays an important role in receptor subtype selectivity. The <i>cis</i> conformation at the Cys<sup>6</sup>-Pro<sup>7</sup> peptide bond was essential for &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;4 nAChR subtype allosteric selectivity. In summary, we have identified a unique single-disulfide conopeptide with a noncompetitive, potentially allosteric inhibitory mechanism at the nAChRs. The small size and rigidity of the Czon1107 peptide could provide a scaffold for rational drug design strategies for allosteric nAChR modulation. This new paradigm in the "conotoxinomic" structure-function space provides an impetus to screen venom from other <i>Conus</i> species for similar, short bioactive peptides that allosterically modulate ligand-gated receptor function.

### Keywords
Conopeptides, Nmr spectroscopy, Electrophysiology, Mass spectrometry, Conotoxins

### Affiliations
Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.
Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science

### Submitter
Siddhartha Sarma

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Siddhartha P Sarma
Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.


