### Accession
PXD024063

### Title
Chronic treatment with terbutaline increases glucose and oleic acid oxidation and protein synthesis in cultured human myotubes

### Description
Objective: In vivo studies have reported several beneficial metabolic effects of β-adrenergic receptor agonist administration in skeletal muscle, including increased glucose uptake, fatty acid metabolism, lipolysis and mitochondrial biogenesis. Although these effects have been widely studied in vivo, the in vitro data are limited to mouse and rat cell lines. Therefore, we sought to discover the effects of the β2-adrenergic receptor agonist terbutaline on metabolism and protein synthesis in human primary skeletal muscle cells.  Results: The results showed that 4 h treatment with terbutaline was sufficient to increase glucose uptake in human myotubes, but also decreased both glucose and oleic acid oxidation along with oleic acid uptake. Moreover, administration of terbutaline for 96 h increased glucose uptake and oxidation, as well as oleic acid oxidation, leucine incorporation into cellular protein and upregulated several pathways related to mitochondrial metabolism.  Conclusion: These results suggest that β2-adrenergic receptor have direct effects in human skeletal muscle affecting fuel metabolism and net protein synthesis, effects that might be favourable for both type 2 diabetes and muscle wasting disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Human skeletal muscle cells were seeded out, grown and differentiated in 25 cm2 flasks. On day 3 of differentiation the cells were treated with either 0.01% DMSO or 1 µM terbutaline. At day 7 of differentiation the cells were washed in DPBS (with Mg2+ and Ca2+), harvested by scraping, washed in DPBS and spun down at 1000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min. The cells were then resuspended in DPBS, and frozen at −80°C. The cells were lysed using 150 µL of RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor followed by protein aggregation CAPTURE (ref PMID: 30833379), and protein reduction, alkylation and digestion into peptides with trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a 3M Empore™ C18 resin disc. Each peptide mixture was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive HF with EASY Spray PepMap® RSLC column (C18, 2 μl, 100 Å, 75 μm × 25 cm) using 90 min LC separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.7.0 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. UniProt database with ‘human’ entries (September 2018) was used for the database searches

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta adrenergic receptor; energy metabolism; mitochondrial metabolism; myotubes; oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


