### Accession
PXD012226

### Title
Application of data-independent acquisition approach to study the proteome dynamics of plant pathogenesis responses

### Description
Plants and pathogens are entangled in a continual arms race. The plants are evolved to have a dynamic defense and immune mechanisms to resist the infection and enhance the immunity for the second wave attacks from the same or different type of pathogenic species. Not only in the evolutionally or physiologically, the plant-pathogen interaction is also highly dynamic in the molecular level. Recently, the emerging quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach, data-independent acquisition (DIA), was developed for the analysis of proteome in a high throughput fashion. In this study, the DIA approach was applied to quantitatively trace the change of the plant proteome from the early to late stage of pathogenesis progression. This study revealed that the early stage of the pathogenesis response, the proteins directly related to the chaperon for the defense proteins. In the later stage, not only the defense proteins but also a set of the pathogen associate molecular pattern triggered immunity (PTI), effector triggered immunity (ETI) related proteins were highly induced. Our finding showed the dynamics of the regulation in protein level and demonstrated that the potential of using DIA approach for tracing the dynamics of the plant proteome during pathogenesis responses.

### Sample Protocol
4 to 5-week-old tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum cv CL5915) were inoculated with Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000 using the modified dipping method. Leaf sample of Pst inoculated groups were collected at 4, 8, and 24 hour post-infection (hpi). The control inoculum for the mock inoculation contained the same components as the bacteria inoculum but without Pst DC3000. Leaf sample of the mock inoculated group were also collected at 4, 8, and 24 hour post-treatment (hpt). Three biological replicates of control and Pst DC3000 inoculated leaves were prepared for the proteomics experiments. Total proteins extracted from the leaves were proteolyzed in-solution with Lys-C and Trypsin after reduction and cysteine alkylation. The desalt peptides (2 μg) with addition of Biognosys iRT peptides were analyzed in a data in-dependent acquisition (DIA) mode by nanoLC−MS/MS, equipped with a self-packed tunnel-frit analytical column (ID75 μm x 50 cm length) on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bellefonte, USA). The peptides were separated by a 135-min gradient using the mobile phases including Solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and Solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). With a ﬂow rate of 250 nL/min, the gradient started with a 40 min equilibration maintained at 2% of B and set as the following segments: 2 to 8% of B in 8 min, 8 to 25% of B in 90 min, then 25% to 48% of B in 5 min, 48 to 80% of B in another 5 min followed by 80% of B wash 10 min and the last equilibrium to 2% B in the last 20 min. For building the spectral library, shotgun data-dependent acquisition runs (top 15 method) were performed on the same LC-MS equipment and gradient.

### Data Protocol
With the DDA data files, the Mascot (version 2.3), X!Tandem (version 2013.06.15.1) and Comet (version 2017.01 rev.1) were used to do the protein database search against a combined database of ITAG (version 3.1, 34881 entries; reverse sequence generate as the decoy database) and the iRT standard peptides and BSA (SwissProt Accession: P02769) sequence. Search parameters were set as followings: MS tolerance, 20 ppm, allow precursor monoisotopic mass isotope error; number of trypsin missed cleavage: 2; Fragment Mass tolerance, 0.2 Da; enzyme, trypsin; static modifications, carbamidomethyl (Cys, + 57.021 Da); dynamic modifications, oxidation (+15.995 Da) of methionine. Next the software on the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, version 5.1) was used to combine the search result from different search engine and different repeats. OpenMS (version 2.2.0) was utilized for decoyed spectral library construction. We employed the OpenSWATH (version 0.1.2) to search the DIA files against the spectral library we constructed. The retention time alignment using the information of iRT transitions. Search parameters were set as followings: peptide FDR, 0.05; protein FDR, 0.01; alignment method, LocalMST; re-alignment method, lowess; RT difference, 60; alignment scare, 0.05. Only proteins detected and quantified in all runs (3 biological replicates) were included in the data set. Differential protein quantity was evaluated by the students' t-Test. Proteins with differentially regulated abundance having p-value less than 0.05 and fold change greater than 1.5 or less than 0.67 were defined as “significant” change in protein quantity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant pathogenesis responses, Quantitative proteomics, Pseudomonas syringae, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Wei-Hung Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Yet-Ran Chen
Academia Sinica


