### Accession
PXD007789

### Title
Human keratinocytes HaCaT LC-MSMS_SDS exposure

### Description
We employed human HaCaT cells as a model system to identify cellular proteins that accompany SDS-induced toxicity based on a proteomic approach. HaCaT human keratinocyte cell line were treated with a non-cytotoxic dose of SDS (25 µg/ml, as determined by the MTT assay and microscopically examination) for 48 h. The altered abundance of proteins from HaCaT keratinocytes exposed to SDS was analyzed by LC-MS/MS approach and quantified using Progenesis LC software. The abundance of 217 proteins (which were identified by multiple peptides, ≥ 2) was altered in keratinocytes exposed to SDS; in which 131 proteins had increased abundance while 86 proteins was down regulated. The Pathview map of 131 up-regulated proteins was built and enhancement of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis was found.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaT cells were seeded in T75 tissue culture flasks and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, Glutamax™ Supplement and antibiotics. After growing to ~ 60-70% confluence the cultured cells were divided into two groups, one is control (fresh medium was added, samples 7, 8, 13 and 14) and another were exposed to SDS (25 μg/ml, samples 11, 12 and 15) diluted in complete DMEM (48 h.).  The cells homogenates (control and after SDS treatment) were prepared by sonication of the suspension at +4°C following the program for the ultrasonic BANDELIN Sonopuls HD 2070 instrumen. The pair of HaCaT samples (175 µg of protein) for each cells types (untreated and SDS-exposed) were processed in-solution digestion, alkylation was performed with vinylpyridine. Separation and identiﬁcation of the peptides were performed on a Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC connected to Orbitrap Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG ion source. Mass spectra were measured in the positive ion mode. Data was acquired in the Orbitrap Q-Exactive analyzer with resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) for MS and 15,000 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans. The collision energy was set to 35%. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from targeting for 10 s. Singly charged ions and ion with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering MS/MS scans. Three independent LC-MS/MS runs were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs in raw format were carried out for untreated and SDS exposed HaCaT cells and processed separately or jointly (control vs SDS-exposed) using Progenesis LC-MS software. Protein identiﬁcation in Mascot software was performed with decoy against SwissProt (SP, 2012_11 version, .fasta format) for Homo sapiens. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to 1 missing cleavages were allowed. Pyridylethylation (C) was used as static modification. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable. Charge states of +2, +3, and +4 were taking into account for parent ions. Mass tolerance was set to ± 15 ppm for parent ion masses and ± 0.01 Da for fragment ion masses. Maximum false discovery rate (FDR) = 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of sodium dodecyl sulfate (25 mg/ml) and Triton X-100 (12.5 mg/ml and 25 mg/ml) on the HaCaT immortalized keratinocytes exposed to these surfactants for 48 h were studied. Using shotgun proteomics, a comparative analysis of the proteomic profiles of control and experimental cells after surfactants exposure was carried out. 260 common proteins were identified in control and experimental cells; 33 proteins were found in cells exposed to all three treatments, but not in control cells. These 33 proteins apparently reflect a nonspecific (universal) response of cells to toxic damage by the surfactants. These proteins are associated with activation of cell proliferation, changes in the functional activity of their ER and mitochondria, increased mRNA stability and activation of protein degradation processes in the cells. The possibility of using these proteins as a nonspecific parameter of cell response to cytotoxic damage is discussed. The mass spectrometry proteomics data ("raw", "mgf" and "xml" files) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD007789 and PXD007776.

### Keywords
Glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, Hacat keratinocytes, Pathview map, Exposure, Shotgun proteomics, Sodium dodecyl sulphate

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia 
Orekhovich Research Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Russia

### Submitter
Natalia Petushkova

### Lab Head
Dr Andrey V. Lisitsa
Orekhovich Research Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Russia


