### Accession
PXD037312

### Title
CRL2ZER1/ZYG11B recognizes small N-terminal residues for degradation

### Description
N-degron pathway plays an important role in the protein quality control and maintenance of cellular protein homeostasis. ZER1 and ZYG11B, the substrate receptors of the Cullin 2-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL2), recognize N-terminal (Nt) glycine degrons and participate in the Nt-myristoylation quality control through the Gly/N-degron pathway. Here we show that ZER1 and ZYG11B can also recognize small Nt-residues other than glycine. Specifically, ZER1 preferentially binds to Nt-serine, -alanine, -threonine and -cysteine over -glycine, while ZYG11B prefers Nt-glycine but also has the capacity to recognize Nt-serine, -alanine and -cysteine in vitro. Nt-serine, -alanine and -cysteine undergo Nt-acetylation by NatA, thereby shielding them from recognition by ZER1/ZYG11B in cells. We found that ZER1/ZYG11B is able to target the non-acetylation of small Nt-residue degrons for degradation in NatA-deficient cells, implicating its role in the Nt-acetylation quality control. Furthermore, we present the crystal structures of ZER1 and ZYG11B bound to various small Nt-residues and uncover the molecular mechanism of non-acetylated substrate recognition by ZER1 and ZYG11B.N-degron pathway plays an important role in the protein quality control and maintenance of cellular protein homeostasis. ZER1 and ZYG11B, the substrate receptors of the Cullin 2-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL2), recognize N-terminal (Nt) glycine degrons and participate in the Nt-myristoylation quality control through the Gly/N-degron pathway. Here we show that ZER1 and ZYG11B can also recognize small Nt-residues other than glycine. Specifically, ZER1 preferentially binds to Nt-serine, -alanine, -threonine and -cysteine over -glycine, while ZYG11B prefers Nt-glycine but also has the capacity to recognize Nt-serine, -alanine and -cysteine in vitro. Nt-serine, -alanine and -cysteine undergo Nt-acetylation by NatA, thereby shielding them from recognition by ZER1/ZYG11B in cells. We found that ZER1/ZYG11B is able to target the non-acetylation of small Nt-residue degrons for degradation in NatA-deficient cells, implicating its role in the Nt-acetylation quality control. Furthermore, we present the crystal structures of ZER1 and ZYG11B bound to various small Nt-residues and uncover the molecular mechanism of non-acetylated substrate recognition by ZER1 and ZYG11B.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells expressing Ub-SFLH-GFP were infected with shNT and shNAA10 lentivirus and selected for stable cells. The stable cells were collected and lysed in ice-cold cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X100, 10% glycerol, add freshly 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 × protease inhibitors). GFP-Trap® Magnetic Particles (Proteintech) were added to the supernatants and incubated with rotation overnight at 4°C. The beads were then washed four times with the same lysis buffer before bound proteins were eluted using SDS-PAGE sample buffer (95°C, 5 min). Proteins were subsequently resolved by SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised from the gel and cut into small pieces (1 mm). The proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) and tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted and desalted.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. For MS1 survey scan, automatic gain control (AGC) target is 1 × 106 and the resolution is 70,000. The MS2 spectra were acquired with resolution 17500. MS/MS data were searched using Proteome Discoverer software with an overall false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% for peptides. Proteins with a score < 2 were removed. Peptide sequences were searched using trypsin specificity and allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation on N-terminal and lysine were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for precursor ions were set at ± 10 ppm for precursor ions and ± 0.02 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
N-degron pathway plays an important role in the protein quality control and maintenance of cellular protein homeostasis. ZER1 and ZYG11B, the substrate receptors of the Cullin 2-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL2), recognize N-terminal (Nt) glycine degrons and participate in the Nt-myristoylation quality control through the Gly/N-degron pathway. Here we show that ZER1 and ZYG11B can also recognize small Nt-residues other than glycine. Specifically, ZER1 binds better to Nt-Ser, -Ala, -Thr and -Cys than to -Gly, while ZYG11B prefers Nt-Gly but also has the capacity to recognize Nt-Ser, -Ala and -Cys in vitro. We found that Nt-Ser, -Ala and -Cys undergo Nt-acetylation catalyzed by Nt-acetyltransferase (NAT), thereby shielding them from recognition by ZER1/ZYG11B in cells. Instead, ZER1/ZYG11B readily targets a selection of small Nt-residues lacking Nt-acetylation for degradation in NAT-deficient cells, implicating its role in the Nt-acetylation quality control. Furthermore, we present the crystal structures of ZER1 and ZYG11B bound to various small Nt-residues and uncover the molecular mechanism of non-acetylated substrate recognition by ZER1 and ZYG11B.

### Keywords
N-terminal acetylation, Crl2zer1/zyg11b, Nt-ser

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University
The Province and Ministry Co-sponsored Collaborative Innovation Center for Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China

### Submitter
wenyi mi

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyi Mi
The Province and Ministry Co-sponsored Collaborative Innovation Center for Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China


