### Accession
PXD023959

### Title
Ubiquitinated sites on VPS34 by UBE3C LC-MSMS

### Description
Ubiquitinated sites on VPS34 identified by LC-MS/MS analysis of VPS34 derived from in vivo ubiquitination assays of UBE3C-transfected or -untransfected 293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
After in vivo Flag-VPS34 ubiquitination assays were performed in cells transfected with or without UBE3C, Flag-VPS34 were isolated by immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag beads, separated by SDS-PAGE, and stained with SYPROTM Ruby Protein Gel Stain. The bands corresponding the increasing molecular weight of the ubiquitin-conjugated Flag-VPS34 were excised from the gel for in-gel digestion with Lys-C and Trypsin for overnight. NanoLC−nanoESI-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system connected to an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Luoms mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 μm particles with a pore with of 100 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 45% solvent B (80 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution with a 2×105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 1.6 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and MS2 scan analysis at 30K resolution in the orbitrap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5×104 and the max injection time was 54 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
All data generated were searched against the Swiss- Prot Human database, and (561,911 entries total) database using the Mascot search engine (v.2.7.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) through Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4.1.15; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, variable modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), ubiquitinylation (K) allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Peptide sequence assignments contained in MASCOT search results were validated by manual confirmation from raw MS/MS data. For label-free quantification, precursor ions intensities were extracted using Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer with a 2 ppm mass precision and 2 min retention time shift (align the LC/MS peaks mapping to the isotope pattern and retention time).

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy are two major quality control processes whose impairment is linked to a wide variety of diseases. The coordination between UPS and autophagy remains incompletely understood. Here, we show that ubiquitin ligase UBE3C and deubiquitinating enzyme TRABID reciprocally regulate K29/K48-branched ubiquitination of VPS34. We find that this ubiquitination enhances the binding of VPS34 to proteasomes for degradation, thereby suppressing autophagosome formation and maturation. Under ER and proteotoxic stresses, UBE3C recruitment to phagophores is compromised with a concomitant increase of its association with proteasomes. This switch attenuates the action of UBE3C on VPS34, thereby elevating autophagy activity to facilitate proteostasis, ER quality control and cell survival. Specifically in the liver, we show that TRABID-mediated VPS34 stabilization is critical for lipid metabolism and is downregulated during the pathogenesis of steatosis. This study identifies a ubiquitination type on VPS34 and elucidates its cellular fate and physiological functions in proteostasis and liver metabolism.

### Keywords
Ube3c, Ubiquitinated sites, Vps34

### Affiliations
R602, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yu-Hsuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Hsuan Chen
R602, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


