### Accession
PXD001301

### Title
CRISPR-Cas9-based knockout of the prion protein and its effect on the proteome

### Description
The molecular function of the cellular prion protein (PrPC) and the mechanism by which it may contribute to neurotoxicity in prion diseases and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are only partially understood. Mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells and, more recently, C2C12 myocytes and myotubes have emerged as popular models for investigating the cellular biology of PrP. Mouse epithelial NMuMG cells might become attractive models for studying the possible involvement of PrP in a morphogenetic program underlying epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions. Here we describe the generation of PrP knockout clones from these cell lines using CRISPR-Cas9 knockout technology. More specifically, knockout clones were generated with two separate gRNAs targeting recognition sites on opposite strands within the first hundred nucleotides of the Prnp coding sequence. Several PrP knockout clones were isolated and genomic insertions and deletions near the CRISPR-target sites were characterized. Subsequently, deep quantitative global proteome analyses that recorded the relative abundance of > 3000 proteins were undertaken to begin to characterize the molecular consequences of PrP deficiency. The levels of ~120 proteins were shown to reproducibly correlate with the presence or absence of PrP, with most of these proteins as belonging to extracellular components, cell junctions or the cytoskeleton.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for comparative global proteomics analysis For the comparative analyses of global proteomes NMuMG cell clones were employed, which expressed wild-type levels of PrP, no PrP or stably reduced levels of PrP. For each of these cell clones, three 100 mm cell culture plates grown to near confluency served as starting material for generating three biological replicates. Cells were lysed with the aid of 0.5 mm glass beads and a Mini-BeadBeater-8 (Biospec Products Inc., Oklahoma, USA) in the presence of SDS-containing Lysis Buffer (2% SDS, 62.5 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 8.0), which had been preheated to 90 °C. Following three cycles of 1 minute bead beading at ‘Homogenization Level’, samples were further incubated at 90 °C to deactivate residual enzymatic activities in the cellular extracts. Protein levels were adjusted by BCA colourimetric assay (Thermo Scientific, Nepean, Ontario, Canada). Subsequently, disulfide bonds were first reduced in 100 μg aliquots for 30 min at 60 °C in the presence of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), then alkylated for 1 hr at room temperature in the presence of 10 mM 4-vinylpyiridine (4-VP). The samples were then acetone precipitated, the pellets washed with 90% acetone and redissolved in 9 M urea. To ensure that the residual urea concentration did not exceed 1.5 M, samples were diluted in Tetraethylammonium bromide buffer (TEAB) and then digested with side chain-modified porcine trypsin overnight at 37°C. The covalent modification of peptides with reagents from the 6-plex amine-reactive tandem mass tag (TMT ) labeling kit followed instructions provided by the manufacturer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA).   Nanospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry To remove urea, buffer components and unreacted TMT reagents, samples were ZipTip-purified on reversed-phase (C18) and strong cation exchange (SCX) resins. Eluents were adjusted to 0.1 % formic acid and separated on 25 cm C18 nanocapillary columns (Acclaim PepMap RSLC with 100 Å pore size, 2 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter) using an EASY-nLC 1100 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A linear four-hour gradient of 2 to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid was used to elute peptides and transfer them by dynamic nanospray ionization to the ion transfer tube of an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The acquisition method was designed with a view to maximize parallelization and involved three scan types. First, a survey scan of the 400-2000 m/z range at 120,000 resolution was conducted in the orbitrap with the automated gain control target set to 2 e5. Next, the most intense precursor ion carrying two or more charges was isolated, subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) and its fragments detected in the linear ion trap located at the back end of the machine. Finally, the ten most intense fragments from this MS2 scan were synchronously sent to the ion-routing multipole for higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD). The low m/z fragments obtained during MS3 fragmentation, including the TMT reporter ions, were detected at 60,000 resolution in the orbitrap with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1.0 e5 and the maximum injection time limited to 120 ms. The combined cycle time for this method was set to 3 seconds during which as many precursors as possible, selected on the basis of their intensity and in the order from most intense to lower intense, were subjected to this processing scheme. Dynamic exclusion prevented the re-analysis of any precursor mass in a 20 ppm m/z window for the duration of 300 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Post-acquisition analyses For the analyses of global proteome datasets, the international protein index (IPI) mouse database (Version 3.87) was interrogated by Mascot (Version 2.4; Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK ) and Sequest HT search engines embedded in Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and by integrated proteomics software packages Scaffold (Version Q+; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, Oregon, USA) and PEAKS Studio (Version 6.0; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). The percolator algorithm [25] was applied to filter all CID spectra and select the subset of spectra that exceed a false discovery rate target of 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular function of the cellular prion protein (PrPC) and the mechanism by which it may contribute to neurotoxicity in prion diseases and Alzheimer's disease are only partially understood. Mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells and, more recently, C2C12 myocytes and myotubes have emerged as popular models for investigating the cellular biology of PrP. Mouse epithelial NMuMG cells might become attractive models for studying the possible involvement of PrP in a morphogenetic program underlying epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions. Here we describe the generation of PrP knockout clones from these cell lines using CRISPR-Cas9 knockout technology. More specifically, knockout clones were generated with two separate guide RNAs targeting recognition sites on opposite strands within the first hundred nucleotides of the Prnp coding sequence. Several PrP knockout clones were isolated and genomic insertions and deletions near the CRISPR-target sites were characterized. Subsequently, deep quantitative global proteome analyses that recorded the relative abundance of&gt;3000 proteins (data deposited to ProteomeXchange Consortium) were undertaken to begin to characterize the molecular consequences of PrP deficiency. The levels of &#x223c; 120 proteins were shown to reproducibly correlate with the presence or absence of PrP, with most of these proteins belonging to extracellular components, cell junctions or the cytoskeleton.

### Keywords
Kockdown, Crispr-cas9, Prion, Knockout

### Affiliations
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Gerold Schmitt-Ulms

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
University of Toronto


