### Accession
PXD002281

### Title
Identification of HER2 peptides for quantification in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues

### Description
The ability to accurately quantify proteins in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues using targeted mass spectrometry opens exciting perspectives for biomarker discovery. We have developed and evaluated a selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay for the human receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (HER2) in FFPE breast tumors. Peptide candidates were identified using an untargeted mass spectrometry approach in relevant cell lines. A selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay was developed for the six best candidate peptides and evaluated for linearity, precision and lower limit of quantification. The six HER2 peptides of interest were then quantified by SRM in a cohort of 40 archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues from women with invasive breast carcinomas, showing different levels of HER2 gene amplification. Finally, the agreement was tested between data generated by SRM and data generated using standard clinical pathology methods, namely immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The high agreement observed indicates that SRM is a suitable method to quantify peptides from FFPE material, and therefore represents a powerful approach for biomarker discovery studies.

### Sample Protocol
Suitable HER2 peptides for targeted MS analysis were identified by untargeted MS analysis from untreated and formalin-fixed HER2-overexpressing cell lines (SKBR-3 and BT-474). The HER2-overexpressing SKBR-3 and BT-474 cell lines (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were cultivated to confluence in McCoy’s 5A medium containing 15 % fetal bovine serum or in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10 % FCS, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM sodium pyruvate and 2 mM L-glutamine respectively. Samples were prepared according to one of three following procedures, namely 1) total protein fraction from fresh cell cultures; 2) plasma membrane-enriched fraction followed by SDS-PAGE fractionation and in-gel digestion of the band corresponding to HER2; or 3) total protein fraction from formalin-fixed cell cultures, followed by peptide extraction using a procedure allowing unblocking of formalin cross-links. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos from Thermo Electron (Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity HPLC system from Waters Corporation. Peptides were trapped on a home-made 100 µm × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a gravity-pulled home-made emitter of dimension 75 µm × 150 mm (both columns packed with 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ chromatographic phase from Michrom (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). The analytical separation was run for 65 min using a gradient of 0.1 % formic acid in H2O (solvent A) and 0.1 % formic acid in CH3CN (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 5 % B for 1 min, 5 %–35 % B in 54 min and 35 %–80 % B in 10 min at a flow rate of 220 nL/min. Electrospray voltage was set to 1800 V. For MS survey scans, the orbitrap analyzer resolution was set to 60,000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window of 400 to 2000. A maximum of eight precursor ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ analyzer with a dynamic exclusion time set to 45 s. Ions were accumulated to a target value of 7 × 103 with an isolation width of 2 m/z and CID was performed at a normalized collision energy of 35 %.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from raw data using the embedded software from the instrument vendor (extract_MSN.exe) and were subsequently submitted to EasyProt (v2.2), a platform which uses Phenyx (GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland) for protein identification. Searches were conducted against the UniProtKB/SwissProt database (11.01.2011 and 13.06.2012 releases containing 20’252 and 20’237 reviewed entries respectively) specifying “Homo sapiens” taxonomy. The parent ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed or variable modification whereas oxidized methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage allowed. Peptide scores were set up to maintain the false positive peptide ratio below 5 %. Alternatively, raw mass spectrometry data were processed using the SEQUEST search algorithm (SEQUEST version 27.0, revision 12, Thermo Electron) and searches were performed using the UniProtKB/SwissProt protein knowledgebase database (version 2011_07) filtered for “homo sapiens” (58772 sequences concatenated with their decoy entries). Data were searched with a mass tolerance of +/-5 ppm for parent ions and +/- 1.0 Da for fragment ions. Methionines (reduced/oxidized; +15.9949 Da) were considered as differential modifications while cysteines were considered as fully carbamidomethylated (+57.0199 Da). False discovery rate was set to 1%. Only fully tryptic peptides with no more than one missed cleavage were considered for data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The ability to accurately quantify proteins in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues using targeted mass spectrometry opens exciting perspectives for biomarker discovery. We have developed and evaluated a selectedreaction monitoring assay for the human receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (HER2) in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast tumors. Peptide candidates were identified using an untargeted mass spectrometry approach in relevant cell lines. A multiplexed assay was developed for the six best candidate peptides and evaluated for linearity, precision and lower limit of quantification. Results showed a linear response over a calibration range of 0.012 to 100 fmol on column (R(2): 0.99-1.00).The lower limit of quantification was 0.155 fmol on column for all peptides evaluated. The six HER2 peptides were quantified by selected reaction monitoring in a cohort of 40 archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissues from women with invasive breast carcinomas, which showed different levels of HER2 gene amplification as assessed by standard methods used in clinical pathology. The amounts of the six HER2 peptides were highly and significantly correlated with each other, indicating that peptide levels can be used as surrogates of protein amounts in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues. After normalization for sample size, selected reaction monitoring peptide measurements were able to correctly predict 90% of cases based on HER2 amplification as defined by the American Society of Clinical Oncology and College of American Pathologists. In conclusion, the developed assay showed good analytical performance and a high agreement with immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization data. This study demonstrated that selected reaction monitoring allows to accurately quantify protein expression in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and represents therefore a powerful approach for biomarker discovery studies. The untargeted mass spectrometry data is available via ProteomeXchange whereas the quantification data by selected reaction monitoring is available on the Panorama Public website.

### Keywords
Human, Ltq orbitrap velos, Formalin-fixed parrafin-embedded tissues (ffpe), Human receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbb-2 (her2), Breast cancer

### Affiliations
F. Hoffmann-La Roche
Translational Technologies and Bioinformatics, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche Pharma Research & Early Development (pRED), Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Grenzacherstrasse 124, CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Carine Steiner

### Lab Head
Dr Ducret Axel
Translational Technologies and Bioinformatics, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche Pharma Research & Early Development (pRED), Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Grenzacherstrasse 124, CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland


