### Accession
PXD002262

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with extracellularly applied α-syn assemblies, Condition 4 - controls (7/8)

### Description
Fibrillar α-Synuclein (α-Syn) is the principal component of Lewy bodies which are evident in individuals affected by Parkinson disease (PD). This neuropathologic form of α-Syn contributes to PD progression and propagation of exogeneous α-Syn between neurons has been demonstrated. In order to identify proteins interacting with extracellularly applied α-syn assemblies (either oligomeric or fibrillar α -syn) and identify in particular plasma membrane proteins exposed extracellularly, we exposed pure-neuronal cultures to oligomeric and fibrillar α-syn for 10 min, pulled down the complex, and identified the associated proteins using a proteomic-based approach. Using pull-down of whole cell lysates and MS, we have identified proteins interacting with extracellularly applied α-syn in three different conditions. Each condition consisted in three experimental replicates of cells exposed 10 min to α-syn assemblies and the non-treated cells used as controls

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant α-syn (oligomeric and fibrillar forms) with a C-terminal S-tag that binds with high affinity to ribonuclease S-protein were used to identify specific partners of α-syn assemblies. Pure cultures of cortical neurons, maintained in astrocyte-conditioned neuronal medium, were exposed to recombinant oligomeric or fibrillar S-tagged α-syn for 10 min (conditions 1 and 2 respectively). α-syn-S-tag assemblies and associated proteins were pulled down from whole cell lysates using S-protein agarose beads, trypsin digested directly on-beads. In order to discriminate between neuronal specific proteins and proteins from astrocytes, we made a control experiment in which pure astrocytes were exposed to recombinant S-tag α-syn assemblies (oligomeric and fibrillar forms in conditions 3 and 4 respectively). For each condition, control samples were prepared from cells unexposed to α-syn.  Resulting tryptic peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo Scientific Proxeon EASY-nLC II high performance nano liquid chromatography system coupled to the nanoelectrospray ion source of a Thermo Scientific Linear Ion Trap-OrbitrapVelos mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS data were processed automatically using the Scaffold software (version 3.6.4) and the SwissProt_18112011 database with both the Mascot (Version: 2.3.02) and the X! Tandem (Version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1) search engine, a specific trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, a tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment monoisotopic masses and 6 ppm for parent monoisotopic mass tolerance, and the following chemical modifications: Carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification, and dehydration, ammonia loss, oxidation of methionine and N-acetylation as variable modifications. For the Scaffold analysis, thresholds were set at 90% minimum for peptides and 99% and 2 unique peptides minimum for protein. Identified proteins were quantified by a label-free proteomic approach using spectral counting with the Scaffold software. Nucleolin was chosen to normalize the spectral counting data because comparison between controls and samples identified this protein as a major and reproducible contaminant among experiments. Proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides in at least 2 replicates were quantified. Only proteins with an average fold increase, corresponding to the ratio of spectral counting calculated from averaged spectral counts of three independent replicates between the cells exposed to α-syn assemblies (either oligomeric or fibrillar) and the untreated control cells, above 1.6 were considered as significantly increased in the pull-down and thus considered as α-syn interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn) assemblies can be up-taken by neurons; however, their interaction with the plasma membrane and proteins has not been studied specifically. Here we demonstrate that &#x3b1;-syn assemblies form clusters within the plasma membrane of neurons. Using a proteomic-based approach, we identify the &#x3b1;3-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase (NKA) as a cell surface partner of &#x3b1;-syn assemblies. The interaction strength depended on the state of &#x3b1;-syn, fibrils being the strongest, oligomers weak, and monomers none. Mutations within the neuron-specific &#x3b1;3-subunit are linked to rapid-onset dystonia Parkinsonism (RDP) and alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC). We show that freely diffusing &#x3b1;3-NKA are trapped within &#x3b1;-syn clusters resulting in &#x3b1;3-NKA redistribution and formation of larger nanoclusters. This creates regions within the plasma membrane with reduced local densities of &#x3b1;3-NKA, thereby decreasing the efficiency of Na+ extrusion following stimulus. Thus, interactions of &#x3b1;3-NKA with extracellular &#x3b1;-syn assemblies reduce its pumping activity as its mutations in RDP/AHC.

### Keywords
Oligomers, Lc-msms, Fibrils, Proteomics, Pull-down, Protein-protein interactions, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
CNRS
Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, Team Melki, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Virginie Redeker

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Redeker; Ronald Melki
Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, Team Melki, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


