### Accession
PXD015277

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Normothermic Ex-Vivo perfusion in a DCD auto-transplantation model

### Description
We performed an unbiased proteomics analysis of 28 kidney biopsies obtained at three time points from pig kidneys subjected to 30-minutes of warm ischemia, followed by 8 hours of NEVKP or static cold storage (SCS), and auto-transplantation.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen porcine kidney biopsy samples were lysed, homogenized and sonicated. The supernatant was collected following centrifugation at 15,000g at 4C for 20 minutes. Total protein concentration was measured using Coomassie assay and each sample was normalized to 250g of total protein. remaining samples underwent denaturation, reduction and alkylation and overnight trypsin digestion at 37C. Following digestion, SCX chromatography and fractionation were performed on an HPLC system (Agilent 1100) using a 60-min two-step gradient. The resulting fractions corresponding to chromatographic peaks of eluting peptides were pooled into 7 fractions. Peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS. Peptides from each fraction were extracted with 10 μL OMIX C18 MB tips (Varian), and loaded onto a 3.3 cm C18 pre-column (New Objective). Eluted peptides from the trap column were loaded onto a resolving analytical PicoTip Emitter column, 15 cm in length (New Objective). The columns were operated on the EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and coupled online to Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nano-ESI source (Proxeon Biosystems). Each fraction was run using a 60-min gradient and analyzed in data-dependent mode. For protein identification and data analysis, XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher) was utilized to generate RAW files of each MS run.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra from each fraction were analysed using Andromeda search engine (MaxQuant v.1.5.3.28) against a Sus scrofa database generated from the non-redundant union of porcine sequences from UniProtKB, NCBI RefSeq, and cRAP database of common contaminants. Reverse decoy mode was used. Tryptic peptides were selected with up to two mis-cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification. Protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.01. Label free quantification was performed and normalized protein LFQ intensities were calculated. The data were analysed using Perseus v.1.5.2.6. Reverse hits, contaminants and proteins lacking annotation were removed. Normalized LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. The data were filtered to retain only those proteins that were identified in at least 5 samples at any time point.

### Publication Abstract
Normothermic ex-vivo kidney perfusion (NEVKP) results in significantly improved graft function in porcine auto-transplant models of donation after circulatory death injury compared with static cold storage (SCS); however, the molecular mechanisms underlying these beneficial effects remain unclear. We performed an unbiased proteomics analysis of 28 kidney biopsies obtained at three time points from pig kidneys subjected to 30 min of warm ischemia, followed by 8&#xa0;h of NEVKP or SCS, and auto-transplantation. 70/6593 proteins quantified were differentially expressed between NEVKP and SCS groups (false discovery rate &lt; 0.05). Proteins increased in NEVKP mediated key metabolic processes including fatty acid &#xdf;-oxidation, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. Comparison of our findings with external datasets of ischemia-reperfusion and other models of kidney injury confirmed that 47 of our proteins represent a common signature of kidney injury reversed or attenuated by NEVKP. We validated key metabolic proteins (electron transfer flavoprotein subunit beta and carnitine O-palmitoyltransferase 2, mitochondrial) by immunoblotting. Transcription factor databases identified members of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) family of transcription factors as the upstream regulators of our dataset, and we confirmed increased expression of PPARA, PPARD, and RXRA in NEVKP with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The proteome-level changes observed in NEVKP mediate critical metabolic pathways. These effects may be coordinated by PPAR-family transcription factors and may represent novel therapeutic targets in ischemia-reperfusion injury.

### Keywords
Ischemia-reperfusion injury, Dcd, Perfusion, Nevkp, Kidney, Transplant

### Affiliations
Multi-Organ Transplant, and Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine. University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
University Health Network

### Submitter
Caitriona McEvoy

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Konvalinka
Multi-Organ Transplant, and Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine. University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


