### Accession
PXD011209

### Title
Two of a kind: Transmissible Schwann cell cancers in the endangered Tasmanian devil.

### Description
Devil facial tumour disease 1 and 2 (DFT1 and DFT2) are two genetically distinct transmissible cancers endangering the survival of the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii). DFT1 first arose from a cell of the Schwann cell lineage, however, the tissue-of-origin of the recently discovered DFT2 cancer remains unknown. Here we have performed mRNA and protein expression analyses to show that variation in expression patterns between DFT1 and DFT2 tumours is low. Furthermore, DFT2 cells express a range of markers associated with Schwann cell differentiation, suggesting a similar tissue-of-origin to DFT1 tumours. These findings suggest that devils may be predisposed to transmissible cancers of Schwann cell origin. The emergence of these two unique cancers presents an unprecedented opportunity to gain insight into cancer development in animal species.

### Sample Protocol
The DFT1 C5065, DFT2 SN and fibroblast TD344 cell lines in triplicate were lysed in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate containing 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (pH7.8-8.2) at 95oC. Protein was recovered by collecting the supernatant after centrifugation (14,000g for 5 min at 4oC), and the protein concentration was estimated using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit.  Protein (100 µg) from each biological sample was reduced at 65oC for 30 minutes using dithiothreitol (DTT; 10mM), then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA; 20mM) at room temperature for 30 min and digested with trypsin (5 µg) overnight at 37oC. Samples were acidified with formic acid (1% v/v) to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate and removed by centrifugation and the peptide supernatant dried by vacuum concentration.  Peptides were stored at -20oC and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water, before analysis by LC-MS. Equal amount of peptide from each biological replicate of respective cell line was pooled and fractionated using HpH reverse phase chromatography. Resultant fractions were combined into a total of 13 fractions for each cell line. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was carried out in positive ion mode using a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with an Eksigent nanoLC 400 liquid chromatography system (SCIEX) and nanoflex cHiPLC module (SCIEX).  Peptides (10µl, approx. 2 µg) were desalted with 2% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 5µl/min for 5 minutes using a C18 trap (2cm, 200 μm, 2.7 μm, Halo C18) for both Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) and data independent (SWATH) experiments. For IDA, peptides were separated on a cHiPLC C18 column (15 cm x 200 μm, 3 μm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 25oC, SCIEX) using a linear solvent gradient from 2% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) to 35% mobile phase B (B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 600 nL/min over 120 mins. For SWATH, data was acquired using a 60 min LC gradient (5-35% mobile phase B) at 600nl/min. Liquid chromatography eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray MS analysis (spray voltage 2.5kV, curtain gas 25, GS1 20) using a nanospray III source (SCIEX) and an uncoated PicoTip Emitter (10cm, 360 μm O.D., 20 μm I.D., New Objective).  For spectral library generation in IDA mode, high pH fractions were analysed using a TOFMS survey scan (m/z 350-1500, 200 msec) followed by MS/MS analysis (100 msec each, m/z 100-1800) of the top 20 most intense precursor ions with an exclusion time of 30 sec.   For SWATH/MS experiments, samples were analysed in data independent mode (SWATH) using m/z variable windows (100 in total) determined based on precursor m/z densities from IDA data. In SWATH mode a TOF-MS survey scan was acquired (m/ z 350-1500, 30 msec, high resolution setting of 30,000) followed by 100 SWATH-MS2 scans (m/ z 350-1500, 30 msec, variable windows, high sensitivity setting of 15,000).  Each SWATH-MS2 scan used a rolling collision energy (CE = 0.06 x m/z - 1 for +2 ions and, CE = 0.06 x m/z – 3 for +3-5 ions) and CE spread of 5.  SWATH experiments for each digested sample were acquired in a random order with one blank injection acquired between each sample.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using the Paragon algorithm (SCIEX) in ProteinPilot (Version 5.0, SCIEX) in thorough ID mode with FDR calculation enabled and allowing biological modification. MS/MS spectra from all IDA experiment were searched against a reference database for the Tasmanian Devil (Sarcophilus harrisii, UniProt KB, 22,388 entries, November 2016) to generate a spectral library.  Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine residues, and an Unused cut-off score of 1.3 (95% confidence) was used for database searches. For SWATH quantitation, ProteinPilot IDA search results for all high pH fractions were imported into PeakView2.1 with SWATH2.0 MicroApp (SCIEX) and used as a spectral library.  Retention times for all Tasmanian devil facial tumour SWATH files were aligned using linear regression and by selecting 5 endogenous peptides across the elution profile.  The top 6 most intense fragment ions for each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data using a maximum number of peptides of 100, 75ppm mass tolerance, peptide confidence threshold of ≥ 0.99, and a 5 min retention time extraction window.  After data processing, peptides with confidence  99% and FDR  1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Devil facial tumour disease (DFTD) comprises two genetically distinct transmissible cancers (DFT1 and DFT2) endangering the survival of the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) in the wild. DFT1 first arose from a cell of the Schwann cell lineage; however, the tissue-of-origin of the recently discovered DFT2 cancer is unknown. In this study, we compared the transcriptome and proteome of DFT2 tumours to DFT1 and normal Tasmanian devil tissues to determine the tissue-of-origin of the DFT2 cancer. Our findings demonstrate that DFT2 expresses a range of Schwann cell markers and exhibits expression patterns consistent with a similar origin to the DFT1 cancer. Furthermore, DFT2 cells express genes associated with the repair response to peripheral nerve damage. These findings suggest that devils may be predisposed to transmissible cancers of Schwann cell origin. The combined effect of factors such as frequent nerve damage from biting, Schwann cell plasticity and low genetic diversity may allow these cancers to develop on rare occasions. The emergence of two independent transmissible cancers from the same tissue in the Tasmanian devil presents an unprecedented opportunity to gain insight into cancer development, evolution and immune evasion in mammalian species.

### Keywords
Tasmanian devil, Proteomics, Swath, Devil facial tumour disease

### Affiliations
Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7000, Australia.
Macquarie university

### Submitter
Karthik Shantharam kamath

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda L Patchett
Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania 7000, Australia.


