### Accession
PXD004624

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of serum samples demonstrates reprogramming of organ functions via systemic calcium mobilization and platelet activation in metastatic melanoma patients – proteins from serum samples of melanoma patients with high tumor load

### Description
Pathophysiology of cancer-associated syndroms such as cachexia is poorly understood and no routine biomarkers have been established, yet. Using shotgun proteomics, known marker molecules including PMEL, CRP, SAA and CSPG4 were found deregulated in patients with metastatic melanoma. Targeted analysis of 58 selected proteins with multiple reaction monitoring was applied for independent data verification. In three patients, two of which suffered from cachexia, a tissue damage signature was determined, consisting on nine proteins, PLTP, CD14, TIMP1, S10A8, S10A9, GP1BA, PTPRJ, CD44 and CO4A, as well as increased levels of glycine and asparagine, and decreased levels of polyunsaturated phosphatidylcholine concentrations, as determined by targeted metabolomics. Remarkably, these molecules are known to be involved in key processes of cancer cachexia. Based on these results, we propose a model how metastatic melanoma may lead to reprogramming of organ functions via formation of platelet activating factors from long-chain polyunsaturated phosphatidylcholines under oxidative conditions and via systemic induction of intracellular calcium mobilization. Calcium mobilization in platelets was demonstrated to regulate several of these marker molecules. Additionally, platelets from melanoma patients proved to be in a rather exhausted state, and platelet-derived eicosanoids implicated in tumor growth were found massively increased in blood from three melanoma patients. Platelets were thus identified as important source of serum protein and lipid alterations in late stage melanoma patients. As a result, the proposed model describes the crosstalk between lipolysis of fat tissue and muscle wasting mediated by oxidative stress, resulting in the metabolic deregulations characteristic for cachexia.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were routinely collected from patients with metastatic melanoma with high tumor load treated within a phase I/II trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01614301) after giving written informed consent.  Serum samples were depleted employing Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The depletion was performed according to the protocol of the manufacturer, using 7µL of serum per depletion. In the following, 250µL of depleted serum eluate containing not more than 25µg total protein amount was used for digestion.  In-solution digestion was performed using 3 kDa MW cut off filters (Nanosep with Omega membrane, Pall, USA). After washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich), proteins were reduced with 32mM dithiothreitol (Gerbu) for 30 min at 35°C on a thermal shaker (1000 rpm) and alkylated with 54mM 2-iodoacetamide solution (Sigma Aldrich) at 30°C for 45 min. Both, dithiothreitol and 2-iodoacetamide solutions were prepared with 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride (Sigma Aldrich) solution in 50nM ammonium bicarbonate. Afterwards, proteins were digested on the filter using a Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega) with a total enzyme to protein ratio of 1:20. For clean-up of resulting peptide samples C18 spin columns (Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) were used and, after drying via vacuum centrifugation, the samples were stored at -20°C. Upon LC-MS analysis, the dried peptides were reconstituted in 5 µL of the equimolar 10 fmol standard peptide mix and 40 µL of mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) for shotgun analysis. Digested peptides were separated by UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Pre-column: Acclaim PepMap 100, C18 100 μm x 2 cm; Analytical column: Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 75 μm x 50cm; Dionex, California, USA). Per injection, 1 µl of the sample was loaded on the pre-column with a flow rate of 10µl/min. For separation, peptides were eluted to the analytical column applying a gradient from 8 to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 95 min and operating at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Data acquisition was conducted on a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) using a top 8 data dependent method. The full scan MS was acquired at a resolution of 70.000, the MS2 scan at 17.500, both at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version August 2014 with 20 194 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Pathophysiologies of cancer-associated syndromes such as cachexia are poorly understood and no routine biomarkers have been established, yet. Using shotgun proteomics, known marker molecules including PMEL, CRP, SAA, and CSPG4 were found deregulated in patients with metastatic melanoma. Targeted analysis of 58 selected proteins with multiple reaction monitoring was applied for independent data verification. In three patients, two of which suffered from cachexia, a tissue damage signature was determined, consisting of nine proteins, PLTP, CD14, TIMP1, S10A8, S10A9, GP1BA, PTPRJ, CD44, and C4A, as well as increased levels of glycine and asparagine, and decreased levels of polyunsaturated phosphatidylcholine concentrations, as determined by targeted metabolomics. Remarkably, these molecules are known to be involved in key processes of cancer cachexia. Based on these results, we propose a model how metastatic melanoma may lead to reprogramming of organ functions via formation of platelet activating factors from long-chain polyunsaturated phosphatidylcholines under oxidative conditions and via systemic induction of intracellular calcium mobilization. Calcium mobilization in platelets was demonstrated to alter levels of several of these marker molecules. Additionally, platelets from melanoma patients proved to be in a rather exhausted state, and platelet-derived eicosanoids implicated in tumor growth were found massively increased in blood from three melanoma patients. Platelets were thus identified as important source of serum protein and lipid alterations in late stage melanoma patients. As a result, the proposed model describes the crosstalk between lipolysis of fat tissue and muscle wasting mediated by oxidative stress, resulting in the metabolic deregulations characteristic for cachexia.

### Keywords
Damage signature, Metastatic melanoma, Calcium mobilization, Platelet activation, Serum analysis, Cachexia, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: blood serum
- cell type: not available
- disease: Melanoma
- label: label free sample
- instrument:  Q Exactive
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation

