### Accession
PXD038632

### Title
Robust dimethyl-based multiplex-DIA doubles single-cell proteome depth via a reference channel

### Description
Single-cell proteomics aims to characterize biological function and heterogeneity at the level of proteins in an unbiased manner. It is currently limited in proteomic depth, 
throughput, and robustness, which we address here by a streamlined multiplexed workflow using data-independent acquisition (mDIA). We demonstrate automated and complete dimethyl labeling of bulk or single-cell samples, without losing proteomic depth. Lys-N digestion enables fiveplex quantification at MS1 and MS2 level. Because the multiplexed channels are quantitatively isolated from each other, mDIA accommodates a reference channel that does not interfere with the target channels. Our algorithm RefQuant takes advantage of this and confidently quantifies twice as many proteins per single cell compared to our previous work (Brunner et al, PMID 35226415), while our workflow currently allows routine analysis of 80 single cells per day. Finally, we combined mDIA with spatial proteomics to increase the throughput of Deep Visual Proteomics seven-fold for microdissection and four-fold for MS analysis. Applying this to primary cutaneous melanoma, we discovered proteomic signatures of cells within distinct tumor microenvironments, showcasing its potential for precision oncology.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic or Lys-N digest of bovine serum albumin (BSA) or HeLa C was labeled with dimethyl using the insolution labeling protocol (Boersema et al, 2009). Briefly, 500 pmol of the BSA digest was reconstituted in 300 µL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 7) buffer and aliquoted into three separate tubes. To each of these, 4 µL of 4% (vol/vol) formaldehyde (CH2O, CD2O or 13CD2O) and 4 ll of 600 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN or NaBD3CN) were added sequentially. The samples
were incubated at room temperature for 1 h on a bench-top mixer. To quench the reaction, 16 µL of 1% (vol/vol) ammonia (NH4OH) was added to each tube. The solutions were then dried at room temperature using a speed vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 200 µL of buffer A (0.1% formic acid), and desalted using inhouse prepared, C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2003). The solutions were then adjusted to have a concentration of 50 fmol/μL or 100 ng/ μL. Labeled peptides were mixed in different ratios and injected into a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 or timsTOF HT in triplicates, corresponding to an injection amount of 50 fmol per replicate or 125 ng HeLa per channel.
HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium at 10% fetal bovine serum, 20 mM glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. The supernatant was carefully removed, cells were detached by accutase treatment for 5 min at 37°C followed by pipetting for cell aggregate dissociation. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, lysed by 60 mM TEAB and 20% acetonitrile (ACN) at 72°C for 30 min. Proteins were digested by trypsin and Lys-C in a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. Peptides were cleaned up by C18 desalting as described above. Cleaned up peptides were labeled as described above in 100 µL 60 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) to be comparable to the single-cell workflow. Evotips were loaded as described in the single-cell experiments. HeLa cells were cultured and harvested following standard protocol as above. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS, pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in ice-cold PBS to a solution of 2x106 cells per mL. 2 µL propidium iodide (BioRad, 1351101) was added to the single-cell suspension and sorting was performed on the PI-negative live cell population using fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS). Single cells were sorted into 384-well plates containing 1 µL of 20% ACN, 0.01% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltopyranoside (DDM), 60 mM TEAB pH 8.5, centrifuged briefly, sealed with aluminum seal sheets and frozen at -80 °C until further processing. Single cells were incubated in the 384-well plate for 30 min at 72 °C in a PCR cycler with a lid temperature of 110 °C, digested overnight at 37 °C (lid temperature 55 °C) after addition of 1 µL of 20% ACN, 0.01% DDM, 60 mM TEAB and 0.5 ng trypsin and Lys-C each. Digested peptides were derivatized with dimethyl by adding 1 µL 0.6% formaldehyde (final concentration 0.15%) and 1 µL 92 mM cyanoborohydride (final concentration 23 mM). Single cells in a consecutive row pattern (B, D, F, …) were labeled with intermediate dimethyl (∆4) using intermediate formaldehyde (CD2O) and light cyanoborohydride, while other wells (C, E, G, …) were labeled with heavy dimethyl (∆8) using heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O) and heavy cyanoborohydride. After one hour incubation at room temperature, the dimethyl labeling reaction was stopped by adding 1 µL 0.65% ammonia solution (final concentration 0.13%). Before Evotip loading, samples were acidified by 1 µL 6% TFA (final concentration 1%). All pipetting steps were done with a Bravo robot (Agilent). Evotips Pure were loaded with the Bravo robot (Agilent), by activation with 1-propanol, washing two times with 50 µL Buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA), activation with 1-propanol and two wash steps with 50 µL buffer A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA). In between Evotips were spun at 700xg for 1 min. For sample loading, Evotips were prepared with 70 µL buffer A and a short spin at 700xg. 10 µL of 1 ng/µL prepared and aliquoted reference channel proteome (labeled with dimethyl light, ∆0) was pipetted into Evotips, followed by an intermediate and heavy dimethyl labeled single cell with the same tip of the Bravo robot to avoid plastic contacts. Single-cell wells were washed with 15 µL buffer A and also loaded onto the Evotips. Evotips were spun at 700 g to load the sample and
washed ones with 50 µL buffer A and stored at 4°C with buffer A on top until measured. The mDIA-DVP samples were processed as previously described (see publication for more details) and subjected to the same workflow.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 2.0.1 was used to process triplicate to quintuplicate DDA data for calculating the labeling efficiency of each dimethyl channel. All dimethyl groups (Var DimethNter0, Var DimethLys0, Var DimethNter2, Var DimethLys2, Var DimethNter4, Var DimethLys4, Var DimethNter6, Var DimethLys6, Var DimethNter8, and Var DimethLys8) were first configured as variable modifications in MaxQuant. They were selected as variable modifications together with Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein-N-term). For example, BSA samples labeled with dimethyl Δ0 were searched with Var DimethNter0, Var DimethLys0, Oxidation (M), and Acetyl (Protein-N-term) as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification for bulk but unselected for ultra-high sensitivity acquisitions, since peptides were not reduced and alkylated. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 3. Depending on the sample, either trypsin/P or Lys-N was selected as the protease and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Labeling efficiency was calculated based on intensity ratios of labeled peptides relative to all detected peptides. 
DIA-NN version 1.8.1 was used to search DIA raw files and dia-PASEF files for precursor and fragment identifications based on 2D or 3D peak position (retention time, m/z precursor, and IM) using AlphaPeptDeep-predicted spectral libraries (dimethyl labeled tryptic HeLa: 6331933 precursor entries, label-free tryptic HeLa: 6341464 precursor entries, dimethyl labeled tryptic Human/Yeast/E.Coli mix: 9716057 precursor entries, dimethyl labeled Lys-N-derived HeLa: 3387578 precursor entries, dimethyl labeled tryptic HeLa for ultra-high sensitivity samples: 6294089 precursor entries).  The DIA-NN search included the following settings: Protein inference = “Genes”, Neural network classifier = “Single-pass mode”, Quantification strategy = “Robust LC (high precision)”, Cross-run normalisation = “RT-dependent”, Library Generation = “IDs, RT and IM Profiling”, and Speed and RAM usage = “Optimal results”. Mass accuracy and MS1 accuracy were set to 0 for automatic inference from the first run. The following settings were also enabled: “Use isotopologues”, “MBR”, “Heuristic protein inference”, and “No shared spectra”. For dimethyl labeled BSA and tryptic HeLa samples, the following additional commands were entered into the DIA-NN command line GUI: (1) {--fixed-mod Dimethyl, 28.0313, nK}, (2) {--channels Dimethyl, 0, nK, 0:0; Dimethyl, 4, nK, 4.0251:4.0251; Dimethyl, 8, nK, 8.0444:8.0444}, (3) {--original-mods}, (4) {--peak-translation}, (5) {--ms1-isotope-quant}, (6) {--report-lib-info}, and (7) {–mass-acc-quant 10.0}. Note that (7) is removed from the command line for the MS1-centric method. For dimethyl labeled Lys-N-derived HeLa samples, additional channels were inserted into the DIA-NN command line GUI: {--channels Dimethyl, 0, nK, 0:0; Dimethyl, 2, nK, 2.0126:2.0126; Dimethyl, 4, nK, 4.0251:4.0251; Dimethyl, 6, nK, 6.0377:6.0377; Dimethyl, 8, nK, 8.0444:8.0444}. For label-free HeLa tryptic/Lys-N samples, only the following commands were used: (1) {--original-mods}, (2) {--ms1-isotope-quant}, (3) {  report-lib-info} and (4) {–mass-acc-quant 10.0}. In cases where only one channel or two channels were present, the actual number of channels were inserted into the DIA-NN command line GUI and not the full set of channels We used reannotate with the fasta SwissProt database of reviewed sequences (April, 2022).  Ultra-high sensitivity measurements were searched in the same way as tryptic HeLa samples, except that the scan window was always set to a fixed value of 9, as well as MS1 and mass accuracy to 15 ppm, as this was identified as the optimal settings after several runs and kept constant for minimizing variance between the datasets. The optimal settings were evaluated by an 
independent search with ‘unrelated runs’ enabled. In cases of empty channels, the full set of channels were still added to the DIA-NN command line GUI. For the single-cell dataset and mDIA-DVP, a combined library approach was used to speed up the searching time. A subset of the single-cell dataset (50 raw files) or DIA runs (50 ng) of the reference channel sample were searched with same settings against the AlphaPeptDeep-predicted library. The generated report-lib library (file name: ‘report-lib.tsv’, from ‘first-pass’ search) was then used to analyze all raw files. The report-lib library was adjusted by renaming the ‘Protein.Group’ column to ‘UniprotID’ and searched without the ‘reannotate’ function in DIA-NN to keep the same protein grouping. The first-pass-result of this search was used for data analysis, since a MBR cycle was already performed in the report-lib library generation.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell proteomics aims to characterize biological function and heterogeneity at the level of proteins in an unbiased manner. It is currently limited in proteomic depth, throughput, and robustness, which we address here by a streamlined multiplexed workflow using data-independent acquisition (mDIA). We demonstrate automated and complete dimethyl labeling of bulk or single-cell samples, without losing proteomic depth. Lys-N digestion enables five-plex quantification at MS1 and MS2 level. Because the multiplexed channels are quantitatively isolated from each other, mDIA accommodates a reference channel that does not interfere with the target channels. Our algorithm RefQuant takes advantage of this and confidently quantifies twice as many proteins per single cell compared to our previous work (Brunner et&#xa0;al, PMID 35226415), while our workflow currently allows routine analysis of 80 single cells per day. Finally, we combined mDIA with spatial proteomics to increase the throughput of Deep&#xa0;Visual Proteomics seven-fold for microdissection and four-fold for MS analysis. Applying this to primary cutaneous melanoma, we discovered proteomic signatures of cells within distinct tumor microenvironments, showcasing its potential for precision oncology.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Single cells, Mass spectrometry, Dia, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


