### Accession
PXD035927

### Title
Escherichia coli proteome during stationary phase

### Description
The aim of this study was to determine the fate of ribosomes and r-proteins. In this respect, SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeled Amino acids in cell Culture) based experimental approach was used. E.coli cells were grown in MOPS medium supplemented with “heavy” labeled arginine (Arg10) and lysine (Lys8). At the mid-log phase, the culture was further supplemented with a 20-fold molar excess of “light” unlabeled arginine (Arg0) and lysine (Lys0), divided into 8 aliquots, and grown for 14 days. Cell samples were collected at day one (24h), day two (48h), and subsequently in 48h intervals over the following 12 days. The quantities of r-proteins in the proteome were determined using SILAC based LC-MS/MS and normalized to the corresponding values of day one.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were suspended in 10 volumes of 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris‐HCl pH 7.5, and 100 mM DTT containing lysis buffer. Cell suspensions were heated at 95oC for 5 min and lysed by sonication (Bandelin) (60 x 1-sec pulses at 50% intensity). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14 000 g for 10 min. Protein concentration was determined at A280 using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. 7.5 µg of total protein from stationary phase cell lysates was mixed in 1:1 ratio with total protein from reference cell lysates. Samples were precipitated with 2:1:3 volume methanol:chloroform:water. Protein pellets were suspended in 25 μl of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, followed by disulfide reduction with 5 mM DTT for 30 min and cysteine alkylation with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) at an 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio for 4 h. Urea concentration in the solution was reduced by adding 4 vol of 100 mM ABC and peptides were further digested using mass spectrometry grade trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) overnight. Enzymes were inactivated by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration. Peptides were desalted with self-made reverse-phase C18 StageTips columns. The resulting peptides were fractionated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Maxquant (v1.5.6.0) with default settings, except that the minimal peptide length for the specific and non-specific search was 5 amino acids. Unique peptides were used for quantification, main search peptide tolerance was 8 ppm, and variable modification was used for quantitation of oxidation (methionine). The peptide identification search was carried out against E. coli K-12 MG1655 protein sequence database from UniprotKB (as of Oct. 2019). The search results were filtered and transformed using Perseus (v1.6.14.0). For proteins bL20, bL33, bL34, bS20, and bS21 MS data analysis was done using the Mascot search engine and Skyline as described in (Lilleorg et al, 2019). Each protein was quantified through SILAC ratios H/M, L/M, and/or (L+H)/M, comparing unlabeled (L) and/or “heavy”-labeled (H) relative quantities against medium-heavy labeled (M) internal reference.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial ribosomes are composed of three rRNA and over 50 ribosomal protein (r-protein) molecules. r-proteins are essential for ribosome assembly and structural stability and also participate in almost all ribosome functions. Ribosomal components are present in stoichiometric amounts in the mature 70S ribosomes during exponential and early stationary growth phases. Ribosomes are degraded in stationary phase; however, the stability and fate of r-proteins during stationary growth phase are not known. In this study, we report a quantitative analysis of ribosomal components during extended stationary-phase growth in Escherichia coli. We show that (i) the quantity of ribosomes per cell mass decreases in stationary phase, (ii) 70S ribosomes contain r-proteins in stoichiometric amounts, (iii) 30S subunits are degraded faster than 50S subunits, (iv) the quantities of 21 r-proteins in the total proteome decrease during 14&#x2009;days (short-lived r-proteins) concomitantly with the reduction of cellular RNA, and (e) 30 r-proteins are stable and form a pool of free r-proteins (stable r-proteins). Thus, r-proteins are present in nonstoichiometric amounts in the proteome of E. coli during the extended stationary phase. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Ribosome degradation has been extensively described from the viewpoint of its main component, rRNA. Here, we aim to complement our knowledge by quantitatively analyzing r-protein degradation and stability both in the ribosomes and in the whole-cell proteome during stationary phase in E. coli. r-proteins are considered to be very stable in the proteome. Here, we show that a specific set of r-proteins are rapidly degraded after release from the rRNA. The degradation of r-proteins is an intriguing new aspect of r-protein metabolism in bacteria.

### Keywords
Ribosomal proteins, E.coli, Proteome

### Affiliations
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Kaspar Reier

### Lab Head
Dr Tiina Tamm
Chair of Molecular Biology Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology Estonia


