### Accession
PXD023988

### Title
PANNEXIN-1 CHANNEL REGULATES NUCLEAR CONTENT PACKAGING INTO APOPTOTIC BODIES AND THEIR SIZE

### Description
Apoptotic bodies (ApoBDs), which are large extracullular vesicles exclusively released by apoptotic cells, possess therapeutically exploitable properties including biomolecule loadability and transferability. However, current limited understanding of ApoBD biology has hindered its exploration for clinical use. Particularly, as ApoBD-accompanying cargoes (e.g. nucleic acids and proteins) have major influence on their functionality, further insights into the mechanism of biomolecule sorting into ApoBDs are critical to unleash their therapeutic potential. Previous studies suggested pannexin 1 (PANX1) channel, a negative regulator of ApoBD biogenesis, can modify synaptic vesicle contents. We also reported trovafloxacin (a PANX1 inhibitor) increasing proportion of ApoBDs containing DNA. Therefore, we sought to define the role of PANX1 in regulating the sorting of nuclear content into ApoBDs. Here, using flow cytometry and label-free quantitative proteomic analyses, we showed that targeting PANX1 activity during apoptosis, via either pharmacological inhibition or genetic disruption, resulted in enrichment of both DNA and nuclear proteins in ApoBDs that were unexpectedly smaller in size. Our data suggest that PANX1, besides being a key regulator of ApoBD formation, also functions as a negative regulator of nuclear content packaging and modulator of ApoBD size.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Equal amount (30 µg) of protein samples (three biological replicates for each treatment) were separated in SDS-PAGE. The separated protein bands were visualized using Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain and the gel bands were then extracted using scalpel blades in to five gel bands. The bands were then reduced, alkylated and trypsinised as previously described [27]. Briefly, 10 mM DTT (Bio-Red) was used for reduction, 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) was used for alkylation and the samples were trypsinized using 150 ng of trypsin (Promega). The tryptic peptides were extracted using 50% (w/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS was carried out using the Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) in water and 100% v/v acetonitrile in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-35 min, 3-22% B; (iii) 35-40 min, 22-40% B; (iv) 45-50 min, 40-80% B; (v) 50-55 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 55-56 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated at positive-ionisation mode, with the spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and the ion transfer capillary temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200, with an AGC target of 5e5. The “top speed” acquisition mode (cycle time: 3 seconds) on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 5 were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and fragmented with using HCD with a stepped collision energy of 30 ± 5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15,000 resolution at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion was 30 seconds. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant platform(version 1.6.17.0) and searched against UniProt human database (20,394 reviewed Jan 2021) using default LFQ search parameters with the following parameters: LFQ min. ratio count = 2 with unique + razor peptides used for quantitation. Match between runs feature is activated. For this search Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaves after lysine or arginine, even when proline is present) was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of Methionine and Acetylation of protein N-Term were specified as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. LFQ intensities imported from the proteinGroups.txt output were Log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Apoptotic bodies (ApoBDs), which are large extracellular vesicles exclusively released by apoptotic cells, possess therapeutically exploitable properties including biomolecule loadability and transferability. However, current limited understanding of ApoBD biology has hindered its exploration for clinical use. Particularly, as ApoBD-accompanying cargoes (e.g., nucleic acids and proteins) have major influence on their functionality, further insights into the mechanism of biomolecule sorting into ApoBDs are critical to unleash their therapeutic potential. Previous studies suggested pannexin 1 (PANX1) channel, a negative regulator of ApoBD biogenesis, can modify synaptic vesicle contents. We also reported that trovafloxacin (a PANX1 inhibitor) increases proportion of ApoBDs containing DNA. Therefore, we sought to define the role of PANX1 in regulating the sorting of nuclear content into ApoBDs. Here, using flow cytometry and label-free quantitative proteomic analyses, we showed that targeting PANX1 activity during apoptosis, via either pharmacological inhibition or genetic disruption, resulted in enrichment of both DNA and nuclear proteins in ApoBDs that were unexpectedly smaller in size. Our data suggest that PANX1, besides being a key regulator of ApoBD formation, also functions as a negative regulator of nuclear content packaging and modulator of ApoBD size. Together, our findings provide further insights into ApoBD biology and form a novel conceptual framework for ApoBD-based therapies through pharmacologically manipulating ApoBD contents.

### Keywords
Nuclear proteins, Cargo sorting, Apoptotic bodies, Dna, Extracellular vesicles, Pannexin 1

### Affiliations
La Trobe University, Department of Biochemistry and Genetics
La Trobe University

### Submitter
Pamali Fonseka

### Lab Head
Dr Suresh Mathivanan
La Trobe University, Department of Biochemistry and Genetics


