### Accession
PXD019169

### Title
Genome-wide pQTL analysis of protein expression regulatory networks in the human liver

### Description
Background: Previous expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies have identified thousands of genetic variants to be associated with gene expression at the mRNA level in the human liver. However, protein expression often correlates poorly with mRNA levels. Thus, protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) study is required to identify genetics variants that regulate protein expression in human livers. Results: We conducted a genome-wide pQTL study in 287 normal human liver samples and identified 900 local-pQTL variants and 4,026 distant-pQTL variants. We further discovered 53 genome hotspots of pQTL variants. Transcriptional region mapping analysis showed that 1,133 pQTL variants are in transcriptional regulatory regions. Genomic region enrichment analysis of the identified pQTL variants revealed 804 potential regulatory interactions among 595 regulators (e.g. non-coding RNAs) and 394 proteins. Moreover, pQTL variants and trait-variant integration analysis uncovered several novel mechanisms underlying the relationships between protein expression and liver diseases, such as alcohol dependence. Notably, over 2,000 of the identified pQTL variants have not been reported in previous eQTL studies, suggesting extensive involvement of genetic polymorphisms in post-transcriptional regulation of protein expression in human livers.  Conclusions: We have partially established protein expression regulation networks in human livers and generated a wealth of pQTL data that could serve as a valuable resource for the scientific community.

### Sample Protocol
We obtained normal human liver tissues from XenoTech LLC (Lenexa, KS, USA), the University of Minnesota Liver Tissue Cell Distribution System, and the Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN). We prepared human liver S9 fractions (HLS9) from about 200 mg of frozen liver tissues using a previously published method. Briefly, we cut liver tissues into small pieces (1×1×1 mm) and homogenized them using a microcentrifuge pestle in 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes with 0.5 mL ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). We centrifuged the homogenates at 9,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the top lipid-containing layer was removed. This centrifugation and top layer removal were repeated once, and the resulting supernatants (S9 fractions) were collected and stored at -80 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
We prepared a total of 287 HLS9 samples for proteomic analysis using the method detailed previously. We conducted LC-MS/MS analysis on a Sciex TripleTOF 5600 plus mass spectrometer system coupled with an Eksigent 2D plus LC system. We used a trap-elute LC configuration for sample separation. We injected six µg of proteins into the mass spectrometer, and each sample injection was followed by an injection of 6 µL of water to minimize sample carryover. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with the ion spray voltage floating at 5500 v and the source temperature set at 280 °C. The DIA scheme included a 250 ms TOF-MS scan from 400 to 1250 Da and MS/MS scans from 100 to 1500 Da. The MS/MS scans of all precursors were performed in a cyclic manner using a 100-variable isolation window scheme. The accumulation time was 25 ms per isolation window, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.8 s.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Hls9, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Bing He

### Lab Head
Dr Hao-Jie Zhu
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan


