### Accession
PXD010082

### Title
Macrophage Responses to Helicobacter pylori

### Description
The purpose of this study was to examine macrophage proteomic changes induced by Helicobacter pylori. Macrophages utilized were the RAW 264.7 murine cell line. Macrophages were treated with H. pylori for 24 hours. The experimental design was a 4-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). In addition to uninfected control and H. pylori infected, the additional two conditions included an inhibitor of deoxyhypusine synthase (N1-guanyl-1,7-diamine-heptane, 1-(7-ammonioheptyl)guanidinium sulfate; GC7) an enzyme involved in the hypusination translation pathway, and the inhibitor plus H. pylori.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were digested and labeled with iTRAQ reagents. Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a database containing the Mus musculus and Helicobacter pylori subsets of the UniprotKB database using Spectrum Mill (Agilent). Spectrum Mill autovalidation was performed using a FDR threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The reverse transsulfuration pathway is the major route for the metabolism of sulfur-containing amino acids. The role of this metabolic pathway in macrophage response and function is unknown. We show that the enzyme cystathionine &#x3b3;-lyase (CTH) is induced in macrophages infected with pathogenic bacteria through signaling involving phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/MTOR and the transcription factor SP1. This results in the synthesis of cystathionine, which facilitates the survival of pathogens within myeloid cells. Our data demonstrate that the expression of CTH leads to defective macrophage activation by (i) dysregulation of polyamine metabolism by depletion of <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine, resulting in immunosuppressive putrescine accumulation and inhibition of spermidine and spermine synthesis, and (ii) increased histone H3K9, H3K27, and H3K36 di/trimethylation, which is associated with gene expression silencing. Thus, CTH is a pivotal enzyme of the innate immune response that disrupts host defense. The induction of the reverse transsulfuration pathway by bacterial pathogens can be considered an unrecognized mechanism for immune escape.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Macrophages are professional immune cells that ingest and kill microbes. In this study, we show that different pathogenic bacteria induce the expression of cystathionine &#x3b3;-lyase (CTH) in macrophages. This enzyme is involved in a metabolic pathway called the reverse transsulfuration pathway, which leads to the production of numerous metabolites, including cystathionine. Phagocytized bacteria use cystathionine to better survive in macrophages. In addition, the induction of CTH results in dysregulation of the metabolism of polyamines, which in turn dampens the proinflammatory response of macrophages. In conclusion, pathogenic bacteria can evade the host immune response by inducing CTH in macrophages.

### Keywords
Immune response, Helicobacter pylori, Proteomics, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core


