### Accession
PXD013131

### Title
Exploring the virulence gene interactome with CRISPR/dCas9 in the human malaria parasite

### Description
The var multigene family encodes clonally variant surface antigens that are key to immune evasion and pathogenesis in the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. Epigenetics and nuclear organization regulate the var gene family in a system of mutually exclusive expression; however, few factors have been shown to play a direct role in these processes. Thus, we adapted a CRISPR-based immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry approach for identification of novel factors associated with var genes in their natural chromatin context.  A tagged, catalytically inactive Cas9 (“dCas9”) was targeted to the promoters or introns of a subset of var genes and subjected to immunoprecipitation followed by label-free LC-MS/MS. A non-targeted dCas9 served as a control.

### Sample Protocol
A tagged, catalytically inactive Cas9 (dCas9-3HA) was expressed in parasites along with an sgRNA targeting the var gene promoter or intron or no specific sequence in the genome (non-targeted). Synchronized ring stage parasites were cross-linked by adding formaldehyde (ThermoScientific Pierce 28908) to the culture (final concentration 1%) and incubating with gentle agitation for 10 minutes at room temperature. Cross-linking was quenched with glycine (final concentration 0.125 M) for five minutes at room temperature. Cross-linked parasites were washed with cold PBS, lysed in 0.15% saponin for 5-10 minutes, and washed twice with cold PBS. 3 x 10^9 cross-linked parasites were resuspended in 10 mL of lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, PI] and incubated with rotation at 4°C for 30 minutes. Extracts were centrifuged for eight minutes at 380 g at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed. The pellet was resuspended in 10 mL nuclear lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% sodium  deoxycholate, PI] and incubated for 10 min at 4°C with occasional vortexing. Lysates were centrifuged for eight minutes at 380 g at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 1.8 mL chromatin shearing buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% sodium  deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, PI]. Samples were transferred to 1.5 mL sonication tubes from Diagenode and sonicated for 12 minutes total (24 cycles of 30 sec on, 30 sec off) in a Diagenode Pico Bioruptor at 4°C, the target DNA fragment size being 2 kb. Lysates were centrifuged for ten minutes at 13,500 g at 4°C. All supernatant of the chromatin lysate was diluted 1:10 in wash buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, 10% glycerol, PI]. 10 mg of Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen 10004D) conjugated to 10 μg of anti-HA antibody (Abcam ab9110) were added to the diluted chromatin sample and incubated overnight with rotation at 4°C. Beads were collected on a magnet, divided into three microcentrifuge tubes, and washed (five minutes with rotation at 4°C) three times with one mL wash buffer and once with one mL TE buffer. Beads were collected on a magnet and washed three times with 100 uL 25 mM NH4HCO3. Beads were resuspended in 100 uL 25 mM NH4HCO3 and on-beads digestion was performed for one hour with 0.6 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega V5071). Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 2.5 µL/min over four minutes. Separation was then performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 50°C with a linear gradient of 2% to 30% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 91 minutes.

### Data Protocol
MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 375–1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. The top 20 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a resolution of 15,000 with the intensity threshold kept at 1.3 × 105. Ions with charge state from 2+ to 6+ were selected for screening. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27 with a dynamic exclusion of 40s. For identification, the data were searched against the Plasmodium falciparum FASTA database (PlasmoDB-36 Pfaciparum3D7 AnnotatedProtein containing cas9 and the common contaminants) using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (version 3.9) (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al., 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=4). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Dcas9, Interactome, Crispr

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute's mass spectrometry platform (LSMP)

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute's mass spectrometry platform (LSMP)


