### Accession
PXD030414

### Title
Proteomics of WT and bleached Euglena

### Description
In this study, the whole-genome proteome with dark-adapted E. gracilis strain (WT) and permanently ofloxacin-bleached mutant (B2) was compared under the light exposure after 0 h, 12 h, and 72h.

### Sample Protocol
To be brief, the frozen samples were thawed (approximately 400 μL) and added -40℃ acetone with 4 times the volume of the samples for precipitation to 4 h. Then, the pellet of each sample was collected by centrifugation at 12 000 rpm at 4℃ for 10 min. 300 μL 80% acetone was added to rinse the pellet with a centrifuge at 12000 rpm for 10 min. After repeating this step twice, 100 μL HEPES-SDC (Sigma, USA) was added to dissolve protein and the ice bath ultrasound was performed for 2min. Finally, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min. For digestion, each sample was added with precooled acetone at a volume of 5 times, shaken on ice for 30 min and the protein precipitated at -20℃ for 4 h. The supernatant was removed carefully after centrifugation at 12,000 rpm at 4℃ for 10 min. 200 μL precooled 80% acetone was added and the pellet was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 rpm. Then, 100μL 100 mM HEPES-SDC (Sigma, USA) was added to dissolve protein and the ice bath ultrasound was performed for 30 s. The dissolved protein was digested by trypsin (2 μg, Promega, USA) for 2-4 h at 42℃. The digested samples were added with 15 μL TMT (Thermo Scientific, USA) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h, then added with 2 μL 5% hydroxylamine and incubated at room temperature for 15 min again. The collected fractions were SDC cleanup with 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma, USA) and peptide desalting with desalting buffer work solution Acetonitrile (ACN, ANPEL Laboratory Technologies, China). The samples were performed in XBridge BEH C18 XP Column (Waters, USA). For nanoLCMS/MS analysis, 1 μg of total peptides for each sample were conducted on a nano-UPLC (EASYnLC1200) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A reversed-phase column (100 μm ID ×15 cm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Math) was used to separate. Mobile phases A were H2O with 0.1% formic acid ( FA, Sigma, USA), 2% ACN, and phase B were 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. The samples were separated with a gradient of 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min in gradient A, while gradient B: 2-5% for 2 min, 5-22% for 68 min, 22-45% for 16 min, 45-95% for 2 min, 95% for 2 min. Finally, Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in profile and positive mode with an Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
After data quality was controlled, protein sequences were searched against their species-level UniProt FASTA databases (UniProt-Euglenophyceae-107469-2021-03).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Euglena gracilis (E. gracilis)</i> has secondary endosymbiotic chloroplasts derived from ancient green algae. Its chloroplasts are easily lost under numerous conditions to become permanently bleached mutants. Green cells adapted in the dark contain undeveloped proplastids and they will develop into mature chloroplasts after 3 days of light exposure. Thus, <i>E. gracilis</i> is an ideal model species for a chloroplast development study. Previous studies about chloroplast development in <i>E. gracilis</i> focused on morphology and physiology, whereas few studies have addressed the regulatory processes induced by light in the proteome. In this study, the whole-genome proteome of dark-adapted <i>E. gracilis</i> (WT) and permanently ofloxacin-bleached mutant (B2) was compared under the light exposure after 0, 12, and 72&#xa0;h. The results showed that the photosynthesis-related proteins were up-regulated over time in both WT and B2. The B2 strain, with losing functional chloroplasts, seemed to possess a complete photosynthetic function system. Both WT and B2 exhibited significant light responses with similar alternation patterns, suggesting the sensitive responses to light in proteomic levels. The main metabolic activities for the utilization of carbon and energy in WT were up-regulated, while the proteins with calcium ion binding, cell cycle, and non-photosynthetic carbon fixation were down-regulated in B2. This study confirmed light-induced chloroplast development in WT from dark, and also for the first time investigates the light responses of a bleached mutant B2, providing more information about the unknown functions of residual plastids in <i>Euglena</i> bleached mutants.

### Keywords
Euglena

### Affiliations
Shenzhen University

### Submitter
Jiangxin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiangxin Wang
Shenzhen University


