### Accession
PXD019116

### Title
Identification and analysis of the tegumental protein and excretory-secretory products of the carcinogenic liver fluke Clonorchis sinensis

### Description
The adult C. sinensis 6h culture supernatants containing the ES were harvested and concentrated. The tegument isolated using a freeze/thaw method, extraction with succession extracted buffers. The outer surface proteins of C. sinensis were labeled with biotin, and the biotinylated proteins were purified. The ES, tegumental protein and outer surface labeling protein were identified and analysis by high-resolution LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The crude protein precipitation of C.sinensis was added with 1:50 (W/V) lysis Buffer ( 2 mM EDTA, 8 M urea, 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) and sonicated for 1-2 min, then centrifuged at 13000g at 4°C for 10 min to remove debris, the supernatant was collected and precipitated using 3 volumes of acetone for 3 h at −20°C. After centrifugation at 4 °C at 12000g for 10 min, the protein deposit was redissolved by urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB). The concentration of the protein was determined using a Modified Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Sangon Biotech, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, 10 μg protein of sample was first reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 60 min and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. The urea concentration of protein sample was diluted less than 2 M by adding 100 mM TEAB. The protein pool of each sample was digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin with the ratio of protein: trypsin =50: 1 mass ratio at 37°C overnight and 100:1 for a second digestion for 4 h. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X SPE column and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS raw data were searched against the C. sinensis Database downloaded from Uniprot Database using Sequest software integration in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetylation in N-Term were set as variable modification. The searches were performed using a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.2 Da, resulting in 5 % false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Liver fluke proteins, including excretory-secretory products (ESPs) and tegument proteins, are critical for the pathogenesis, nutrient metabolism, etiology and immune response of liver cancer. To understand the functions of various proteins in <i>Clonorchis sinensis</i> physiology and human clonorchiasis, the ESPs and tegument proteins of <i>C. sinensis</i> were identified. Supernatants containing ESPs from adult <i>C. sinensis</i> after culture for 6 h were harvested and concentrated. The tegument was detached using a freeze/thaw method and successively extracted using various extraction buffers. The outer surface proteins of <i>C. sinensis</i> were labeled with biotin, and the biotinylated proteins were purified. The ESP, tegument and labeled outer surface proteins were identified and analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS. The identified proteins were compared with those of other flukes, and the protein functions associated with pathogenesis, carcinogenesis and potential vaccine antigens and drug targets were predicted and analyzed. A total of 175 proteins were identified after the 6-h culture of <i>C. sinensis</i> ESPs. A total of 352 tegument proteins were identified through sequential solubilization of the isolated teguments, and a subset of these proteins were localized to the surface membrane of the tegument by labeling with biotin. Thirty identified proteins, including annexins, actin and tetraspanins, were identified as potential immunomodulators and promising vaccine antigens. Interestingly, among the 352 tegument proteins, as many as 155 were enzymes, and most were oxidoreductases, hydrolases or transferases. A comparison of the outer surface proteins of <i>C. sinensis</i> with those of other flukes indicated that flukes have some common outer surface proteins, such as actin, tetraspanin, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and annexin. Granulin, thioredoxin peroxiredoxin, carbonyl reductase 1 and cystatin were identified in the <i>C. sinensis</i> proteome and predicted to be related to liver disease and cancer. The analysis of the <i>C. sinensis</i> proteome could contribute to a more in-depth understanding of complex parasite-host relationships, improve the diagnosis of clonorchiasis and benefit research on the pathogenesis and development of novel interventions, drugs and vaccines to control <i>C. sinensis</i> infection.

### Keywords
C. sinensis; proteomics; tegument; biotinylation; cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
GuangXi Center for Disease Prevention and Control
Guangxi Disease Prevention and Control Center

### Submitter
yunliang shi

### Lab Head
Dr yunliang shi
Guangxi Disease Prevention and Control Center


