### Accession
PXD034957

### Title
An Optogenetic-Phosphoproteomic Approach Links Akt Activation to Dynamic Temporal Changes in Signaling in Endothelial Cells

### Description
The serine/threonine kinase Akt is a central node in cell signaling. While aberrant Akt activation underlies the development of a variety of human diseases, how different patterns of Akt-dependent phosphorylation dictates downstream signaling and phenotypic outcomes remains largely enigmatic. Herein, we performed a systems-level analysis that integrates method advances of optogenetics, mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, and bioinformatics to elucidate how different Akt intensity, durability, and pattern of stimulation activated temporal phosphorylation profiles in vascular endothelial cells. Through the analysis of ~35,000 phosphorylation sites across multiple conditions precisely controlled by light stimulation, we identified a series of signaling circuits that define the sequential downstream cascade of Akt activation and interrogated how Akt signaling cross-talks with growth factor signaling in endothelial cells. Furthermore, our results categorized substrates of kinases that are preferably activated by oscillating, transient, and sustained Akt signals. We validated a list of Akt motif-carrying phosphosites that covaried with Akt phosphorylation across experimental conditions as potential Akt substrates and presented the entire dataset a rich resource for future studies on Akt signaling and dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
Lentivirus infected EA.hy 926 cell lines were cultured in a 10 cm dishes in dark. Additionally, for control experiments, HUVECs (P3) were cultured in EGM2 (Lonza) on dishes coated with 0.1% gelatin. EA.hy 926 cells were cultured in M199 media (Lonza) supplemented with 10% FBS and HAT. Once the cells reached almost full conference, the DMEM culture media was changed to a phenol red free media to avoid color influence on the light exposure. Cells then were starved for 5 hours, and treated with Angiopoietin1 or light for 0 (control condition), 10, 20 or 30 minutes. Briefly, light of 0.05, 0.10, and 0.25 mW/cm2 (or 005/010/025 in short), representing minimal, modest, and high Akt activation levels, were separately applied to transduced EA.hy 926 cells.  By controlling light, we included three Akt activation patterns: Sustained (Su), Periodic (Pe, i.e., cells are exposed to light for 5-min and then kept in dark for another 5-min, in a repeated fashion), and Pulsed (Pu, i.e., 5-min light illumination followed by darkness) paradigms.  To keep the impact of overall proteome changes on phosphoproteomic readouts minimal, we focused our measurements in the first 30-min window (with 10-min intervals for sampling). The light exposure time are 10, 20 or 30 minutes. The growth factor Angiopoietin-1 (Ang1, R&D systems) was administered at 400 ng/mL following the vendor’s instruction. After all treatments, the dish was immediately put on liquid nitrogen for 30 seconds to quench the system effectively, following by the addition 9M Urea lysis buffer to lysate the cells on the dishes.  Cells were then dissociated with cell scrapers and then transferred into a 2ml Eppendorf tube. Samples were stored at -80 °C until use. The 9M Urea lysis buffer includes 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0), 9.0 M Urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate. The phosphatase inhibitor (1:100, HaltTM, 100x, Thermo) was added freshly to lysis cells every time usage. Proteins were digested following lysis as previously described. Phosphopeptide were then enriched using High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo) and desalted using C18 ultramicrospin columns (Nest). About 1 ug of enriched phosphopeptide mixture used for DIA-MS measurement.    Data-independent mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) based phosphoproteomics: An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was used to as the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system for phosphoproteomic analysis. Peptide separation was carried out on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75 μm × 50 cm length) with C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B was composed of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. A 2-hour gradient with buffer B from 5 to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was conducted for phosphopeptide separation. The DIA‐MS method was configured to include one MS1 survey scan and 40 MS2 scans of variable windows as previously described 72, 73. The MS1 scan range was 350–1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution was 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30 000 at m/z 200 and normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 scan range was set to 200-1800 m/z. The MS2 AGC was set to be 5.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both of MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.  For addtional validation experiments, the in vitro AKT kinase assay based on FSBA was performed for both non-transduced EA.hy 926 and HUVEC endothelial cells, following the previous procedures published. mTRAQ labeling and PlexDIA mass spectrometry: For both EA.hy 926 and HUVEC endothelial cells,  two channels of mTRAQ reagent  were used to chemically label the peptides digested from the protein samples resulting from the control (+140.0949 Da, Δ0) and AKT treatment (+148.10916 Da, Δ8) conditions following in vitro AKT kinase assay. Per channel, a total of 150 ug purified peptides were used. Then, for each of the cell line samples, the labeled peptides were mixed, lyophilized, and cleaned by C18 again for phosphopeptide enrichment following the same protocol above. 2 ug of the mTRAQ-labeled phosphopeptides per cell line for plexDIA mass spectrometry, using DIA-MS method as above mentioned.

### Data Protocol
The DirectDIA function (i.e., a spectral-library free method) of Spectronaut software v15 was used. The DIA runs were all directly searched against Swiss-Prot protein database (September 2020, 20,375 entries). The possibilities of Oxidation at methionine, Acetylation at the protein N-terminals, and Phosphorylation at serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was were set as variable modifications, whereas Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Overall, both peptide- and protein- FDR (based on Qvalue) were controlled at 1%, and the data matrix was filtered by Qvalue. The data extraction was performed by Spectronaut with default settings and a Q value cut-off of 1% at both peptide and protein levels. In particular, the PTM localization score was strictly kept at 0.75 to ensure the phosphosites were localized, similar to Class I confidence. The PTM score of 0 was then used for reporting the total number of identified phosphosites and accepting quantitative values in each sample for all Class-I phosphosites identified at the experiment level, as reported previously. All the other Spectronaut settings for identification and quantification were kept as default. For each localized P-site, the phosphopeptide precursors with the least missing values among all the samples were taken for relative quantification between samples. The quantitative peak areas for phosphopeptides were log2-transformed for downstream bioinformatic and statistical analysis.   For addtional validation experiments of the present pilot plexDIA analysis on phosphoproteomics using DIA-NN, herein, we followed a workflow modified from the original plexDIA report. First, we relied on the heavy mTRAQ channel to generate the library by allowing only one Phospho (STY) per each fully tryptic peptide. And the “mTRAQ_libGen_Human_fromFASTA” procedure recommended by original plexDIA report was used for the theoretical spectrum library generation with the additional option speicified as “fixed-mod mTRAQ, 148.1091618309, nK”. For the following step doing DIA data search and mTRAQ ratio extraction, the searching pipeline “plexDIA_MS2_method” and above generated library were used.   The motif analysis was analyzed by motifeR. Pearson coefficients were calculated using cor() in R. The heatmap and cluster analysis were performed using the R package “pheatmap” or by Cluster 3.0 followed TreeView based visualization. The principal component analysis (PCA) was performed based on R function prcomp(). The fuzzy c-means clustering (FCM) analysis was performed by the package ‘Mfuzz’ (version 2.46.0).  The protein-level biological annotation and enrichment analysis were performed by using Metascape (https://metascape.org/). The P-site-level annotation and enrichment analysis against kinase~P-site relationships and regulatory processes were conducted using the annotation files from Phosphosite database (PSPdb) and OmniPath resources and then the Fisher's exact test function provided by Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The serine/threonine kinase AKT is a central node in cell signaling. While aberrant AKT activation underlies the development of a variety of human diseases, how different patterns of AKT-dependent phosphorylation dictate downstream signaling and phenotypic outcomes remains largely enigmatic. Herein, we perform a systems-level analysis that integrates methodological advances in optogenetics, mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics, and bioinformatics to elucidate how different intensity, duration, and pattern of Akt1&#xa0;stimulation lead to distinct temporal phosphorylation profiles in vascular endothelial cells. Through the analysis of ~35,000 phosphorylation sites across multiple conditions precisely controlled by light stimulation, we identify a series of signaling circuits activated downstream of Akt1 and interrogate how Akt1 signaling integrates with growth factor signaling in endothelial cells. Furthermore, our results categorize kinase substrates that are preferably activated by oscillating, transient, and sustained Akt1 signals. We validate a list of phosphorylation sites that covaried with Akt1 phosphorylation across experimental conditions as potential Akt1 substrates. Our resulting dataset provides a rich resource for future studies on AKT signaling and dynamics.

### Keywords
Time course, Phosphoproteomics, Akt1, Mtraq, Dia-ms, Optogenetics, Akt

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale University School of Medicine


