### Accession
PXD012288

### Title
786-O LC-MS/MS -  Loss of BAP1 Results in Growth Inhibition and Enhances Mesenchymal-Epithelial Transition in Kidney Tumor Cells

### Description
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) is a member of the ubiquitin C‑terminal hydrolase family of deubiquitinating enzymes and is implicated in transcriptional regulation. The BAP1 gene is mutated in about 10% of patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), the most common form of renal cancer, suggesting that BAP1 may be a tumor suppressor. However, whether BAP1 influences the progression of ccRCC tumors expressing WT BAP1 is unclear. Here, we assessed the expression and function of BAP1 using human ccRCC specimens and cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with 8 M urea supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Selleck), 100 μg of protein was reduced with 5mM DTT for 60 min at room temperature and alkylated with 12mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ overnight. The peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters) and labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, ThermoFisher) following manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled peptides of different samples were mixed, desalted and separated by HPLC into 12 fractions at pH10 and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (release on October 25, 2017, containing 20,168 entries) using the SEQUEST search engine of Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoScientific). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required, 2 missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT sixplex on lysine/peptide N-terminal were set as the fixed modifications, oxidation on methionine and acetylation on N-terminal were set as the variable modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The reporter ion abundance was normalized to total peptide amount, and abundance from each channel was used to calculate the mean ratio of identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) is a member of the ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase family of deubiquitinating enzymes and is implicated in transcriptional regulation. The <i>BAP1</i> gene is mutated in about 10% of patients with ccRCC, the most common form of renal cancer, suggesting that BAP1 is a tumor suppressor. However, whether <i>BAP1</i> influences the progression of ccRCC tumors expressing wild-type (WT) <i>BAP1</i> is unclear. Here, we assessed the expression and function of BAP1 using human ccRCC specimens and cell lines. Analysis of datasets in The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed that lower <i>BAP1</i> expression is correlated with longer overall survival of ccRCC patients. We established human ccRCC cell lines with stable <i>BAP1</i> knockout and performed multiomic analysis of BAP1-mediated cellular processes. <i>BAP1</i> knockout downregulated proteins associated with protein synthesis, resulting in decreased cell growth. Importantly, loss of <i>BAP1</i> decreased the formation of stress fibers and membrane protrusions and induced migration and invasion defects. <i>BAP1</i> knockout in ccRCC cells also downregulated the expression of transcriptional repressor protein Snail and decreased the activity of Rho family GTPases, promoting the cells to undergo mesenchymal-epithelial transition. Unexpectedly, quantitative proteomics also showed that <i>BAP1</i> knockout increased expression of several amino acid transporters and multiple tyrosine kinases, including the epidermal growth factor receptor. Overall, our results suggest that BAP1 regulates multiple cellular processes, and we also uncover a new role for BAP1 in controlling mesenchymal-epithelial transition in ccRCC cells.

### Keywords
786-o bap1 lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Tsinghua Univ
School of Life Science, Tsinghua University, China

### Submitter
Pengsheng Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
School of Life Science, Tsinghua University, China


