### Accession
PXD026438

### Title
Activated interleukin-7 receptor signaling drives B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in mice

### Description
Philadelphia chromosome-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph-like ALL) is a high-risk subtype of B-ALL often associated with genetic variants that alter cytokine receptor signaling, including mutations in the interleukin-7 receptor (IL7R). To investigate whether IL7R variants are leukemia-initiating, we built mouse models expressing activated Il7r (aIL7R). B-cell intrinsic aIL7R mice developed spontaneous B-ALL, demonstrating sufficiency of Il7r activating mutations in leukemogenesis. Concomitant introduction of a knock-out allele in the associated adapter protein Lnk (encoded by Sh2b3) or a dominant-negative variant of the transcription factor Ikaros (Ikzf1) increased disease penetrance. The resulting murine leukemias displayed monoclonality and recurrent somatic Kras mutations and efficiently engrafted into immunocompetent mice. Phosphoproteomic analyses of aIL7R leukemic cells revealed constitutive Stat5 signaling and B cell receptor (BCR)-like signaling despite absence of surface pre-BCR. Finally, in vitro treatment of aIL7R leukemic B-cells with Jak, mTOR, or Syk inhibitors blocked growth, confirming that each pathway is active in this mouse model of IL7R-driven B-ALL

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for phosphoproteomic analysis Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M Urea containing phosphatase inhibitors and sonicated. Protein concentration was then determined by a BCA assay (Pierce). 1-2 mg of each sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 45 minutes, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 8.9, and digested with Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, from Wako) for 4 hours at room temperature at a ratio of 1:100 (Lys-C to total protein), followed by sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:100 (trypsin to total protein), overnight at room temperature. Following digestion, peptides were desalted and concentrated using Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Samples were then dried by vacuum centrifugation, lyophilized, and stored at −80 °C until further processing.  PhosphoTyrosine Immunoprecipitation Protein-G agarose (Sigma) was reconstituted in water for 1 hour at room temperature and washed three times in IP buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 0.3% NP-40). Beads were resuspended in IP buffer containing three antibodies (4G10 from Sigma, pY100 and pY1000 from Cell Signaling Technologies) and placed on a rotator for 6-8 hours at 4 degrees. Beads were washed one time with IP buffer and added to lyophilized peptides in IP buffer, overnight at 4 degrees. Beads were then washed three times with IP buffer, 3 times with wash buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.4), and 3 times with water. Peptides were eluted with 15% Acetonitrile containing 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid. For human PDX samples, heavy labeled peptides were added, and in all cases the Acetonitrile was removed using vacuum centrifugation.   Mass Spectrometry Online peptide separation coupled to MS/MS was performed with a nanoLC system (nanoAcquity UPLC system, Waters) and a Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto a trap column (Bruker C18 MAGIC beads, 200 A pore size, 4 cm packing length, 100 μm column inner diameter) connected to an analytical column (Bruker C18 MAGIC beads, 100 A pore size, 20 cm packing length, 75 μm column inner diameter) with an incorporated electrospray emitter. Peptide separation was achieved using a gradient from 3 to 40% (V/V) of ACN in 0.1% FA over 40 or 115 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min.  A top 10 method was used for data-dependent/discovery acquisitions. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1e6, with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum fill time of 200 ms, and a normalized collision energy of 28.  Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) methods were used to target specific phosphorylated peptides. The acquisition method combined 5 sequential PRM events followed by a full scan event. Precursor ions of the peptides were targeted in preliminary experiments without time-scheduling and confirmed precursors were targeted +/− 5 minutes of the observed elution times in the actual experimental runs. PRM events were acquired with an orbitrap resolution of 17,500, an AGC value of 2e5, and maximum fill times of 100 ms, and a normalized energy of 28. The precursor ion of each targeted peptide was isolated using a 2 m/z window. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, an AGC value of 3e6, and maximum fill times of 240 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Analysis For DDA analysis, MS data files were searched using the COMET algorithm and the output was imported into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline with the following parameters: variable oxidation of methionine (15.99 Da), variable phosphorylation (79.96 Da) of serine, threonine, or tyrosine, up to 4 variable modifications per peptide, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02 Da), two missed cleavages, maximum charge of 7. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  Quantitative analysis of pY peptides was performed with Skyline software. Quantifiable fragment ions for each peptide were confirmed and an intensity value was determined by summing the area under the curve gleaned from a subset of fragment ion and/or precursor ion isotopic peaks (minimum peak number = 3). For mouse pY quantification, the intensity value for each peptide was normalized to that for a phosphorylated peptide from Fgr within the same sample prior to assessing changes in relative peptide abundance. For human PDX models, the intensity values for endogenous peptides were first normalized to that of the corresponding spiked-in heavy peptide and then to that of GSK3B pY216.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Il7, Leukemia, Prm, Cancer

### Affiliations
Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute. Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington. Seattle, WA USA
Seattle Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Nathan Camp

### Lab Head
Dr Richard James
Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research Institute. Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington. Seattle, WA USA


