### Accession
PXD009808

### Title
Raw N-glycan MALDI mass spectrometry imaging data on formalin-fixed mouse kidney

### Description
The N-glycome was mapped and visualised on formalin-fixed mouse kidney tissue using an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF/ToF MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics).

### Sample Protocol
The formalin-fixed mouse kidney tissue was sectioned onto ITO slides, antigen retrieved and PNGase F treated by droplet deposition using a Chemical InkJet Printer 1000 (ChIP-1000) instrument (Shimadzu). Following overnight incubation to allow N-glycan enzymatic cleave, the tissue sections were overlaid with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) in 1 mM Sodium Chloride (NaCl) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) using a capillary nebulized spray delivered via a TM-sprayer instrument (Shimadzu). MS data was acquired using an ultrafleXtreme MALDI-ToF/ToF MS instrument (Bruker Daltonics). Instrument-specific settings were as follows: 800–4500 m/z range, 700 Da matrix suppression, 2 kHz laser repetition rate, and 2.5 GS/s. Method-specific settings were as follows: 75 % laser power and 2698 V detector gain. A total of 1000 shots were acquired at each position with no walk. Data was acquired by oversampling from an arbitrary array with center to center acquisition distance of 100 μm overlaid onto the 250 μm PNGase F array.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data for the regions of interest (ROI), labelled cal (calibrant region), control (control region), png1 (PNGase F-treated region 1) and png2 (PNGase F-treated region 2), were converted to imzML (www.imzml.org) using SCiLS Lab (version 2015b, SCiLS GmbH, Bruker Daltonics).

### Publication Abstract
Provided is the annotated raw data for <i>N</i>-glycan mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) annotations in thin cross-sections of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded murine kidney. Relevant meta-data have been provided in this brief and the raw MSI data can be accessed using ProteomeXchange with the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) identifier PXD009808. This brief is the first in a set of submissions from our group which will make raw data publicly accessible for existing and future MSI studies.

### Keywords
Mouse, Maldi, Mass spectrometry imaging, N-glycan, Formalin-fixed, Kidney

### Affiliations
Future Industries Institute The University of South Australia
The University of South Australia

### Submitter
Matthew Briggs

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Hoffmann
Future Industries Institute The University of South Australia


