### Accession
PXD013720

### Title
Identification of proteins and miRNAs that specifically bind an mRNA in vivo

### Description
Understanding regulation of an mRNA requires knowledge of its regulators. However, methods for reliable de-novo identification of proteins binding to a particular RNA are scarce and were so far only successfully applied to abundant noncoding RNAs in cell culture. Here, we present vIPR, an RNA-protein crosslink, RNA pulldown, and shotgun proteomics approach to identify proteins bound to a selected mRNA in C. elegans. Applying vIPR to the germline-specific transcript gld-1 led to enrichment of known and novel interactors. By comparing enrichment upon gld-1 and lin-41 pulldown, we demonstrate that vIPR recovers both common and specific RNA-binding proteins, and we validate DAZ-1 as a novel and specific gld-1 regulator. Finally, combining vIPR with small RNA sequencing, we recover known and biologically important transcript-specific miRNA interactions, and we identify miR-84 as a specific interactor of the gld-1 transcript. We envision that vIPR provides a platform for investigating RNA in vivo regulation in diverse biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in 50 μL of 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were first digested by LysC at a LysC-to-protein ratio of 100:1 at room temperature for 3 h. Then, the sample solution was diluted to a final concentration of 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin digestion was performed at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 100:1 under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 h. Digestion was stopped and pH adjusted to < 3.0 with TFA. Peptides were desalted with SCX (strong cation chromatography) and C18 Stage Tips prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography (rpHPLC) was performed employing an EASY nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using self-made fritless C18 microcolumns (75 μm ID packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm or 1.9-μm resin, Dr. Maisch, Germany) connected on-line to the electrospray ion source (Proxeon, Denmark) of a Q Exactive plus or a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a 5 to 48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 2 h. Settings for MS analysis were as follows: one full scan (resolution 70,000 or 60,000; m/z 300-1,700 or 350-1,800) followed by top 10 or top 20 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (min. signal required, 21,000; isolation width, 2 or 1.3 m/z; normalized collision energy, 26). The Q Exactive instruments were operated in the data dependent mode (DDA) with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by up to 10 or 20 consecutive MS/MS scans. Ions with an unassigned charge state and singly charged ions were rejected. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed and processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.1.2, 1.5.7.4, and 1.6.0.16) with standard settings, unless stated otherwise in the following. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and asparagine/glutamine deamidation. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm for MS scans and 20 ppm for MS/MS scans. The match between runs option was enabled. Database search was performed using Andromeda against UniProt/Swiss-Prot worm database (October 2014) with common contaminants. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. For protein quantification, the label-free algorithm based on peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding regulation of an mRNA requires knowledge of its regulators. However, methods for reliable de-novo identification of proteins binding to a particular RNA are scarce and were thus far only successfully applied to abundant noncoding RNAs in cell culture. Here, we present vIPR, an RNA-protein crosslink, RNA pulldown, and shotgun proteomics approach to identify proteins bound to selected mRNAs in C. elegans. Applying vIPR to the germline-specific transcript gld-1 led to enrichment of known and novel interactors. By comparing enrichment upon gld-1 and lin-41 pulldown, we demonstrate that vIPR recovers both common and specific RNA-binding proteins, and we validate DAZ-1 as a specific gld-1 regulator. Finally, combining vIPR with small RNA sequencing, we recover known and biologically important transcript-specific miRNA interactions, and we identify miR-84 as a specific interactor of the gld-1 transcript. We envision that vIPR will provide a platform for investigating RNA in vivo regulation in diverse biological systems.

### Keywords
Caenorhabditis elegans, Q exactive hf-x, Rna pulldown, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
BIMSB/MDC
Systems Biology of Gene Regulatory Elements Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB) Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Kathrin Theil

### Lab Head
Dr Nikolaus Rajewsky
Systems Biology of Gene Regulatory Elements Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB) Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin, Germany


