### Accession
PXD023141

### Title
Identification of spidroin proteins in the silk glands of Nephila clavipes spiders

### Description
Glands were frozen at -80 ºC immediately after being retrieved and stored under this condition until initiating the proteomics analysis protocol. Glands were washed with cold PBS and immersed in 120 l of homogenization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10 mM DTT, 4% (w/v) SDS). Glands were boiled for 5 min, incubated overnight at 4 ºC and centrifuged at 4 ºC and 13000 rpm for 10 min. The whole gland proteome of each gland was concentrated as described elsewhere (Bonzon-Kulichenko, F. Garcia-Marques, M. Trevisan-Herraz and J. Vazquez, Journal of Proteome Research, 2015, 14, 700-710 (DOI:10.1021/pr5007284).Briefly, samples were loaded into an SDS-PAGE gel (0.5 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving) and the electrophoresis process was stopped when the front entered  2 mm into the resolving gel. The unseparated protein bands were then visualized by Coomassie staining, excised and digested at 37 ºC overnight with 500 l of 25 g/l chymotrypsin (Promega) in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 containing 10 mM CaCl2. The cleaved peptides were extracted by incubation for 2 h in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 on shaking, acidized with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, desalted onto C18 cartridges (Oasis, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), and dried down.The analysis of the samples proceeded through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Easy nLC 1000 nano-HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Themo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, 75-m i.d., 3-m particle size, 2-cm length, Thermo Scientific), and a reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75-m, i.d., 3-m particle size, 50-cm length, Thermo Scientific) in buffer A [0.1% formic acid (v/v)] and eluted with a 60 min linear gradient of buffer B [90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)], at 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometry (MS) runs consisted of 70000 FT-resolution spectra in the 390-1200 m/z wide range, followed by data-dependent MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense parent ions acquired along the chromatographic run. High-energy collisional (HCD) fragmentation was performed at 27% of normalized collision energy and the isolation window for the parent ion mass was established at 2 Da.

### Sample Protocol
Glands were frozen at -80 ºC immediately after being retrieved and stored under this condition until initiating the proteomics analysis protocol. Glands were washed with cold PBS and immersed in 120 l of homogenization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10 mM DTT, 4% (w/v) SDS). Glands were boiled for 5 min, incubated overnight at 4 ºC and centrifuged at 4 ºC and 13000 rpm for 10 min. The whole gland proteome of each gland was concentrated as described elsewhere (Bonzon-Kulichenko, F. Garcia-Marques, M. Trevisan-Herraz and J. Vazquez, Journal of Proteome Research, 2015, 14, 700-710 (DOI:10.1021/pr5007284).Briefly, samples were loaded into an SDS-PAGE gel (0.5 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving) and the electrophoresis process was stopped when the front entered  2 mm into the resolving gel. The unseparated protein bands were then visualized by Coomassie staining, excised and digested at 37 ºC overnight with 500 l of 25 g/l chymotrypsin (Promega) in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 containing 10 mM CaCl2. The cleaved peptides were extracted by incubation for 2 h in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8 on shaking, acidized with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, desalted onto C18 cartridges (Oasis, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA), and dried down.The analysis of the samples proceeded through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Easy nLC 1000 nano-HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Themo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, 75-m i.d., 3-m particle size, 2-cm length, Thermo Scientific), and a reverse-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75-m, i.d., 3-m particle size, 50-cm length, Thermo Scientific) in buffer A [0.1% formic acid (v/v)] and eluted with a 60 min linear gradient of buffer B [90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)], at 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometry (MS) runs consisted of 70000 FT-resolution spectra in the 390-1200 m/z wide range, followed by data-dependent MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense parent ions acquired along the chromatographic run. High-energy collisional (HCD) fragmentation was performed at 27% of normalized collision energy and the isolation window for the parent ion mass was established at 2 Da.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the MS/MS spectra were analysed with the SEQUEST HT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific), using a database containing Homo sapiens and Aranae protein sequences (UniProt 2019, July Release). For data base searching, parameters were selected as follows: chymotrypsin digestion with two maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was chosen as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) as variable modification. The same collections of the MS/MS spectra were searched using a decoy database built from the same target database. Peptide identification from MS/MS data was performed using the probability ratio method (Martinez-Bartolome, P. Navarro, F. Martin-Maroto, D. Lopez-Ferrer, A. Ramos-Fernandez, M. Villar, J. P. Garcia-Ruiz and J. Vazquez, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2008, 7, 1135-1145 (DOI:10.1074/mcp.M700239-MCP200) and the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification was calculated based on the search results against a decoy database using the refined method (P. Navarro and J. Vazquez, Journal of Proteome Research, 2009, 8, 1792-1796 (DOI:10.1021/pr800362h). The proportion of proteins identified in the gland was calculated through spectral counting, assuming as positive events those with 1% FDR.Peptides identified as originating from spidroins were subsequently aligned specifically with the proteins released from the genome sequencing of Nephila clavipes spiders as found in Babb et al. (P. L. Babb, N. F. Lahens, S. M. Correa-Garhwal, D. N. Nicholson, E. J. Kim, J. B. Hogenesch, M. Kuntner, L. Higgins, C. Y. Hayashi, I. Agnarsson and B. F. Voight, Nat. Genet., 2017, 49, 895-+ (DOI:10.1038/ng.3852). The alignment was performed with the Emboss Matcher for the Pairwise Sequence Alignment of sequences (www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/psa/emboss_matcher/) using the BLOSUM 62 matrix, with a gap open of 1 and a gap extend of 4. An identity of 85% or higher was established as the condition for assigning a peptide to a given spidroin protein.

### Publication Abstract
The expression of spidroins in the major ampullate, minor ampullate, flagelliform, and tubuliform silk glands of Trichonephila clavipes spiders was analyzed using proteomics analysis techniques. Spidroin peptides were identified and assigned to different gene products based on sequence concurrence when compared with the whole genome of the spider. It was found that only a relatively low proportion of the spidroin genes are expressed as proteins in any of the studied glands. In addition, the expression of spidroin genes in different glands presents a wide range of patterns, with some spidroins being found in a single gland exclusively, while others appear in the content of several glands. The combination of precise genomics, proteomics, microstructural, and mechanical data provides new insights both on the design principles of these materials and how these principles might be translated for the production of high-performance bioinspired artificial fibers.

### Keywords
Spider silk; proteomics; liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; silk gut

### Affiliations
Full Professor  Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory & Proteomics Unit Vascular Pathophysiology Area Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Melchor Fernández Almagro núm. 3 28029 Madrid
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez Cobos
Full Professor  Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory & Proteomics Unit Vascular Pathophysiology Area Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Melchor Fernández Almagro núm. 3 28029 Madrid


