### Accession
PXD029033

### Title
A membrane-permeable and IMAC-enrichable crosslinking reagent for advanced in vivo crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Description
We developed a novel membrane-permeable and IMAC-enrichable cross-linker tBu-PhoX. Applying our optimized in vivo XL-MS pipeline, we revealed PPI landscape from intact human cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells, E. coli and B. subtilis were harvested and re-suspended in Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Samples were washed 3 times with PBS to exclude amine-contained medium. Intact mitochondria were harvested and purified from mouse heart, then washed 3 times with 300 mM Trehalose buffer. Protein concentration was adjusted to 10 mg/ml. Cells or intact mitochondria crosslinking was performed twice, each time with 1 mM tBu-PhoX for 30 min at room temperature. Crosslinking reaction was quenched with 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 for 15 min at room temperature. Crosslinked sample is lysed by SDS-based lysis buffer, followed by protein precipitation. After tryptic digestion and cleaned by C8 StageTip, precleaning step is performed. Then, phosphonate is denuded by deprotection, followed by phosphoenrichment to LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched by Plink2 with 1% FDR criteria. All the comparison is finished by R. 3D structure is displayed by pymol and python script.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is an attractive method for the proteome-wide characterization of protein structures and interactions. Currently, the depth of in&#x2005;vivo XL-MS studies is lagging behind the established applications to cell lysates, because cross-linking reagents that can penetrate intact cells and strategies to enrich cross-linked peptides lack efficiency. To tackle these limitations, we have developed a phosphonate-containing cross-linker, tBu-PhoX, that efficiently permeates various biological membranes and can be robustly enriched using routine immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography. We have established a tBu-PhoX-based in&#x2005;vivo XL-MS approach that enables cross-links in intact human cells to be identified in high numbers with substantially reduced analysis time. Collectively, the developed cross-linker and XL-MS approach pave the way for the comprehensive XL-MS characterization of living systems.

### Keywords
Protein structures, Proteomics, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
LEIBNIZ-FORSCHUNGSINSTITUT FÜR MOLEKULARE PHARMAKOLOGIE (FMP)
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie

### Submitter
Pin-Lian Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
LEIBNIZ-FORSCHUNGSINSTITUT FÜR MOLEKULARE PHARMAKOLOGIE (FMP)


