### Accession
PXD025940

### Title
Proteome-wide and matrisome-specific atlas of the human ovary from prepuberty to menopause

### Description
Our modern era is witnessing an increasing infertility rate worldwide. Although some of the causes can be attributed to our modern lifestyle (eg. persistent organic polluants, late pregnancy), our knowledge of the human ovarian tissue has remained limited and insufficient to reverse the infertility statistics. Indeed, all efforts have been focused on the endocrine and cellular function in support of the cell theory that dates back to the 18th century, while the human ovarian matrisome is still under-described. Therefore, hereby we provide the first systematic study focusing on the human ovarian matrisome and its remodeling during a woman lifetime, from prepuberty til menopause. We apply our matrisome tailored fractionation method, the DC-MaP strategy and mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics using TMT pro 16-plex isobaric labeling to delineate proteome-wide and ECM-specific shifts between prepubertal, reproductive-age and menopausal stages. Post-translational modifications, namely proline hydroxylation and advanced glycation ends products have also been detected at different intensities according to age. Matrisome age-biomarkers have been validated with lightsheet microscopy-based-3D imaging, following immunofluorescence and tissue clearing with an ovary-tailored protocol. We used machine learning and statistics to build a neural network that can predict predict the probability of a specific ovarian tissue matrisome to resemble to prepubertal, reproductive-age or menopausal tissue and potentially conclude its fertility potency or evaluate in the future the efficiency of ovarian rejuvenation treatments. We also used NLP medscan technology for advanced literature text-mining to predict all possible-connections between the extra- and intra-cellular compartments and how chemo-radiotherapy, known for its gonadotoxicity can also affect key matrisome proteins.This comprehensive proteomics analysis represents the ovarian proteomic codex and contributes to an improved understanding of the critical roles that ECM plays throughout ovarian life span. By publishing our proteomic data, we hope to open new avenues in fertility restoration, ovarian rejuvenation and reproductive tissue engineering

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. Each 10 mg-ovarian tissue was transferred to an empty 2 mL FastPrep®Lysing matrix tube (MP Biomedicals) filled with 200 µL lysis buffer (0.2% RapiGest [Waters Corp., Milford, MA], 300 mM NaCl 25mM HEPES, 0.25 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 0.25 mM PMSF, 1X halt protease inhibitor cocktail [Thermo Scientific, San José, USA] and 5 mM EDTA) and mechanically lysed using 0.3 mm-diameter stainless steel beads (Full Moon, BioSystems, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Homogenization was carried at 4 °C with Precellys Evolution (Bertin Technologies). The homogenate was eluted with the needle technique by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The eluate was then centrifuged again at 16,000g for 30 min at 4°C to recover the supernatant, which represents the soluble fraction. The remaining pellet which represents the insoluble fraction was enzymatically digested using 1.35 mg/mL LiberaseTM DH (Roche Diagnostics, GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) in 100 mM triethylamonium bicarbonat (TEAB) and 5 mM CaCl2. Each sample was subsequently incubated at 37°C for 2 h under agitation (140 rpm) with regular 30-s vortexing every 30 min. The enzymatic reaction was halted by the addition of 20 mM EDTA. Both soluble and insoluble fractions were processed as described below. Soluble Fraction Processing. One hundred µg of total soluble proteins were reduced with 5 mM of 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 30 min at 56 °C and subsequently alkylated with a 25 mM final concentration of chloroacetamide for 25 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were then precipitated using methanol-chloroform, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8) and further digested with Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:25 [wt/wt] overnight at 37 °C. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Recovered peptides were quantified by Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (#23275, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Insoluble Fraction Processing.  One hundred µg of total insoluble proteins were resuspended in a 6 M final concentration of urea in 100 mM TEAB, with continuous vortexing and sonication. Proteins were then reduced in 5 mM DTT and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After cooling to RT, cysteines were alkylated by addition of 25 mM chloroacetamide for 25 min at RT in the dark. Protein digestion was performed using Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 [wt/wt] and incubation for 2 h at 37 °C under 1,000 rpm agitation. After reducing urea concentration to 1 M by addition of 100 mM TEAB, a second aliquot of trypsin was added to the sample at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 [wt/wt] and incubated overnight at 37 °C with continuous agitation at 1,000 rpm. The reaction was stopped and the detergents hydrolyzed by the addition of freshly prepared 50% TFA [vol/vol] to a final concentration of 1% TFA [vol/vol], pH < 2. The acidified sample was centrifuged at 16,000× g for 10 min at RT to eliminate the insoluble MS-compatible detergents. Digests were then desalted and concentrated on HyperSep C18 cartridges (50 mg/mL, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and then dried using a speedvac. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of 100 mM TEAB and quantified by the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay following the manufacturer’s instructions.  All samples were then organized into two sets (soluble set & insoluble set) labeled by TMT pro 16plex according to manufacturer instructions. In each set, a bridge sample (a mix of all 30 samples at equivalent volumes) was introduced as an internal control. The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with enabled advanced peak determination (APD) and with relative quantification either by MS2 or SPS MS3.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against a human protein reference target-decoy database obtained from Uniprot (1 March 2020, 87,489 forward entries). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide, and up to 3 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, and considered dynamic modifications were +15.99 Da for oxidized methionine, +57.00 for carbamidomethyl cysteine, +21.984 Da for glyoxal on arginine, +114.042 Da for 3-deoxyglucosone on arginine and +42.011 Da for acetylation of the protein N-term. Fixed modifications was TMTpro (+304.207Da) for lysine and peptide N-termini. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator, and thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%. Relative quantification was performed with the MS2 or MS3 signal from TMT reporters’ ions. Quan value corrections for isotopic impurities was applied and co-isolation threshold was set at 50 or 65 for MS2 and MS3 data respectively. Two different ways of normalisation were used: none with a scaling mode set on “controls average” or “all average”; or with normalisation against a specific protein database containing liberase.

### Publication Abstract
Our modern era is witnessing an increasing infertility rate worldwide. Although some of the causes can be attributed to our modern lifestyle (e.g., persistent organic pollutants, late pregnancy), our knowledge of the human ovarian tissue has remained limited and insufficient to reverse the infertility statistics. Indeed, all efforts have been focused on the endocrine and cellular function in support of the cell theory that dates back to the 18th century, while the human ovarian matrisome is still under-described. Hereby, we unveil the extracellular side of the story during different periods of the ovary life, demonstrating that follicle survival and development, and ultimately fertility, would not be possible without its involvement. We examined the human ovarian matrisome and described its remodeling from prepuberty until menopause, creating the first ovarian proteomic codex. Here, we confidently identified and quantified 98 matrisome proteins present in the three ovary groups. Among them, 26 were expressed differently among age groups, delineating a peculiar matrisomal fingerprint at each stage. Such proteins could be potential biomarkers phenotyping ovarian ECM at each age phase of female reproductive life. Beyond proteomics, our study presents a unique approach to understanding the data and depicting the spatiotemporal ECM-intracellular signaling networks and remodeling with age through imaging, advanced text-mining based on natural language processing technology, machine learning, and data sonification. Our findings provide essential context for healthy ovarian physiology, identifying and characterizing disease states, and recapitulating physiological tissues or development in vitro. This comprehensive proteomics analysis represents the ovarian proteomic codex and contributes to an improved understanding of the critical roles that ECM plays throughout the ovarian life span.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Human ovary, Matrisome

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
UCLouvain Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique Pôle de Recherche en Gynécologie Avenue Mounier, 52 Bte. B1.52.02 1200 Bruxelles, Belgique

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Christiani Andrade Amorim
UCLouvain Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique Pôle de Recherche en Gynécologie Avenue Mounier, 52 Bte. B1.52.02 1200 Bruxelles, Belgique


