### Accession
PXD028111

### Title
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Restricts Human Naive Pluripotent Stem Cell to Trophoblast Fate Induction

### Description
Human naive pluripotent stem cells have unrestricted lineage potential. Underpinning this property, naive cells are thought to lack chromatin-based lineage barriers. However, this assumption has not been tested. Here, we apply multi-omics to comprehensively define the chromatin-associated proteome, histone post-translational modifications and transcriptome of human naive and primed pluripotent stem cells. Integrating the chromatin-bound proteome and histone modification data sets reveals differences in the relative abundance and activities of distinct chromatin modules, identifying a strong enrichment of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)-associated H3K27me3 in naive pluripotent stem cell chromatin. Single-cell approaches and human blastoid models reveal that PRC2 activity acts as a chromatin barrier restricting the differentiation of naive cells towards the trophoblast lineage, and inhibiting PRC2 promotes trophoblast fate induction and cavity formation. Our results establish that human naive pluripotent stem cells are not epigenetically unrestricted, but instead possess chromatin mechanisms that oppose the induction of alternative cell fates.

### Sample Protocol
Decrosslinked chromatin extracts (30 μg) were processed using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009b) and digested overnight with trypsin. Digested samples were fractionated using strong anion exchange (SAX) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009a), where we collected flow through (FT) and pH8 and pH2 elutions. Peptides were subjected to Stage-Tip desalting and concentration (Rappsilber et al., 2007) prior to LC-MS analysis. Peptides are applied to reverse-phase chromatography using a nanoLC-Easy1000 coupled online to a Thermo Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X. Using a 120 minute gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.01% TFA), peptides are eluted and subjected to tandem mass spectrometry.  The mass spectrometer is operated in Top20 mode and dynamic exclusion is applied for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry were analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.6.6.0) and searched against the curated UniProtKB human proteome (downloaded 27 June 2017) with default settings and LFQ, IBAQ, and match between runs enabled. Identified proteins were searched against a decoy database from MaxQuant. Proteins flagged as ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminant’ or ‘only identified by site’ were filtered from the final protein list. Biological triplicates were grouped to calculate differential proteins. Data were filtered for 3 valid values in at least 1 group. Missing values were imputed using default settings in Perseus, based on the assumption that they were not detected because they were under or close to the detection limit. Differential proteins between triplicates were calculated using a Student’s t test (p < 0.05) and a fold-change of > 2 fold. Generation of volcano plots and downstream analysis of proteomics data was performed using R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Prc2 inhibition, Che, Chromatin

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen

### Submitter
Dick Zijlmans

### Lab Head
Dr Hendrik Marks
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands


