### Accession
PXD035043

### Title
Paradiplonema papillatum E3 interactome

### Description
In eukaryotes, pyruvate, a key metabolite produced by glycolysis, is converted by a mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH) to acetyl-coenzyme A, which is fed into the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Two additional enzyme complexes catalyze similar oxidative decarboxylation reactions albeit using different substrates, the branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) and the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH). In diplonemids, one of the most abundant and diverse groups of oceanic protists, comparative transcriptome analyses indicated that their PDH complex is compositionally unique, with the conventional E1 subunit replaced by an aceE protein of prokaryotic origin. Here we endogenously tagged the common E3 subunit with a protein A tag and performed immunoprecipitation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 5x108 cells expressing protein A-tagged E3, as well as wild-type control cells were grown axenically in vented flasks at 27 °C in seawater-based trypton-rich medium (36 g/l sea salt, 1 g/l tryptone and 1% (v/v) fetal bovine serum) with the appropriate selection antibiotic G418 (75 µg/ml). Cells were harvested at 1,000 g for 10 minutes. After that, cells were resuspended in 5 ml ice cold 1x PBS, centrifuged again at 1,000 g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in ice cold 1x PBS and was used for irradiation with 600 mJ/cm2 UV light (254 nm wavelength) to covalently crosslink (UV Stratalink 1800, Stratagene). UV-crosslinked cells were lysed using lysis buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, 1% (v/v) glycerol, 1x cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors; Roche) and passed through a 30 gauge needle several times. The cell lysate was cleared twice at 10,000 g for 20 minutes. 75 µl IgG Sepharose 6 Fast Flow beads (Sigma) were added to the cleared cell lysate and rotated at 4 °C for 2 to 3 hours. The beads were washed three times with the washing buffer (10 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 250 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) glycerol) supplemented with 0.1% (v/v) IGEPAL CA-630, and then twice with the washing buffer without the detergent. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads with 100 µl of 0.1 M glycine (pH 3.0) by rotating for 5 minutes at room temperature and immediately mixed with 10 µl of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9.0). Small aliquots of input, flow through, and elution fraction were processed for immunoblotting. The elution fraction was subsequently sent for mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spec: Proteins eluted from sepharose beads were digested with trypsin and nanoflow liquid chromatography was used for separation of the resulting peptides on Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B contained acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm × 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min with loading buffer composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After 4 minutes, the ventile was switched and Mobile phase B increased from 4% to 35% B at 60 min, 75% B at 61 min, hold for 8 minutes, and 4% B at 70 min, hold for 15 minutes until the end of the run. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1450 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30 and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.14, which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a custom protein sequence database of P. papillatum (43,871 sequences) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters were the default ones employed by MaxQuant for Orbitrap analyzers with full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The experimental design included matching between runs for biological replicates. Peptides were required to be at least seven amino acids long, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins, and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. Protein quantification was done using iBAQ indices (raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides) allowing comparison of protein abundances both within samples and between them. After filtering to remove any protein IDs with less than two unique peptides and an Andromeda score of less than 20, the obtained data were processed in Perseus v1.6.14 as described previously (Zoltner et al., 2020; doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-0294-2_38).

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, pyruvate, a key metabolite produced by glycolysis, is converted by a tripartite mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex to acetyl-coenzyme A, which is fed into the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Two additional enzyme complexes with analogous composition catalyze similar oxidative decarboxylation reactions albeit using different substrates, the branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) complex and the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) complex. Comparative transcriptome analyses of diplonemids, one of the most abundant and diverse groups of oceanic protists, indicate that the conventional E1, E2, and E3 subunits of the PDH complex are lacking. E1 was apparently replaced in the euglenozoan ancestor of diplonemids by an AceE protein of archaeal type, a substitution that we also document in dinoflagellates. Here, we demonstrate that the mitochondrion of the model diplonemid Paradiplonema papillatum displays pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase activities. Protein mass spectrometry of mitochondria reveal that the AceE protein is as abundant as the E1 subunit of BCKDH. This corroborates the view that the AceE subunit is a functional component of the PDH complex. We hypothesize that by acquiring AceE, the diplonemid ancestor not only lost the eukaryotic-type E1, but also the E2 and E3 subunits of the PDH complex, which are present in other euglenozoans. We posit that the PDH activity in diplonemids seems to be carried out by a complex, in which the AceE protein partners with the E2 and E3 subunits from BCKDH and/or OGDH.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Pdh complex, Paradiplonema papillatum

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology
Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences
Branišovská 31
370 05 České Budějovice


Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice

### Submitter
Corinna Benz

### Lab Head
Dr Julius Lukes
Institute of Parasitology Biology Center, Czech Academy of Sciences Branišovská 31 370 05 České Budějovice


