### Accession
PXD027388

### Title
Integrative proteomics and phosphoproteomics reveals phosphorylation networks involved in maintenance and expression of embryogenic competence in sugarcane callus

### Description
Sugarcane (Saccharum spp.) is one of the most important crops for sugar, biofuels and bioenergy production, becoming an important commodity in the world agricultural market for more than 100 countries. In this study, label-free quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were performed to investigate signaling events related to somatic embryo maturation and differentiation in sugarcane. Embryogenic callus (EC) at the multiplication (EC0) and after 14 days (EC14) under maturation were compared. A total of 251 phosphoproteins and 700 proteins were differentially regulated and accumulated, respectively, in the EC14/EC0 comparison. Metabolic pathways analysis showed that proteins and phosphoproteins are enriched in lysine degradation and starch/sucrose metabolism during multiplication, while differentiation of somatic embryo involves the regulation of energetic metabolism, including TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and carbon metabolism. Multiplication-related phosphoproteins were mainly associated to abscisic acid responses and transcriptional regulation comprising the TOPLESS (TPL), SNF1 kinase homolog 10 (KIN10), SEUSS (SEU), and LEUNIG_HOMOLOG (LUH) proteins. In maturation-related phosphoproteins, the phosphorylation of the proteins light harvesting complex photosystem ii, CURVATURE THYLAKOID 1B, vacuolar proton ATPase A1 and phytochrome interacting factor 3-LIKE 5 is associated to bioenergetic metabolism and carbon fixation. Motif analysis revealed 15 phosphorylation motifs, of which the [D-pS / T-x-D] motif was unique for the phosphopeptides identified during somatic embryo differentiation. Co-expression network analysis of proteins and phosphoproteins revealed the interaction between SNF1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2), abscisic acid responsive elements-binding factor 2 (ABF2), and KIN10, indicating the role of these proteins in the embryogenic competence in EC0. The interactions between ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 5, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 35, small ubiquitin-like modifier 1, and histone deacetylase 1 may be involved in post-translational protein modification during the embryo maturation stage. argonaute 1 (AGO1) also interacts with POLTERGEIST (POL) and may integrate gene silencing and regulation of meristem identity during somatic embryo development. These results reveal novel dynamics of protein regulation in somatic embryogenesis and identify new potential players in somatic embryo differentiation and their phosphosites.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Five biological replicates (300 mg of fresh matter per sample) of embryogenic callus (EC) from multiplication phase and just before replaced to maturation treatment (named as EC0), and EC after 14 days of incubation in maturation treatment (named as EC14) were collected for proteomic and phosphoproteomics analysis. Protein extraction for proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses were performed using 7 M urea/2 M thiourea buffer according Almeida et al. (2020).  Protein digestion was performed according Almeida et al. (2020) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. A total of 1600 μg of protein from each biological replicate was divided into four aliquots of 400 μg due to the loading limit of the filter unit in the tryptic digestion using FASP and performed according to Almeida et al. (2020). The peptides from the four aliquots of each biological replicate were pooled, vacuum-dried, and resuspended in 800 μL of a solution containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in mass spectrometry (MS)-grade water (Sigma-Aldrich). The peptide concentration was estimated by measuring A205 nm using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were stored at -80 °C prior to analyses.  Phosphopeptide enrichment A high-select™ TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to enrich phosphopeptides from tryptic peptides. Aliquots of 500 µg of digested peptides from each biological replicate were vacuum dried, suspended in 150 μL of a solution of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in MS-grade water (Sigma-Aldrich), and placed into TiO2 spin tips. The enrichment steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution of the phosphopeptides, the eluate was vacuum dried and suspended in 25 μL of a solution containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in MS water. The phosphopeptide concentration was estimated by measuring A205nm using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The phosphopeptides were stored at -80 °C prior to analyses.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analysis Proteomics analysis was performed using a nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatograph (UPLC) coupled to a Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters, Manchester, UK) with the parameters described by  Botini et al. (2021). Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode) with ion mobility (HDMSE) and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol μL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra were subsequently acquired by MassLynx v4.0 software (Waters).  Phosphoproteomics analysis Phosphoproteomic analysis was performed using a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) nanoflow chromatography system coupled to a Q-TOF timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) according to Almeida et al. (2020). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation (PASEF) method (Meier et al., 2015; Meier et al., 2018).  Proteomics and phosphoproteomic data analysis Both proteomics and phosphoproteomics MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein databank generated from the sequencing of a haploid Saccharum spontaneum, AP85-441 (databank version: v20190103).  Proteomics MS/MS spectra processing and database search were performed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) software v.3.02 (Waters), and label-free quantification analyses were performed using ISOQuant software v.1.7 (Distler et al., 2014). Proteins with significant Student’s t-test (two-tailed; P < 0.05) results were considered differentially accumulated (DAP), considering  up-accumulated if the Log2 fold change (FC) was greater than 0.5 and down-accumulated if the log2 FC was less than -0.5. Phosphoproteomics MS/MS spectra processing and database search were performed using the MaxQuant software v. 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008) as described in (Almeida et al., 2020). After MaxQuant data analyses, the resulting identified phosphosites (phospho STY (sites).txt) table were filtered only for those that were confidently localized (localization probability ≥ 0.75). Phosphoroteins with significant Student’s t-test (two-tailed; P < 0.05) results were considered differentially regulated (DRP), considering up-regulated if the Log2 FC was greater than 0.5 and down-regulated if the Log2 FC was less than -0.5. Functional annotation analysis were performed using OmicsBox software (https://www.biobam.com/omicsbox) and UniProtKB (https://www.uniprot.org). The protein sequences were submitted to BLAST search against the NCBI nonredundant green plant protein database (taxa: 33090, Viridiplantae). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment pathways analysis between DAPs and DRPs (P < 0.01) was performed in MetaScape (Zhou et al., 2019) after BLAST in NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ) to obtain Arabidopsis thaliana reference sequences. The interaction networks of DAPs and DRPs was performed using Arabidopsis homologs of sugarcane identified with STRING search and used as an input for downstream analysis in Cytoscape (version 3.7.1) (Shannon et al., 2003). The predicted kinases, transcription factors and transcriptional regulators in DAPs and DRPs were identified using the iTAK software (Zheng et al., 2016). To identify possible phosphorylation motifs related to the differentiation of sugarcane embryogenic cells, the MotifeR software was used.

### Publication Abstract
Plant embryogenic cell culture allows mass propagation and genetic manipulation, but the mechanisms that determine the fate of these totipotent cells in somatic embryos have not yet been elucidated. Here, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses to determine signaling events related to sugarcane somatic embryo differentiation, especially those related to protein phosphorylation. Embryogenic calli were compared at multiplication (EC0, dedifferentiated cells) and after 14 days of maturation (EC14, onset of embryo differentiation). Metabolic pathway analysis showed enriched lysine degradation and starch/sucrose metabolism proteins during multiplication, whereas the differentiation of somatic embryos was found to involve the enrichment of energy metabolism, including the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Multiplication-related phosphoproteins were associated with transcriptional regulation, including SNF1 kinase homolog 10 (KIN10), SEUSS (SEU), and LEUNIG_HOMOLOG (LUH). The regulation of multiple light harvesting complex photosystem II proteins and phytochrome interacting factor 3-LIKE 5 were predicted to promote bioenergetic metabolism and carbon fixation during the maturation stage. A motif analysis revealed 15 phosphorylation motifs. The [D-pS/T-x-D] motif was overrepresented during somatic embryo differentiation. A protein-protein network analysis predicted interactions among SNF1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2), abscisic acid-responsive element-binding factor 2 (ABF2), and KIN10, which indicated the role of these proteins in embryogenic competence. The predicted interactions between TOPLESS (TPL) and histone deacetylase 19 (HD19) may be involved in posttranslational protein regulation during somatic embryo differentiation. These results reveal the protein regulation dynamics of somatic embryogenesis and new players in somatic embryo differentiation, including their predicted phosphorylation motifs and phosphosites.

### Keywords
Somatic embryogenesis, Embryo development, Sugarcane, Label-free phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


