### Accession
PXD018245

### Title
Intercellular Transmission of a Synthetic Bacterial Cytotoxic Prion-Like Protein in Mammalian Cells.

### Description
bacterial amyloidosis, prion-like, RepA-WH1, intercellular transmission,proteotoxic cross-aggregation

### Sample Protocol
Gel electrophoresis and trypsin digestion. The following cell types were studied: N2a cells transfected with pcDNA3.1-WH1(WT)-mCherry or pcDNA3.1-mCherry and incubated with in vitro-assembled WH1(A31V) fibers for 48 h; (ii) THN-rtTA/SH-SY5Y cells having integrated pTRE3GWH1(WT)-TagGFP2 or pTRE3G-TagGFP2, both after induction with Dox (0.5 ug/ml) for 48 h; and naive N2a and THN-rtTA/SH-SY5Y control cells. Whole-cell extracts (see above) were partially resolved bySDS-PAGE gel (10% polyacrylamide) such that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. Protein bands were visualized by colloidal blue staining (Invitrogen), cut into small pieces, and placed in 0.5-ml tubes prior to manual tryptic digestion. Excised bands were cut into small pieces and separately destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 50% acetonitrile (ACN), dehydrated with ACN, and dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)–25 mM ABC and alkylated with iodoacetamide to reach a final concentration of 50 mM. Then, gel pieces were dried, rehydrated with 12.5 ng/ml porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 50 mM ABC, and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted using 100% ACN and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, purified using a Zip Tip with 0.6 μl of C18 resin (Millipore, Sigma-Aldrich), and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 10 -μl of 0.1% formic acid before their analysis by nanosystem liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC–MS/MS). All peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, the sample was loaded into an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted through a rapid-separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) (50 cm long, 75-μm inner diameter, 2-μm particle size). The mobile phase was 0.1% formic acid–water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid–acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set, using a flow rate of 300 nl/min, as follows: 5% to 35% solvent B for 100 min, 35% to 45% solvent B for 20 min, 45% to 100% solvent B for 5 min, and 100% solvent B for 15 min. A 4-μl volume of each sample was injected. LC-MS analysis. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Ionization was performed at a liquid junction voltage of 2,000 and a capillary temperature of 270°C. The full scan method comprised mass selection at m/z 300 to 1,800, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3x106, and 100 ms of máximum injection time. After the scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy value of 27, and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, a 2x 105AGC target, a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), an intensity threshold (IT) of 8x103, 2.0 m/z units as the isolation window, and 100 ms maximum IT. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned ions, singly charged ions, and protonated ions at a level of ≥7. A dynamic exclusion time of 30 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra .raw files were searched against either the Mus musculus Swiss-Prot2016 database (16,838 protein entries; for the N2a recipient cells) or the Homo sapiens Swiss-Prot 2016database (20,131 protein entries; for the SH-SY5Y recipient cells), using the Mascot search engine (v.2.6,Matrix Science). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance levels were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and N-terminal methionine oxidation and acetylation as a variable modification. Identified peptides were filtered using the Percolator algorithm with a false-discovery-rate (FDR) (q-value) threshold of 0.01 (high-confidence filter settings; FDR<1%). Proteins contributing peptides detected at least two times (peptide-spectrum match [PSM] value of >1) or having two or more peptides identified were selected for further analysis. Data representing proteins identified in naive N2a murine control cells were subtracted from data representing those found in N2a cells expressing WH1(WT)-mCherry or mCherry and incubated (or not) with fibers. Data representing proteins found in naive human THN-rtTA/SH-SY5Y control cells were subtracted from data representing those found in THN-rtTA/SH-SY5Y cells expressing WH1(WT)-TagGFP2 or TagGFP2 and cocultured (or not) with the murine donor cells. This subtractive approach, by eliminating in the data sets the background of ubiquitous host proteins, facilitated the identification of the relevant proteins specifically present under each set of cocultivation conditions. A Boolean algebra analysis (Venny, v.2.1; https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/) was undertaken to identify proteins exclusively found at, or shared between, the WH1(WT)-mCherry or TagGFP2 recipient cells. The proteins in the subset present in the WH1(WT)-mCherry/TagGFP2 data sets solely upon incubation with the WH1(A31V) fibers/donor cells were then classified according to functional gene ontology (GO) (GeneCards; 73) and cluster analysis (STRING v.11; 74).

### Publication Abstract
RepA is a bacterial protein that builds intracellular amyloid oligomers acting as inhibitory complexes of plasmid DNA replication. When carrying a mutation enhancing its amyloidogenesis (A31V), the N-terminal domain (WH1) generates cytosolic amyloid particles that are inheritable within a bacterial lineage. Such amyloids trigger in bacteria a lethal cascade reminiscent of mitochondrial impairment in human cells affected by neurodegeneration. To fulfill all the criteria to qualify as a prion-like protein, horizontal (intercellular) transmissibility remains to be demonstrated for RepA-WH1. Since this is experimentally intractable in bacteria, here we transiently expressed in a murine neuroblastoma cell line the soluble, barely cytotoxic RepA-WH1 wild type [RepA-WH1(WT)] and assayed its response to exposure to <i>in vitro</i>-assembled RepA-WH1(A31V) amyloid fibers. In parallel, murine cells releasing RepA-WH1(A31V) aggregates were cocultured with human neuroblastoma cells expressing RepA-WH1(WT). Both the assembled fibers and donor-derived RepA-WH1(A31V) aggregates induced, in the cytosol of recipient cells, the formation of cytotoxic amyloid particles. Mass spectrometry analyses of the proteomes of both types of injured cells pointed to alterations in mitochondria, protein quality triage, signaling, and intracellular traffic. Thus, a synthetic prion-like protein can be propagated to, and become cytotoxic to, cells of organisms placed at such distant branches of the tree of life as bacteria and mammalia, suggesting that mechanisms of protein aggregate spreading and toxicity follow default pathways.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Proteotoxic amyloid seeds can be transmitted between mammalian cells, arguing that the intercellular exchange of prion-like protein aggregates can be a common phenomenon. RepA-WH1 is derived from a bacterial intracellular functional amyloid protein, engineered to become cytotoxic in <i>Escherichia coli</i> Here, we have studied if such bacterial aggregates can also be transmitted to, and become cytotoxic to, mammalian cells. We demonstrate that RepA-WH1 is capable of entering naive cells, thereby inducing the cytotoxic aggregation of a soluble RepA-WH1 variant expressed in the cytosol, following the same trend that had been described in bacteria. These findings highlight the universality of one of the central principles underlying prion biology: No matter the biological origin of a given prion-like protein, it can be transmitted to a phylogenetically unrelated recipient cell, provided that the latter expresses a soluble protein onto which the incoming protein can readily template its amyloid conformation.

### Keywords
Proteotoxic cross-aggregation, Prion-like, Bacterial amyloidosis, Repa-wh1, Intercellular transmission

### Affiliations
CIB.CSIC
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC). Madrid 28040

### Submitter
Vivian de los Rios

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Giraldo
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC). Madrid 28040


