### Accession
PXD037530

### Title
Protein Lactylation modification and Proteomics Features in Cirrhosis Patients after MSCs Treatment.

### Description
Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) therapy improves liver function in patients with liver cirrhosis. However, the therapeutic mechanism underlying MSC therapy remains unclear. Therefore, this study aimed to elucidate the therapeutic mechanism underlying MSC therapy by analyzing changes in the modification and expression of proteins 1-month post-treatment with MSCs. This prospective study included 11 patients with cirrhosis who received MSC injection in the First Hospital of Lanzhou University. The laboratory indexes before and after treatment were collected to evaluate the clinical treatment effect of MSCs, and peptide segments were extracted from liver tissue before and after treatment to revealed the protein expression and lactylation modification. Meanwhile, weighted gene co-expression network analysis was used to analyze co-expression protein modules and their relationship with clinical features. The patients with liver cirrhosis showed an improvement trend after receiving MSC treatment, specifically, the liver protein synthesis function was significantly improved and coagulation function was also significantly improved. Proteomics combined with lactic acid proteomics revealed 160 Lysine lactylation (Kla) sites of 119 proteins. The downregulated lactylated proteins were associated with metabolic processes. The upregulated lactylated proteins were involved in biological processes. The protein-based co-expression module was significantly related to alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin (TBIL), indirect bilirubin (IBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL), and ALB, and 10 proteins significantly related to ALB and 10 proteins significantly related to bilirubin were screened. The changes in clinical indexes before and after treatment indicate that the clinical effects of MSC treatment are related to cell metabolism. Overall, this study is the first study to comprehensively and systematically reveal the changes of lactylated proteins and expression after treatment with MSC by the self-control of patients, and lays a foundation for understanding the functions of lactylation modification in MSC therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A (0.1% (V/V) formic acid and 2% (V/V) acetonitrile) and separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. The liquid phase gradient was set to an increase in the range of 9–22% solvent B [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 98% (v/v) acetonitrile] over 40 min, an increase in the range of 23–32% over 14 min, 80% over 3 min, and a final 80% over 3 min at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC system. The electrospray voltage was 2.1 kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning ranges of primary and secondary MS were set to 350–1400 m/z and 100 m/z, respectively, and the scanning resolutions were set to 120,000 and 45,000. To improve the effective utilization of MS and avoid repeated scanning of parent ions, we set the automatic gain control to 1E5, the signal threshold to 1E5 ions/s, and the maximum implantation time to 100 ms with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Liver biopsy samples were taken out from -80℃ and added liquid nitrogen and fully grinded into powder. Each sample were added with 4 volumes of powder lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 1% protease inhibitor, 3μM TSA, 50 mM Nicotinamide (NAM, Sigma, USA)), ultrasonic lysis. Then, the mixture was centrifuged at 12000g at 4∘C for 10 min for removing cell fragments. Finally, the supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined with a bicinchoninic acid kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). Take an equal amount of each sample protein for enzymatic hydrolysis, add an appropriate amount of standard protein, and adjust the volume to the same with lysate. TCA was added slowly into the sample to 20%. After vortex mix, the mixture was precipitated at 4℃ for 2h and then centrifuged at 4500g for 5min. The supernatant was discarded and the precipitated was washed with precooled acetone for 2-3 times. TEAB (Sigma–Aldrich, USA) was added into the precipitation at a final concentration of 200 mM following dispersing by ultrasound. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio, and the digestion was performed overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma, USA) was added to make the final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 37 ℃ for 60 min. Then, iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma–Aldrich, USA) was added at the final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. TMT lable, HPLC fractionation and modify enrichment The peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 (Phenomenex) and vacuum freeze-dried. The peptides were dissolved with 0.5M TEAB and labeled TMT according to the operation instructions. Briefly, the labeled reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile after thawing. The mixture added with the peptide and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. After that, the mixed labeled peptides were desalted and vacuum freeze-dried. The labeled peptides (6 mg) were separated into fractions by high-pH, reverse-phase High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on an Agilent 300Extend C18 (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inside diameter, 250 mm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). Briefly, peptides were separated into 60 fractions using an acetonitrile gradient of 8–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min. The peptides were then combined into two fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 50 mm Tris HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed lactic acid resin (PTM-1404, Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China) overnight at 4℃ with gentle shaking. After incubation, the resin was washed with IP buffer solution for four times and with deionized water for twice. Finally, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid eluent was used to elute the resin bound peptides for three times. For the LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database research Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15) was used to process the resulting MS/MS data. The tandem mass spectra collected were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta (20395 sequences) database. Mass errors of fragment ions and precursor were set as 0.02 Da and 10 ppm, respectively. Trypsin/P was the cleavage enzyme that allowed ≤4 missing cleavages and ≤3 modifications per peptide. Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT16plex (peptide N-terminal), and TMT16plex (K) were set as fixed modifications, and acetyl (protein N-terminal), oxidation (M), and lactylation (K) were set as variable modifications. The minimal peptide was set to six, and the false discovery rate threshold for proteins, modification sites, and peptides was set as 1%.  Annotation methods and functional enrichment The Gene Ontology (GO) proteome annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). If some identified proteins were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database, the sequence analysis application InterProScan was used to annotate the GO functions of the proteins based on protein sequence alignment. Then, the proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. The domain functional description of the identified proteins was annotated by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment, and the InterPro domain database was used. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathways. The annotation results were mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tool KEGG mapper. Finally, WoLF PSORT, which is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences, was used to predict the subcellular localization of differentially expressed proteins. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. The category with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell (UC-MSC) therapy improves liver function in liver cirrhosis patients. This study aimed to elucidate the therapeutic mechanism underlying cell therapy by analyzing changes in the modification and expression of proteins 1 month post-treatment with UC-MSCs. This prospective study included 11 cirrhosis patients who received MSC injection. The laboratory indexes before and after treatment were collected to evaluate the clinical treatment effect of UC-MSCs, and the protein expression and lactylation modification in the liver were comprehensively revealed. Meanwhile, weighted gene co-expression network analysis was used to analyze the co-expression protein modules and their relationship with clinical features. The patients with liver cirrhosis showed an improvement trend after receiving UC-MSC treatment; specifically, the liver protein synthesis function was significantly improved and the coagulation function was also significantly improved. Proteomics combined with lactic acid proteomics revealed 160 lysine lactylation (Kla) sites of 119 proteins. Functional analysis showed that the lactylation-modified proteins were enriched in the pathway of glucose and other substances' metabolism, and many key enzymes of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis were lactated. UC-MSC therapy has a certain clinical effect in the treatment of liver cirrhosis and may act by regulating material metabolism, because the lactylation protein points to energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Liver cirrhosis; mesenchymal stem cell; cell therapy; lactylation modification; proteomics analysis.

### Affiliations
The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University
The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University; Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province; The Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Institute of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province, China.

### Submitter
ye xie

### Lab Head
Dr Xun Li
The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University; Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province; The Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Institute of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province, China.


