### Accession
PXD022383

### Title
ULK1 regulated phosphatases in mouse and human cells

### Description
In the project “ULK1 regulated phosphatases” by Zehan Hu, Devanarayanan Siva Sankar, Björn Stork and Jörn Dengjel two sets of bottom-up MS-based chemical proteomics experiments were performed in which phosphatase complexes were enriched based on their activity using microcystin-LR coupled sepharose beads.   (1) Three biological replicates of MEFs (triple labeling) were performed comparing phosphatase activity (36 raw files labeled "2018"). ULK1 MEFs were compared DKO MEFs, both in rapamycin conditions. Empty beads were used as negative control (Ctrl).   Following experiments were performed:     (2) Three biological replicates of A549 cells (triple labeling) were performed comparing phosphatase activity (30 raw files labeled "A549"). A549 cells in fed conditions (DMEM) were compared to rapamycin treated cells (Rapa). Empty beads were used as negative control (Ctrl).

### Sample Protocol
Differentially labeled cells were treated or not for 1 h prior cells lysis with modified RIPA buffer. Debris was pelleted and the supernatant containing cellular proteins was collected and used for AP experiments using microcystin-coupled beads. Enriched proteins were reduced by 1 mM DTT and alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in gel digested with trypsin (Promega) in case of A549 samples. In case of MEF samples, proteins were digested by Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, WAKO) for 4 h in solution, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega). In solution digests were separated by high-pH RP-LC. The dry peptide powder was suspended in 400 µl 5% ammonium hydroxide and fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on a Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Dry peptides were resuspended and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) using a Uniprot full-length databases and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique. The “match-between-run” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min. MaxQuant results were analyzed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved ULK1 kinase complex acts as gatekeeper of canonical autophagy and regulates induction of autophagosome biogenesis. To better understand control of ULK1 and analyze whether ULK1 has broader functions that are also linked to the later steps of autophagy, we perform comprehensive phosphoproteomic analyses. Combining in&#xa0;vivo with in&#xa0;vitro data, we identify numerous direct ULK1 target sites within autophagy-relevant proteins that are critical for autophagosome maturation and turnover. In addition, we highlight an intimate crosstalk between ULK1 and several phosphatase complexes. ULK1 is not only a PP2A target but also directly phosphorylates the regulatory PP2A subunit striatin, activating PP2A and serving as positive feedback to promote autophagy-dependent protein turnover. Thus, ULK1 and phosphatase activities are tightly coordinated to robustly regulate protein degradation by autophagy.

### Keywords
Mefs, A549, Silac, Autophagy, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


