### Accession
PXD033354

### Title
Proteomic analysis of fractions of Arabidopsis thaliana proteins captured by immobilized metal affinity chromatography

### Description
Proteins from plant shoot and root tissues were extracted from wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0). They were enriched on conditioned U(VI)-loaded and U(VI)-free Duolite C467 beads. The enriched proteins were identified and quantified by label-free shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Uranium (U) is a naturally-occurring radionuclide that is toxic to living organisms. Given that proteins are primary targets of U(VI), their identification is an essential step towards understanding the mechanisms of radionuclide toxicity, and possibly detoxification. Here, we implemented a chromatographic strategy including immobilized metal affinity chromatography to trap protein targets of uranyl in Arabidopsis thaliana. This procedure allowed the identification of 38 uranyl-binding proteins (UraBPs) from root and shoot extracts. Among them, UraBP25, previously identified as plasma membrane-associated cation-binding protein 1 (PCaP1), was further characterized as a protein interacting in vitro with U(VI) and other metals using spectroscopic and structural approaches, and in planta through analyses of the fate of U(VI) in Arabidopsis lines with altered PCaP1 gene expression. Our results showed that recombinant PCaP1 binds U(VI) in vitro with affinity in the nM range, as well as Cu(II) and Fe(III) in high proportions, and that Ca(II) competes with U(VI) for binding. U(VI) induces PCaP1 oligomerization through binding at the monomer interface, at both the N-terminal structured domain and the C-terminal flexible region. Finally, U(VI) translocation in Arabidopsis shoots was affected in pcap1 null-mutant, suggesting a role for this protein in ion trafficking in planta.

### Keywords
Fractionation, Plant, Purification, Interaction, Proteomics, Metal

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


