### Accession
PXD017303

### Title
Consequences of Cyp2c44 deletion on proteome of the microsomal fraction of primary polyoma middle T (PyMT) tumors

### Description
Here we compared the proteomes of microsomal fractions from primary tumors isolated from PyMT mice versus PyMTxCyp2c44-/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
Microsomes were generated from tumours by homogenized with Tris/HCl (50 mmol/L), 0.25 mol/L sucrose, 0.5 umol/L potassium chloride (pH 7.4, containing 2 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L DTT, 0.1 mmol/L PMSF) and lysed with glass potter. The microsomal fraction was prepared by differential centrifugation (1,000 g for 10 minutes, 10,000 g for 20 minutes and 100,000 g for 90 minutes; all at 4°C) and the pellet was resuspended in microsome buffer containing 50 mmol/L Tris/HCl , 20% glycerine (pH 7.7, containing freshly prepared 5 mmol/L EDTA, 1 mmol/L DTT, 0.1 mmol/L PMSF) and stored in aliquots at -80°C until used. Microsomal protein (10 μg) was loaded on a Bis-Tris NUPAGE 3-12% gradient gel and stained with Coomassie. The gel region corresponding to CYP proteins (40-70 kDa) was cut into 4 pieces and destained in 60% methanol, 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 minutes at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mmol/L DTT, 50 mmol/L ABC for one hour at 56°C and alkylated for 45 minutes in 30 mmol/L iodoacteamide. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mmol/L ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mmol/L CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in a speed vacuum and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) via a Nanospray Flex Ion- Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Zorbax 300SB-C18, Agilent Technologies) followed by separation on in-house packed 2.4 μm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 μm, 15 cm long, New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 70 min and an additional gradient to 60% B for30 min with a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Each run was finished by washout with 99% B for 5 min and column equilibration with 1% B. Mass spectrometry (MS) data were recorded by data dependent Top10 acquisition (selecting the ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for high energy collision dissociation fragmentation). The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000 at m/z 200, and an automatic gain control value of 3xE6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1xE5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Following fragmentation event all selected ions were excluded in a time frame of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analyzed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.3.30) (Cox et al, 2008). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of Nterminus (+42.01), deamidation on N and Q, and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected for variable modification, carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. The mouse proteome set from Uniprot (Download February 2016, 79950 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of 1%. Label free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide.   Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
Arachidonic acid epoxides generated by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes have been linked to increased tumor growth and metastasis, largely on the basis of overexpression studies and the application of exogenous epoxides. Here we studied tumor growth and metastasis in Cyp2c44<sup>-/-</sup> mice crossed onto the polyoma middle T oncogene (PyMT) background. The resulting PyMT<sup>2c44</sup> mice developed more primary tumors earlier than PyMT mice, with increased lymph and lung metastasis. Primary tumors from Cyp2c44-deficient mice contained higher numbers of tumor-associated macrophages, as well as more lymphatic endothelial cells than tumors from PyMT mice. While epoxide and diol levels were comparable in tumors from both genotypes, prostaglandin (PG) levels were higher in the PyMT<sup>&#x394;2c44</sup> tumors. This could be accounted for by the finding that Cyp2c44 metabolized the PG precursor, PGH<sub>2</sub> to 12(S)-hydroxyheptadeca-5Z,8E,10E-trienoic acid (12-HHT), thus effectively reducing levels of effector PGs (including PGE<sub>2</sub>). Next, proteomic analyses revealed an up-regulation of WD repeating domain FYVE1 (WDFY1) in tumors from PyMT<sup>&#x394;2c44</sup> mice, a phenomenon that was reproduced in Cyp2c44-deficient macrophages as well as by PGE<sub>2</sub> Mechanistically, WDFY1 was involved in Toll-like receptor signaling, and its down-regulation in human monocytes attenuated the LPS-induced phosphorylation of IFN regulatory factor 3 and nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B. Taken together, our results indicate that Cyp2c44 protects against tumor growth and metastasis by preventing the synthesis of PGE<sub>2</sub> The latter eicosanoid influenced macrophages at least in part by enhancing Toll-like receptor signaling via the up-regulation of WDFY1.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Wdfy1, Breast cancer, Metastasis, Lymphangiogenesis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Fleming
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


