### Accession
PXD004237

### Title
Paulownia proteome using Shotgun proteomics

### Description
Analysis of the diploid and autotetraploid Paulownia australias and Paulownia 'Yuza 1'  proteome using iTRAQ

### Sample Protocol
Uniformly grown tissue cultured seedlings of the diploid and autotetraploid were cultured in 100-mL triangular flasks on 1/2 MS medium for 30 days. Healthy leaves were harvested, and equal numbers of leaves from each of the three plants in each of the replicate groups were pooled to form the two samples. Terminal buds of 1.5 cm in length of the plantlets in the four treatment groups were sheared, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, extracted with lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM EDTA. After 5 min, 10 mM DTT was added to the samples. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 4°C, 30,000 ×g for 15 min. The supernatant was mixed well with a 5× volume of chilled acetone containing 10% (v/v) TCA and incubated at −20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4°C, 30,000 ×g, the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was washed with chilled acetone three times. The pellet was air-dried and dissolved in lysis buffer. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and centrifuged at 4°C, 30,000 ×g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to another tube. To reduce disulfide bonds in the proteins of the supernatant, 10 mM DTT was added and incubated at 56°C for 1 h. Subsequently, 55 mM IAM was added to block the cysteines and incubated for 1 h in the dark. The supernatant was mixed well with a 5× volume of chilled acetone for 2 h at −20°C to precipitate the proteins. After centrifugation at 4°C, 30,000 ×, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was air-dried for 5 min, dissolved in 500 μL 0.5 M TEAB, and sonicated at 200 W for 15 min. Finally, the samples were centrifuged at 4°C, 30,000 ×g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and quantified. The proteins in the supernatant were kept at −80°C for further analysis.  Total protein (100 μg) was taken out of each sample solution and digested with Trypsin Gold with a ratio of protein : trypsin = 30:1 at 37°C for 16 h. After trypsin digestion, the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were then reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL isopropanol. The samples were labeled with iTRAQ tags. Four other samples were labeled with the same tags as a repeat. The peptides were labeled with the isobaric tags and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The labeled peptide mixtures were then pooled for strong cation exchange and dried by vacuum centrifugation. SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC pump system. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A and loaded onto a 4.6 × 250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1 with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5–60% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 27 min, and 60–100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Mass spectroscopy analysis was performed using an AB SCIEX TripleTOF™ 5600 mass spectrometer, coupled with an online micro-flow HPLC system as described above. The peptides were separated using a nano-bored C18 column with a PicoFrit nanospray tip (75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm, 5-μm particles). Separation was performed at a constant flow rate of 20 μL min−1, with a splitter to get an effective flow rate of 0.2 μL min−1. The mass spectrometer data were acquired in the positive ion mode, with a selected mass range of 300–2000 m/z. Peptides with +2 to +4 charge states were selected for MS/MS. The three most abundantly charged peptides above a count threshold were selected for MS/MS and dynamically excluded for 30 s with a ±30 mDa mass tolerance. Smart information-dependent acquisition (IDA) was activated with automatic collision energy and automatic MS/MS accumulation. The fragment intensity multiplier was set to 20, and the maximum accumulation time was 2 s. The peak areas of the iTRAQ reporter ions reflected the relative abundance of the proteins in the samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired above were converted into Mascot generic format (MGF) files using Proteome discoverer software to generate a peak list. The default parameters of Proteome. Discoverer were used. Data acquisition was performed with the Analyst QS 2.0 software. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine against a transcriptome database containing 82,934 sequences.  For protein identification, a mass tolerance of ±0.05 Da (ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and ±0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. Gln→pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) were allowed as potential variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of the peptides were set to +2 and +3. An automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox, in which a random database sequence was generated and tested for raw spectra in addition to the real database.  To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20) in the 99% confidence interval greater than “identity” in a Mascot probability analysis were counted as identified. Each confident protein identification involved at least one unique peptide.  For protein quantization, each protein was required to contain at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values < 0.05, and only fold changes > 1.2 were considered significant.  Functional analysis of the identified proteins, including all proteins and differetially expressed proteins (DEPs), was conducted using Gene Ontology annotations and the proteins were categorized according to their biological processes, molecular functions and cellular localizations. The proteins were further analyzed using the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins database and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database.

### Publication Abstract
Polyploidy plays a very important role in speciation and plant evolution by way of genomic merging and doubling. In the process of polyploidy, rapid genomic, and transcriptomic changes have been observed and researched. However, proteomic divergence caused by the effects of polyploidization is still poorly understood. In the present study, we used iTRAQ coupled with mass spectrometry to quantitatively analyze proteomic changes in the leaves of autotetraploid Paulownia and its diploid parent. A total of 2963 proteins were identified and quantified. Among them, 463 differentially abundant proteins were detected between autotetraploid Paulownia and its diploid parent, and 198 proteins were found to be non-additively abundant in autotetraploid Paulownia, suggesting the presence of non-additive protein regulation during genomic merger and doubling. We also detected 1808 protein-encoding genes in previously published RNA sequencing data. We found that 59 of the genes that showed remarkable changes at mRNA level encoded proteins with consistant changes in their abundance levels, while a further 48 genes that showed noteworthy changes in their expression levels encoded proteins with opposite changes in their abundance levels. Proteins involved in posttranslational modification, protein turnover, and response to stimulus, were significantly enriched among the non-additive proteins, which may provide some of the driving power for variation and adaptation in autopolyploids. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis verified the expression patterns of related protein-coding genes. In addition, we found that the percentage of differentially abundant proteins that matched previously reported differentially expressed genes was relatively low.

### Keywords
Paulownia australias, Paulownia 'yuza 1', Diploid, Autotetraploid, Itraq

### Affiliations
Henan Agricultural University
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University,95 Wenhua Road, Jinshui District,450002 Zhengzhou, Henan, P.R. China.

### Submitter
Yanpeng Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Fan
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University,95 Wenhua Road, Jinshui District,450002 Zhengzhou, Henan, P.R. China.


