### Accession
PXD029058

### Title
RNA-BioID of lncRNA HOTAIR in Flp-In T-REx cells

### Description
Accumulating evidence highlights the role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) in cellular homeostasis, and their dysregulation in disease settings. Most lncRNAs function by interacting with proteins or protein complexes. While several orthogonal methods have been developed to identify these proteins, each method has its inherent strengths and limitations. Here, we combine two RNA-centric methods ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID to obtain a comprehensive list of proteins that interact with the well-known lncRNA HOTAIR. Overexpression of HOTAIR has been associated with a metastasis-promoting phenotype in various cancers. Although HOTAIR is known to bind with PRC2 and LSD1 protein complexes, an unbiased and comprehensive method to map its interactome has not yet been performed. Both ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID data sets show an association of HOTAIR with mitoribosomes, suggesting HOTAIR has functions independent of its (post-)transcriptional mode-of-action.

### Sample Protocol
For each condition, 20.1 x 106 T-REx 293 RNA-BioID cells were plated in triplicate. Next day, cells were transfected with 17.4 µg of the corresponding lncRNA-12X MS2 constructs using PEI (Polysciences 23966-1). Twenty-four hours post-transfection, the culture medium was refreshed and 2 µg/mL puromycin (InvivoGen ant-pr-1) and 2 ng/mL doxycycline (Sigma Aldrich D9891) were supplemented to the fresh medium. Fourty-eight hours post-transfection 50 µM biotin (Sigma-Aldrich B4639) was added to perform biotin labeling for 16 – 18 hrs. Three hours before harvesting, the culture medium was refreshed with biotin-free medium to prevent saturation of the beads by free biotin still present during the enrichment protocol. Cells were washed twice on the plate with 10 mL ice-cold PBS (ThermoFisher Scientific 14190169), and were ultimately collected by scraping in 750 µL ice-cold PBS. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 500 x g for 5 min at 4°C and were washed once more with 10 mL PBS. Cells pellets were resuspended in 5 mL RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS, supplemented fresh with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11697498001) and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) and were incubated for 15 min on ice to allow efficient lysis. To each lysate 250 U benzonase (Sigma Aldrich E1014) was added and incubated with by end-over-end rotation for 1 hour at 4°C. Lysates were subsequently cleared of cellular debris by spinning at 15000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and protein concentration of the lysates was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad #5000006). A maximal shared protein amount across all samples was calculated to ensure equal starting protein material for each sample. Ninety microliters of Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (GE Healthcare GE17-5113-01) per sample were equilibrated by washing three times with 1 mL unsupplemented RIPA buffer, and were eventually resuspended in 90 µL of supplemented RIPA buffer per sample. Cleared lysates were incubated with equilibrated beads by end-over-end rotation for 3 hr at 4°C to enrich for biotinylated proteins. After affinity purification, beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 500 x g for 2 min. Beads were washed three times with unsupplemented RIPA buffer, twice with 1 mL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, and three times with 1 mL trypsin digest buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2). Beads were ultimately resuspended in 20 µL 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 1 µg trypsin (Promega V5111) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C to allow on-bead protein digestion. Next day, another 500 ng of trypsin was added and samples were incubated for 3 hr at 37°C, after which beads were pelleted and supernatant was transferred to a MS vial. Peptide samples were acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid. Quality control samples (input, flow through, and enriched fractions) to assess enrichment of biotinylated proteins on Western Blot

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analysed using the Andromeda search engine as implemented in MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1). Identified spectra were searched against the human proteome (UniProt). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications during the search. Fast LFQ was disabled, and the minimum LFQ ratio was set at 2. LFQ intensities for identified proteins were imported in Perseus (v1.5.8.5) for downstream analysis. In brief, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and filtered based on reverse hits, contaminant proteins, and proteins identified by site. At least three valid values were needed for a protein to be retained in the analysis. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. Finally, a two-sided t-test (FDR 0.05, 1000 randomizations) was performed to find differential proteins as visualized by volcano plots. Default S0 values were kept during the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulating evidence highlights the role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in cellular homeostasis, and their dysregulation in disease settings. Most lncRNAs function by interacting with proteins or protein complexes. While several orthogonal methods have been developed to identify these proteins, each method has its inherent strengths and limitations. Here, we combine two RNA-centric methods ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID to obtain a comprehensive list of proteins that interact with the well-known lncRNA HOTAIR. Overexpression of HOTAIR has been associated with a metastasis-promoting phenotype in various cancers. Although HOTAIR is known to bind with PRC2 and LSD1 protein complexes, only very limited unbiased comprehensive approaches to map its interactome have been performed. Both ChIRP-MS and RNA-BioID data sets show an association of HOTAIR with mitoribosomes, suggesting that HOTAIR has functions independent of its (post-)transcriptional mode-of-action.

### Keywords
Hotair, Rna-bioid, Lncrna

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Louis Delhaye

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology


