### Accession
PXD018194

### Title
Mouse mitochondrial CLPP substrate identification

### Description
Identification ofputative ClpXP substrates by combination of proteome analysis and TAILS N termini profiling from wt and ClpP-deficient mouse heart mitochondria, combined with substrate trapping using catalytically inactive ClpP expressed in MEF cell culture. This dataset provides the preTAILS proteomedata

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal peptides were enriched from isolated heart mitochondria using TAILS (Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates) with differential formaldehyde isotopes (12CH2O and 13CD2O) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) for modification and labeling of primary amines as described (Demir et al 2017). The following labeling scheme was used: control, light label (12CH2O); Clpp-/- mutant, heavy label (13CD2O). Labeled samples were digested with trypsin (Serva) overnight, then a small aliquot of approximately 10 æg proteome was withdrawn to control for digestion efficiency by SDS-page analysis and labeling efficiency by shotgun proteome analysis (designated ??preTAILS? samples). Peptides were desalted using in-house packed C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and additionally crudely fractionated (15-20-30-50% ACN) at neutral pH in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (AmBiC) using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters). Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) operated in a two-column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, particle size 3 æm, ID 75 æm for trap and ID 50 æm for analytical column; trap column length 2 cm, analytical column length 25 cm, Thermo) at a flow rate of 350 ml/min at 60 øC. The nano LC system was on-line coupled to an Impact II high resolution Q-TOF (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray nano ESI source (Bruker) with a NanoBooster (Bruker) engaged to saturate the nitrogen gas stream with acetonitrile essentially as described (Rinschen et al 2017).

### Data Protocol
For analysis of preTAILS, spectra were matched to peptide sequences at a FDR of 0.01 using MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016), v.1.6.0.16 with the UniProt mouse proteome (release 2017_10) as a database for searches with standard Bruker QTOF instrument settings, which  included 0.07 Da MS precursor tolerance in the first search, 0.006 Da precursor mass tolerance in the second search after recalibration, and MS/MS spectra matching tolerance of 40 ppm. Mass spectra acquired from preTAILS samples were search twice: To control efficiency of the different labeling steps, searches considered trypsin as digestion enzyme with up to four missed cleavages, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and isotopically light (+28.031300) and heavy (+36.075670) dimethylation of Lys residues and Met oxidation as variable modifications. This search confirmed that >98% of the identified Lys residues were dimethyl labeled and < 6% of the identified peptides were cleaved after dimethylated Lys residues, in agreement with inefficient trypsin activity towards dimethyl modified Lys (Huesgen et al Nat Methods 2015, Kleifeld et al 2010). Therefore, for analysis of protein abundance changes, a second analysis was performed considering ArgC as digestion enzyme, duplex isotope labeling by light (+28.031300) and/or heavy (+36.075670) dimethylation of Lys residues, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed and Met oxidation as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse heart, Mitochondria, Clpxp

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Juelich


