### Accession
PXD010242

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics of the diurnal cycle in chow and high fat high sucrose feed rats

### Description
There is growing evidence that energy metabolism and insulin action are regulated by mechanisms that follow a diurnal rhythm and it has been proposed that defects in Akt signalling are associated with the pathophysiology of metabolic disease. It is therefore important to investigate these parameters under physiology of the free-living state. We therefore examined the insulin action in muscle of chow or high fat, high sucrose diet-fed (HFHS) rats during the normal diurnal cycle. HFHS animals displayed hyperinsulinemia, however had reduced systemic glucose disposal and impaired muscle glucose uptake during the feeding period. Proteomics and phosphoproteomics was performed over the diurnal cycle in chow and HFHS rats.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 30 mg of powdered red quadriceps tissue was homogenised in 400 μl of homogenisation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) with protease (1  EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4) and 0.1% SDS. Samples were centrifuged at 17, 000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was added to 5 parts ice-cold acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight to precipitate proteins. The acetone/lysate mixture was centrifuged at 17, 000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the precipitate was resuspended in 300 μl homogenisation buffer and briefly sonicated. The protein mixture was normalised to 1 mg of protein per sample in homogenisation buffer by Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher). The sample was reduced by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 1 hour. The sample was alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 25 mM for 30 minutes protected from light and then quenched with DTT to a final concentration of 20 mM. Lysyl Endopeptidase (WAKO) was added to a ratio of 1:50 w/w of protein and incubated for 3 hours at room temperature with gentle agitation. 1 ml of 20 mM TEAB, 1 mM CaCl2 and 15 μg per sample of trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 30°C. Samples were acidified with trifluroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2% and desalted with C18 columns (Sep-Pak C18 500mg, Waters) and peptides were eluted in 1.2 ml of 50% Acn (acetonitrile), 0.1% TFA and dried down by vacuum centrifuge. In order to accurately compare phosphopeptide abundance between different groups, chemical isobaric labelling was utilised in order to multiplex samples before phospho-enrichment and mass spectrometry. The Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) system from Thermo Fisher was employed and samples were divided into three multiplexes of 10 (TMT-10 plex) with a standard included in each run. For total protein analysis there were a total of 5 TMT multiplexes. TMT labelling was achieved following the TMT-10 plex kits instructions (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, the peptide pellet was resuspended in 100 μl of 20 mM TEAB and sonicated in a waterbath sonicator for 5 minutes. The peptide was normalised to 180 μg of peptide per sample by Qubit protein assay in a 100 μl volume at pH 7.9. 41 μl of Acn was added to each TMT tube and vortexed and then 100 μl of each peptide was added to separate TMT tubes and incubated at room temperature for 80 minutes. The labelling reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 μl of 50% hydroxylamine and samples were pooled into 1 tube for each 10-plex and vacuum dried to ~ 50 μl. The phospho-enrichment strategy was adapted from TiSH methodology developed by Engholm-Keller et al using a combination of titanium dioxide and IMAC (Engholm-Keller et al., 2012)All samples (total protein, mono and multi-phosphorylated peptides) were cleaned up with C18 columns, eluted with 50 μl of 50% Acn, 0.1% TFA, vacuum dried and stored at -30°C. Fractionation of mono-phosphorylated peptides was performed as described previously using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) over a 1 hour gradient [PMID: 26437602]. Each TMT reaction was separated into 36 fractions that were concatenated in 12 fractions. Multi-phosphorylated peptides were run unfractionated due to the lower complexity (lower abundance). Total protein samples were fractionated using a HILIC column over the same 1-hour gradient and concatenated into 12 fractions. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer in positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.8.3, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry (Cox and Mann, 2008)) using the default settings including TMT labelling and phospho STY sites. Database searching was performed using MaxQuant’s Andromeda search engine against the UniProt Rattus norvegicus reference proteome (Proteome ID UP000002494_10116). Peak intensities were normalised to a standard sample that was added to each run (pooled red quadriceps from 3 fasted chow-fed rats) and normalised difference was log 2 transformed. In order to normalise distribution between samples, expression values were subtracted by the median of the column they were in (log 2 expression values).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, High fat high sucrose diet, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


