### Accession
PXD046262

### Title
Mtfp1 ablation enhances mitochondrial respiration and protects against hepatic steatosis- Co-IP

### Description
Hepatic steatosis is the result of an imbalance between nutrient delivery and metabolism in the liver.  It is the first hallmark of Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and is characterized by the accumulation of excess lipids in the liver that can drive liver failure, inflammation, and cancer.  Mitochondria control the fate and function of cells and compelling evidence implicates these multifunctional organelles in the appearance and progression of liver dysfunction, although it remains to be elucidated which specific mitochondrial functions are actually causally linked to NAFLD.  Here, we identified Mitochondrial Fission Process 1 protein (MTFP1) as a key regulator of mitochondrial and metabolic activity in the liver.  Deletion of Mtfp1 in hepatocytes is physiologically benign in mice yet leads to the upregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes and mitochondrial respiration, independently of mitochondrial biogenesis.  Consequently, hepatocyte-specific knockout mice are protected against high fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis and metabolic dysregulation.  Additionally, we find that deletion of Mtfp1 in liver mitochondria inhibits mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening in hepatocytes, conferring protection against apoptotic liver damage in vivo and ex vivo. Our work uncovers novel functions of MTFP1 in the liver, positioning this gene as an unexpected regulator of OXPHOS and a therapeutic candidate for NAFLD.

### Sample Protocol
The immunocomplexes were then washed with IP buffer without Triton X-100 and eluted with Laemmli Sample Buffer 2x at 95°C for 5 min. Protein were stacked in a 15 % SDS-PAGE gel with a 10 min long migration at 80 V. Proteins were fixed in gel and migration was visualized using the Instant Blue stain (Expedeon). Bands were excised for digestion. Gel bands were washed twice in Ammonium bicarbonate (AmBi) 50 mM, once with AmBi 50 mM / ACN 50 % and once with 100% ANC. Gel band were incubated for 30 min at 56°C in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution for reduction. Gel bands were washed in AmBi 50 mM and then in 100% ACN. Alkylation was performed at room temp in the dark by incubation of the gel bands in Iodocateamide 55 mM solution. Gel bands were washed twice in AmBi 50mM and in 100% ACN. 600 ng of trypsin were added for 8h digestion at 37°C. Peptides were extracted by collecting 3 washes of the gel bands using AmBi 50 mM / 50 % ACN and 5 % FA. Peptides clean up and desalting was done using Stage tips (2 disc Empore C18 discs stacked in a P200 tip).  LC-MS/SM analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 30 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 3% to 26% in 105 min, 26% to 48% in 20 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 145 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 400 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using HCD with the energy set at 26 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 105 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) [1,2] using the Andromeda search engine [3] against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (53449 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 24th of July 2018). A modified sequence of the protein MTP18 with a Flag tag in its N-ter part was also searched.  The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. The match between runs features was allowed for biological replicate only. The average of iBAQ intensities in replicates of a same condition were used to compare the protein abundances within a same condition. Intensities normalized by the MaxLFQ algorithm were used for the differential analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nafld, Oxidative phosphorylation, Liver, Steatosis

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Mitochondrial Biology Group

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy WAI
Mitochondrial Biology Group


