### Accession
PXD036330

### Title
PCGF1-PRC1 links chromatin repression with DNA replication during hematopoietic cell lineage commitment

### Description
Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and 2) repress lineage inappropriate genes during development to maintain proper cellular identities. To reveal the function of a variant PRC1 containing PCGF1 (PCGF1-PRC1), we prepared PCGF1 interacting proteins by immunoprecipitation and characterized them by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 0.1% NP-40 lysis buffer (250 mM NaCl) and sonicated for 10s x 3 pulses at 30% amplitude using a Sonics Vibracell VCX 130 processor. After centrifugation, the supernatants were immunoprecipitated with the antibody-coupled Dynabeads M-280 Sheep anti-Rabbit IgG (DB11203; Veritas). Immunoprecipitates were washed by 0.1% NP-40 lysis buffer (350 mM NaCl) for four times, then proteins were separted by anti-FLAG M2 antibody. Separated proteins samples were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for 30 min and then subjected to alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide. The mixtures were diluted 4-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested using 800 ng Lys-C and 400 ng trypsin. The digested samples were mixed with the equal volume of ethyl acetate and acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The mixtures were shaken for 5 min and cetrifuged at 15,000 x g for 5 min for phase separation. Then, the acueous phase was retrieved. The mixtures were desalted using C18-Stage Tips. The peptides trapped in the C18-Stage Tips were eluted with 40 μL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA, followed by drying using a centrifugal evaporator. The dried peptides were redissolved in 20 μL of 3% CAN and 0.1% formic acid. Then, 2 μL of the redissolved sample was analyzed by LC-MS/MS.     In case of iPOND and Mass spectrometry (iPOND-MS), sample preparation was as below. Cells were labeled with 1 μM 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU), from Thermo Fisher or Click Chemistry Tools, for 20 minutes. After labeling, cells were rinsed twice with PBS and cross-linked in 1% formaldehyde/PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature, quenched using 1 M glycine, and washed three times in PBS. Collected cell pellets were frozen at −80°C. 0.25% Triton-X/PBS was used to permeabilize cells. Biotin Azide (PEG4 carboxamide-6-Azidohexanyl Biotin from Thermo Fisher or Click Chemistry Tools) was used to conjugate with EdU via the click reaction. After lysis and sonication, DNA-protein complexes were captured by streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads (Pierce). Beads were washed four times in RIPA buffer. Captured proteins were eluted and cross-links were reversed in sample buffer (500 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0; 24 mM sodium deoxycholate and 24 mM sodium laurylsulphate) by incubating for 20 minutes at 95°C with shaking.  A preliminary DDA (data dependent acquisition) set was performed for SWATH protein quantification as below. Peptides (approximately 100 ng) were directly injected onto a 100 um x 15 cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with 120 A porous C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 um; Dr. Maish GmbH) and then separated using 240-min ACN gradient (3 to 40%, flow rate 300 nl/min) using an Eksigent ekspert nanoLC 400 HPLC system (Sciex). Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400-1200 m/z for 250 ms. The top 25 precursor ions with charge states of 2+ to 5+ that exceeded 150 counts/s were selected for fragmentation with rolling collision energy, and MS2 spectra were collected for 100 ms. A spray voltage of 2100 V was applied. SWATH DIA (data independent acquisitions) were performed by using the same gradient profile used for DDA experiments as describe above. Precursor ion selection was done in the 400-1200 m/z range, with a variable window width strategy (7 to 75 Da). Collision energy for each individual SWATH experiment was set at 45 eV, and 80 consecutive SWATH experiments (100-1800 m/z) were performed, each lasting 36 ms.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS files were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse database (Proteome ID: UP000000589, downloaded October 30, 2019, 17069 proteins entries), using ProteinPilot software v. 4.5 with Paragon algorithm for protein identification. The search parameters were as follows: cysteine alkylation of iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, and TripleTOF 5600. For a protein confidence threshold, we used the ProteinPilot unused score of 1.3 with at least one peptide with 95% confidence. Global false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was lower than 1% in this study.  DIA raw data were analyzed by using the SWATH processing embedded in PeakView software (SCIEX). Peptides from PIG Trypsin and Protease I precursor Lysyl endopeptidase were used for retention time recalibration between runs. The following criteria were used for DIA quantification: Peptide Confidence Threshold 99%, 30 ppm maximum mass tolerance, 6 minutes maximum RT tolerance. Multivariate data analysis was performed by using Markerview software (SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb group proteins (PcG), polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and 2), repress lineage inappropriate genes during development to maintain proper cellular identities. It has been recognized that PRC1 localizes at the replication fork, however, the precise functions of PRC1 during DNA replication are elusive. Here, we reveal that a variant PRC1 containing PCGF1 (PCGF1-PRC1) prevents overloading of activators and chromatin remodeling factors on nascent DNA and thereby mediates proper deposition of nucleosomes and correct downstream chromatin configurations in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). This function of PCGF1-PRC1 in turn facilitates PRC2-mediated repression of target genes such as Hmga2 and restricts premature myeloid differentiation. PCGF1-PRC1, therefore, maintains the differentiation potential of HSPCs by linking proper nucleosome configuration at the replication fork with PcG-mediated gene silencing to ensure life-long hematopoiesis.

### Keywords
Polycomb group proteins, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Pcgf1

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences
Laboratory for Developmental Genetics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Yong-Woon Han

### Lab Head
Dr Haruhiko Koseki
Laboratory for Developmental Genetics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences


