### Accession
PXD030381

### Title
Mechanism-based traps enable protease and hydrolase substrate discovery

### Description
we report a strategy for creating mechanism-based, light activated protease and hydrolase substrate traps in complex mixtures and live mammalian cells. The traps capture substrates of hydrolases, which normally use a serine or cysteine nucleophile. Replacing the catalytic nucleophile with genetically encoded 2,3-diaminopropionic acid permits the first step reaction to form an acyl-enzyme intermediate in which a substrate fragment is covalently linked to the enzyme through a stable amide bond; this enables stringent purification and identification of substrates. We identify new substrates for proteases, including an intramembrane mammalian rhomboid protease RHBDL4. We demonstrate that RHBDL4 can shed luminal fragments of ER-resident type I transmembrane proteins to the extracellular space, as well as catalysing non-canonical secretion of endogenous soluble ER-resident chaperones. We also discover that the putative serine hydrolase retinoblastoma binding protein 9 is an aminopeptidase – with a preference for removing aromatic amino acids – in human cells. Our results exemplify a powerful paradigm for discovering the substrates and activities of hydrolase enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) Proteins (including TEV-GFP conjugate, substrates trapped by HtrA2 or RHBDL4) in polyacrylamide gel slices (1–2 mm) were in situ enzymatically digested for LC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a 96-well microtiter plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by reduction with 10 mM DTT and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. RBBP9 eluates in solution were treated in two ways: 1. incubation at RT overnight in the presence of 10 mM DTT without alkylation; 2. reduction with 10 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin/LysC (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile and analyzed by nanoscale capillary LC-MS/MS, which uses an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) was used to trap the peptides before separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile. The eluate was directly introduced to a modified nanoflow ESI source with a hybrid dual pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA). Data-dependent analysis was carried out using a resolution of 30,000 for the full MS spectrum, followed by ten MS/MS spectra in the linear ion trap. MS spectra were collected over an m/z range of 300–2,000.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis (Venn Diagram)  LC-MS/MS data were searched against an in-house protein sequence database containing Swiss-Prot and the protein constructs specific to the experiment, using the Mascot search engine program (Matrix Science, version 2.4). Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 5 p.p.m. and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Variable modifications for oxidized methionine, carbamidomethyl cysteine, pyroglutamic acid, and deamination of glutamine/asparagine were included. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold program (version 5, Proteome Software Inc.).  LC-MS/MS data analysis (Volcano Plot)  For quantitative analysis, MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.0) and searched with the embedded Andromeda search engine against the corresponding database (Uniprot). The required FDR was set to 1% or 5% at peptide and protein levels. The maximum allowed missed cleavages was set to two. Protein quantification was done by LFQ with default settings. The MaxQuant ProteinGroups output file was further processed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Contaminations and reverse hits were removed by filtering. The remaining protein quantifications were log2 transformed.  Determination of X attached to Dap in RBBP9 LC-MS/MS files (in RAW format) were first converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard (version 3.0.11252). Data preparation and processing were then performed using custom Python (version 3.8.1) scripts written with the pyOpenMS package (version 2.4.0). In brief, collected spectra were centroided and all MS2 spectra with a precursor mass lower than that of the unconjugated Dap-containing tryptic peptide from RBBP9 (Pept(Dap)) were filtered out.  For each filtered MS2 spectrum, the ten most abundant peaks in each 100 Th mass interval were extracted. Based on the peptide sequence of Pept(Dap) and the precursor mass for each MS2 spectrum, a list of theoretical ion masses was calculated; these corresponded to the MS2 fragmentation of a substrate-conjugated Pept(Dap) (Pept(Dap-X). This list contained the monocationic b- and y-ions, the dicatonic b- and y- ions, and ions corresponding to water or ammonium losses from the side-chains of b- or y- ions. Peaks in the MS2 spectrum were matched against this list, and a score for this matching was calculated as previously described. This score was ten times the negative logarithm of the approximate probability that at least k out of n masses have been matched by chance, where k is the number of matches and n is the number of masses in the list. To extract the top-scoring spectra, the family-wise error rate for the probability values was controlled at 0.05 using the Bonferroni correction. The mass difference between Pept(Dap) and the precursor ion for each Pept(Dap-X) spectrum was calculated to determine the MW of each conjugate. For each mass shift, representative top-scoring spectra were manually interrogated to verify the assignment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Shan Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Jason W. Chin
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology


