### Accession
PXD003438

### Title
SCX_MS raw files and RP_MS raw files

### Description
A novel one-dimensional on-line pH gradient-eluted strong cation exchange (SCX)-nano-ESI-MS/MS method was developed for protein identification and tested with mixture of six standard proteins, total lysate of HuH7 and N2a cells, as well as membrane fraction of N2a cells. This method utilized an on-line nano-flow SCX column in a nano-LC system coupled with a nano-electrospray high-resolution mass spectrometer. Protein digests were separated on a nano-flow SCX column with a pH gradient and directly introduced into a mass spectrometer through nano-electrospray ionization. SCXLC-MS/MS showed identification capability for higher proportion of basic peptides compared to RPLC-MS/MS method, especially for histidine-containing peptides. Our SCXLC-MS/MS method is an excellent alternative method to the RPLC-MS/MS method for analysis of standard proteins, total cell and membrane proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
N2a Cell Membrane Sample Preparation Mouse Neuro 2a (N2a) cells (American Type Culture Collection) were grown in DMEM including high glucose, 200 mM glutamine, and 10% FBS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and maintained in a humidified incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. A total of 2E8 N2a cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS buffer and harvested in lysis buffer (2 M NaCl, 10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA). The cells were sonicated mildly for 30 s at 100 W (Scientz Biotech, Zhejiang, China) and centrifuged at 600g for 5 min to remove intact cells. The suspension was centrifuged in a Himac CP 100MX preparative ultracentrifuge (Hitachi, Toyota, Japan) using the P40ST-2042 rotor at 200 000g at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was suspended in 12 mL of high pH buffer (100 mM Na2CO3, 1 mM EDTA, pH 11.3). After 30 min incubation on ice, the soluble material was removed by ultracentrifugation (as above). The pellet was suspended in 12 mL of urea buffer (6 M urea, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) and incubated on ice for 30 min; the soluble material was removed by ultracentrifugation. The pellet was washed with 10 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 7.6) twice and lysed with SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT). Proteomic Reactor and Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) Digestion The HuH7 cell samples were processed by the centrifugal proteomic reactor with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 μg of protein from each sample was diluted and acidified by 1.2 mL of 1% formic acid and mixed with 10 μL of SCX slurry by vigorous vortexing. The samples were then centrifuged at 15 000 rpm, 4 min), and the resulting pellet (containing SCX beads and proteins) was washed with 0.5% formic acid. The samples were reduced by mixing with 20 μL of 150 mM NH4HCO3 and 50 mM DTT (shaking at 1000 rpm, 56 °C, 15 min), and after reduction the DTT in the sample was diluted using 1.2 mL 0.5% formic acid and followed by centrifugation. The samples were then subjected to alkylation by mixing with 20 μL of 150 mM NH4HCO3 and 100 mM iodoacetamide in darkness (15 min, room temperature), and the reaction was stopped by adding 1.2 mL of 0.5% formic acid containing 0.4 μg of trypsin. After centrifugation, the resulting pellet was dissolved in 20 μL of 1 M NH4HCO3 and followed by trypsin digestion on a shaker at 1000 rpm at 37 °C for 4 h. Finally, 300 μL of elution buffer (4 N NH3·H2O and 50% ACN) was added to elute the resulting peptides out of the SCX slurry. N2a total cell lysate and membrane lysate samples were digested by a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method according to a previously described method with some slight modifications.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software MaxQuant(http://maxquant.org/, version 1.3.0.5). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, + 15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of six standard proteins or the International Protein Index (IPI) human/mouse database (version 3.87, European Bioinformatics Institute). Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and protein groups was rigorously controlled to be <1% by the Andromeda search engine.FDR was calculated by the number of hits from the reverse database divided by the number of forward hits.

### Publication Abstract
A novel one-dimensional online pH gradient-eluted strong cation exchange-nanoelectrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (SCX-nano-ESI-MS/MS) method was developed for protein identification and tested with a mixture of six standard proteins, total lysate of HuH7 and N2a cells, as well as membrane fraction of N2a cells. This method utilized an online nanoflow SCX column in a nano-LC system coupled with a nanoelectrospray high-resolution mass spectrometer. Protein digests were separated on a nanoflow SCX column with a pH gradient and directly introduced into a mass spectrometer through nanoelectrospray ionization. More than five thousand unique peptides were identified in each 90 min LC-MS/MS run using 500 nanogram of protein digest either from total cell lysate or from membrane fraction. The unique peptide overlap between online strong cation exchange nano-ESI-MS/MS (SCXLC-MS/MS) and reverse phase nano-ESI-MS/MS (RPLC-MS/MS) is only &#x2264;30%, which indicated these two methods were complementary to each other. The correlation coefficient of retention time and theoretical isoelectric point (pI) of identified peptides in SCXLC-MS/MS was higher than 0.4, which showed that peptides elution in SCXLC-MS/MS was dependent on their charge states. Furthermore, SCXLC-MS/MS showed identification capability for a higher proportion of basic peptides compared to the RPLC-MS/MS method, especially for histidine-containing peptides. Our SCXLC-MS/MS method is an excellent alternative method to the RPLC-MS/MS method for analysis of standard proteins, total cell and membrane proteomes.

### Keywords
Strong cation exchange, Ph gradient

### Affiliations
SIMM
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201203, China

### Submitter
mai dier

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201203, China


