### Accession
PXD025435

### Title
Expression of transport proteins in the rete mirabile of European silver and yellow eel

### Description
This dataset consists of 33 raw MS files, an associated peak list and result file, acquired on an Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer operated in Data Dependent Acquisition mode. The files are associated with a manuscript submitted for publication. Publication title: " Expression of transport proteins in the rete mirabile of European silver and yellow eel "   The swimbladder rete mirabile is known for its highly efficient countercurrent concentrating ability, allowing for the generation of hyperbaric oxygen partial pressures in the range of several 10th or even more than 100 atmospheres. The transcapillary exchange between venous and arterial capillaries is often explained by passive diffusion and hydraulic (osmotic) transport. The reported countercurrent concentration of lactate ions, however, raises the possibility that specific transport proteins contribute to the countercurrent concentrating ability of the rete. We therefore analyzed the transcriptome as well as the proteome of rete capillaries of the European eel. The results clearly show the presence of a large number of membrane transport proteins in the transcriptome as well as in the proteome. ATP required to energize ion and metabolite transport can be generated in the aerobic metabolism. A high ROS defense capacity is established in rete endothelial cells, probably connected to the hyperbaric oxygen partial pressures, generated in the rete by back-diffusion of oxygen.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues of 12 samples (6 biological replicates for yellow and for silver eels, respectively) were homogenized and centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min at 4°C to obtain a pellet containing debris and nuclear components. The supernatant was removed and centrifuged again at 15000 × g for 30 min at 4°C to separate the components into a membrane fraction (pellet) and cytosolic fraction (supernatant). The membrane pellets were reconstituted in 60 µl of a chaotropic buﬀer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100 mM DTT, and 50 mM TEAB. Protein samples (100 μg) were digested with Trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, V5117) using the FASP procedure (Wiśniewski et al., 2009).  Resulting peptides were enriched and desalted using C18 packed pipette tips (Pierce, #87784), lyophilized, and reconstituted in 90 µl 100 mM TEAB buffer. An aliquot of 18 µl per sample was mixed with iTRAQ-4plex labeling reagent following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Samples were incubated for 3 h at room temperature, dried down in a Speed Vac and reconstituted in 75 µL 0.1% TFA. The contents of four differentially iTRAQ labeled samples were combined and separated using high pH reverse-phase spin columns (Thermo Fisher, #84868) into eight fractions.   Peptides from each fraction were analyzed by LC-MS within 2 h gradients using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) that was set to operate in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra were matched against the draft genome sequence of the European eel using Sequest via the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientiﬁc, USA). The search parameters were as follows:  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, acetylation and/or methionine loss at the protein N-terminus, and iTRAQ 4plex label at lysine residues and at the peptide N-terminus were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The required false positive rate was set to 1% at the peptide and at the protein level, respectively, and was calculated via the Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anguilla anguilla, Rete mirabile, Proteomics, Itraq, European eel

### Affiliations
Innsbruck Medical University, Biocenter
Institute of Zoology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
Klaus Faserl

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Pelster
Institute of Zoology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria


