### Accession
PXD008469

### Title
The chloroplast outer and inner envelope membrane translocase (TOC/TIC) interaction network identifies a 23 kDa glycine-rich protein as new subunit of the 1-MDa TIC complex

### Description
The protein import machinery is essential for chloroplast biogenesis, but knowledge on its exact functioning and the subunits involved in protein translocation is incomplete. Using TAP-tagged Toc159, we reproducibly identified a translocase interaction network that comprises in addition to known TOC members, the 1-MDa TIC complex, six FtsH/FtsHi proteases, Tic110, the KOC1 kinase and several other proteins, some of which with unknown function. The analysis of sub-complexes constituting the Toc159 interaction network in wildtype and a mutant defective in the 1-MDa TIC complex (tic56-3) revealed that the TOC and FtsH/FtsHi complex(es) accumulate independently of the TIC complex as do most other proteins in the network. An exception is a glycine-rich protein of 23 kDa that co-migrates with the 1-MDa complex and is co-regulated with its subunits in tic56-3. This protein was tentatively designated as Tic23. Tic23 abundance is significantly decreased in tic20-I mutant plants and the protein is completely absent from tic56-1 and Spectinomycin-treated wildtype plants lacking Tic214, suggesting a mutual dependency between its accumulation and intactness of the 1-MDa complex. Likewise, tic23-I mutants expressing reduced levels of Tic23 are pale-green and accumulate significantly decreased amounts of Tic20-I. Similar to tic56-3 plastids, the in vitro protein import capacity of tic23-I mutants is not affected. Taken together our results identify Tic23 as an additional component of the 1-MDa TIC complex that is required for complex stability and assembly while it serves complex-mediated functions other than protein import.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomes for the import mutants plants and the according wildtype controls were analyzed in three biological replicates and several technical replicates. Therefor total protein was extracted from plant material cultivated on ½ MS-medium containing 1% agar. The plant material was cultivated under short day conditions (8 h light/ 16 h dark). For extraction of total protein, plant material was frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed with a pestle. The material was incubated with extraction buffer at 70°C for 10 min under shaking. The extract was clarified by centrifugation at maximum speed in a tabletop centrifuge for 10 min at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
Each polyacrylamide gel lane were cut into 16 sections corresponding to apparent molecular weight of protein complexes. These gel slices were digested with trypsin as previously described (Rodiger et al., 2014). 20 µL (100 μg protein) were solubilized (10 min, 80 °C) in 201 μL 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters), and reduced by adding 6.2 μL 10 mM dithiothreitol (10 min, 60 °C). Cys residues were alkylated using 6.2 μL 30 mM iodacetamide (30 min in the dark). Subsequently, 2 μL trypsin (final concentration: 1:100 (w/w) corresponding to 1 μg protease per vial) was added. Samples (final volume 250 μL) were digested (37 °C, overnight). In order to stop the digestion at pH < 2, 2 μL 37% HCl was added. To avoid loading insoluble material onto the column, the peptide solutions were thoroughly centrifuged prior to sample loading (4 °C, 21500 × g, 30 min).

### Publication Abstract
We report a systematic analysis of chloroplast high-molecular mass protein complexes using a combination of native gel electrophoresis and absolute protein quantification by MSE. With this experimental setup, we characterized the effect of the tic56-3 mutation in the 1-MDa inner envelope translocase (TIC) on the assembly of the chloroplast proteome. We show that the tic56-3 mutation results in a reduction of the 1-MDa TIC complex to approximately 10% of wildtype levels. Hierarchical clustering confirmed the association of malate dehydrogenase (MDH) with an envelope-associated FtsH/FtsHi complex and suggested the association of a glycine-rich protein with the 1-MDa TIC complex. Depletion of this complex leads to a reduction of chloroplast ATPase to approx. 75% of wildtype levels, while the abundance of the FtsH/FtsHi complex is increased to approx. 140% of wildtype. The accumulation of the major photosynthetic complexes is not affected by the mutation, suggesting that tic56-3 plants can sustain a functional photosynthetic machinery despite a significant reduction of the 1-MDa TIC complex. Together our analysis expands recent efforts to catalogue the native molecular masses of chloroplast proteins and provides information on the consequences of impaired accumulation of the 1-MDa TIC translocase for chloroplast proteome assembly.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Tic

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


