### Accession
PXD032920

### Title
Identification of vitamin K-dependent proteins in mouse liver by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Vitamin K (VK), a fat-soluble vitamin, functions as a co-factor during the gamma-carboxylation reaction that converts glutamic acid residues to gamma-carboxyglutamic acid residues in proteins transiting through the endoplasmic reticulum. Two enzymes are involved which together form the VK cycle: gamma-glutamyl carboxylase (GGCX), and vitamin K oxidoreductase (VKORC1). GGCX requires reduced VK (VKH2) as an essential cofactor, which upon carboxylation, is oxidized to VK epoxide and then reconverted to VKH2 by VKORC1. Physiologically, gamma-carboxylation is essential in the liver for the activity of several coagulation factors (e.g., prothrombin, factor IX, etc.), and in arteries and cartilage to modulate the activity of Matrix Gla Protein (MGP) which prevents extra-osseous tissue mineralization. Gamma-carboxylation also negatively regulates the function of osteocalcin, a bone-derived hormone that promotes glucose homeostasis. Our objective is to identify unrecognized gamma-carboxylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Livers from 5-day-old Vkorc1-/- mice are devoid of gamma-carboxylation. Therefore, livers from WT and Vkorc1-/- mice were homogenized in lysis buffer and gamma-carboxylated proteins immunoprecipitated using rabbit anti-Gla antibodies and protein A-agarose beads (Lacombe et al., 2018, JCI Insight). Immunoprecipitated proteins were then digested on-bead with trypsin at 37C for 18 hours using 0.25ug of Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). The samples were then reduced with 9 mM dithiothreitol at 37C for 30 minutes and, after cooling for 10 minutes, alkylated with 17 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. The supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and cleaned from residual detergents and reagents with MCX cartridges (Waters Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution in 10% ammonium hydroxide /90% methanol (v/v), samples were dried with a Speed-vac, reconstituted under agitation for 15 min in 11 µL of 2%ACN-1%FA and 2.4% of each sample was loaded into a 75 μm i.d. × 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems). The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 90% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a two slopes gradient at a flowrate of 250 nL/min. Solvent B first increased from 2 to 44% in 100 min and then from 44 to 88% B in 20 min. The HPLC system was coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3-1.7 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 360-1560) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 with a target value at 3e5. The 25 most intense peptide ions were fragmented in the HCD cell and analyzed in the linear ion trap with a target value at 2e4 and a collision energy at 29. Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30 sec after 2 MS/MS events.

### Data Protocol
The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science) against the UniProt Mus Musculus protein database. The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, glutamic acid carboxylation and phosphorylation S/T/Y as variable modifications. Data interpretation was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8) using a peptide threshold of 80%, a protein threshold of 95% and one peptide minimum. We considered a protein as being carboxylated when the average exclusive spectrum count in WT samples was at least double of the Vkorc1-/- samples. To minimize the potential identification of proteins non-specifically binding the anti-Gla antibodies or the agarose beads, we excluded proteins with more than 2 exclusive spectrum counts in the Vkorc1-/- samples or with a difference of less than 2 between the WT and Vkorc1-/- samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Gamma-carboxylation, Vitamin k

### Affiliations
The IRCM Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Discovery Platform
Molecular Physiology Research Unit, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7

### Submitter
Denis Faubert

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Ferron
Molecular Physiology Research Unit, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H2W 1R7


