### Accession
PXD020112

### Title
Proteomics reveals the preliminary physiological differences between the wild and captive spotted seal (Phoca largha) pups

### Description
Spotted seals (Phoca largha) is a critically endangered pinniped in China and South Korea. Captive in artificially controlled environment is a conventional method to protect and maintain the population of this species. However, little is known about the physiological differences between the wild and captive P. largha. In order to draw the preliminary protein expression profile in the P. largha, blood from the wild and captive pups were subjected to a label-free comparative proteomic analysis. According to the results, 972 proteins were identified, which performed functions related to various metabolic, immune and cellular processes. Among these identified proteins, the expression level of 51 proteins significantly changed between the wild and captive P. large pups. These differentially expressed proteins were enriched in a wide range of cellular functions, including cytoskeleton, phagocytosis. proteolysis, gene expression regulation and carbohydrate metabolism. The activities of phagocytosis and its related ubiquitin mediated proteolysis were significantly higher in the blood of wild P. largha pups than in captive individuals. In addition, a key protein associated with the differences in the wild and captive P. largha pups, heat shock protein 90-beta, were determined due to the most interactions of it with various differentially expressed proteins. Moreover, the wild P. largha pups could be more nutritionally stressed and have more powerful immune capacity. Our study provides the first data on the preliminary protein composition and gives useful information for the physiological characteristics research in this species.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the blood samples were extracted using the Mammalian tissue & cell Protein Extraction Kit (Bangfei Bioscience Co., Ltd, Beijing, China). The concentrations of protein in each sample were determined using the protein quantification kit (Dingguo Changsheng, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Then, these extracted proteins were excised from the preparative tube and destained with NH4HCO3. Following the reduction and alkylation with DL-Dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, the samples were digested with trypsin using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol. For all of the blood samples, three biological replicates were performed, and all digested peptide samples were collected and stored at -80 °C for MS analysis. The process of MS analysis was according to a previous study [46]. Digested peptide mixtures were firstly pressure-loaded onto a fused silica capillary column packed with 3 μm dionex C18 material (Phenomenex, USA). The column was washed with buffer A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and then, an Agilent 1100 quaternary high-performance liquid chromatography was applied to analyzed. The first step consisted of a 5 min gradient from 0% to 2% buffer B, followed by a 45 min gradient to 40% buffer B. Next, the buffer B flowed by 3 min gradient from 40% to 80% and 10 min 80% buffer B. After 2 min buffer B gradient from 80% to 2%, approximately 100 μg of tryptic peptide mixture was loaded onto the columns and was separated at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min by using a linear gradient. As peptides were eluted from the micro-capillary column, they were electrosprayed directly into a micrOTOF-Q II mass spectrometer (BRUKER Scientific, Beijing, China) with the application of a distal 180 °C source temperature. The mass spectrometer was operated in the MS/MS mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the TOF-Q II with the resolution set to a value of 20,000. Each survey scan (50~2,500) was followed by five data-dependent tandem mass scans at 2 HZ normalized scan speed.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the reference transcriptome of spotted seal (NCBI Sequence Read Archive: SRA050171) using the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software based on the standard LFQ module. The following options were used to identify the proteins: Peptide mass tolerance = ±15 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.02 Da, enzyme = trypsin, missed cleavage = 2, fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl, variable modification: oxidation, database pattern = decoy. The identification results were then filtered using a cutoff of 0.01 for the false discovery rate. Furthermore, the minimum number of peptides to identify a protein was set to 1 and proteins with at least two unique peptides were employed for the abundance quantization. The quantification of peptides was based on the MS1 level data. Proteins with the fold change > 1.5 and p-values < 0.05 (t-test) between the wild and captive P. largha pups were considered to be significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Spotted seal (Phoca largha) is a critically endangered pinniped in China and South Korea. The conventional method to protect and maintain the P. largha population is to keep them captive in artificially controlled environments. However, little is known about the physiological differences between wild and captive P. largha. To generate a preliminary protein expression profile for P. largha, whole blood from wild and captive pups were subjected to a label-free comparative proteomic analysis. According to the results, 972 proteins were identified and predicted to perform functions related to various metabolic, immune, and cellular processes. Among the identified proteins, the expression level of 51 were significantly different between wild and captive P. large pups. These differentially expressed proteins were enriched in a wide range of cellular functions, including cytoskeleton, phagocytosis, proteolysis, the regulation of gene expression, and carbohydrate metabolism. The abundances of proteins involved in phagocytosis and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis were significantly higher in the whole blood of wild P. largha pups than in captive individuals. In addition, heat shock protein 90-beta, were determined as the key protein associated with the differences in the wild and captive P. largha pups due to the most interactions of it with various differentially expressed proteins. Moreover, wild P. largha pups could be more nutritionally stressed and have more powerful immune capacities than captive pups. This study provides the first data on the protein composition of P. largha and provides useful information on the physiological characteristics for research in this species.

### Keywords
Spotted seal phoca largha; wild; captive; proteomics; phagocytosis; heat shock protein 90.

### Affiliations
Liaoning Ocean and Fisheries Science Research Institute
Dalian Key Laboratory of Conservation Biology for Endangered Marine mammals, Liaoning Ocean and Fisheries Science Research Institute

### Submitter
Zelong Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhichuang Lu
Dalian Key Laboratory of Conservation Biology for Endangered Marine mammals, Liaoning Ocean and Fisheries Science Research Institute


