### Accession
PXD040144

### Title
Cross-linking mass spectrometry of a complex between the chaperonin TRiC/CCT and its cochaperones, prefoldin and phosducin-like protein 2A

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the architecture of the co-complex between TRiC/CCT, PFD and PhLP2A. The complex was cross-linked with the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking using DSS was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. The dataset contains single injections of three SEC fractions. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 20 ppm. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. False discovery rates (FDRs) were controlled by searches against shuffled sequences of all database entries. The FDR was set to <5% at the non-redundant peptide-pair level. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel format that is included with the submission.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; protein folding; chaperonin; tric/cct; prefoldin; phosducin-like protein 2a

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


