### Accession
PXD027204

### Title
Arabidopsis hy2 mutant LC-MS/MS

### Description
Salt stress is a critical factor of abiotic stress in agricultural production that significantly affects seed germination and early seedling development. In this study, we characterized the function of the Arabidopsis Long Hypocotyl 2(HY2) gene in NaCl signaling. The hy2 mutant was NaCl-insensitive, whereas HY2-overexpressing lines shows NaCl-hypersensitive phenotypes during seed germination.  Induced by exogenous NaCl, the transcription and the protein level of HY2 were up regulated,  and HY2 positively mediated the expression of downstream stress-related genes of RD29A, RD29B and DREB2A. With further quantitative proteomics, we got the patterns of 7,391 proteins under salt stress, and identified 215 differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) specifically regulated by HY2. According to GO enrichment analysis, these proteins  are mainly involved in ion homeostasis, hormone response, reactive oxygen species(ROS) metabolic, photosynthesis and detoxification pathway to response salt stress  . These results direct the pathway of HY2 participating salt stress, and provide new insights for the plant to resist salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
In order to compare the proteomics of col4 and hy2 mutant, 7d-old seedlings were treated with 200 mM NaCl or water (as mock) for 5h. Approximately 0.5g of seedlings were extracted with protein lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5mM EDTA, 1% SDS, 8M Urea, 20mM Dithiothreitol, 1x EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets). Protein was digested using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Digested peptides were dried using a CentriVap (Thermo Fisher) and pre-fractionated with Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide analyzed by on-line nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to an EASY-nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA)

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 2.1)and Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.7.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Phytochromobilin (P&#x3a6;B) participates in the regulation of plant growth and development as an important synthetase of photoreceptor phytochromes (phy). In addition, <i>Arabidopsis</i> long hypocotyl 2 (HY2) appropriately works as a key P&#x3a6;B synthetase. However, whether <i>HY2</i> takes part in the plant stress response signal network remains unknown. Here, we described the function of HY2 in NaCl signaling. The <i>hy2</i> mutant was NaCl-insensitive, whereas HY2-overexpressing lines showed NaCl-hypersensitive phenotypes during seed germination. The exogenous NaCl induced the transcription and the protein level of <i>HY2</i>, which positively mediated the expression of downstream stress-related genes of <i>RD29A</i>, <i>RD29B</i>, and <i>DREB2A</i>. Further quantitative proteomics showed the patterns of 7391 proteins under salt stress. HY2 was then found to specifically mediate 215 differentially regulated proteins (DRPs), which, according to GO enrichment analysis, were mainly involved in ion homeostasis, flavonoid biosynthetic and metabolic pathways, hormone response (SA, JA, ABA, ethylene), the reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolic pathway, photosynthesis, and detoxification pathways to respond to salt stress. More importantly, ANNAT1-ANNAT2-ANNAT3-ANNAT4 and GSTU19-GSTF10-RPL5A-RPL5B-AT2G32060, two protein interaction networks specifically regulated by HY2, jointly participated in the salt stress response. These results direct the pathway of <i>HY2</i> participating in salt stress, and provide new insights for the plant to resist salt stress.

### Keywords
Nacl  seed germination

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University-BFPC

### Submitter
Jinpeng Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Nan Yao
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University-BFPC


