### Accession
PXD003310

### Title
NHE9 interactome(HEK293) -  Effect of disease-associated SLC9A9 mutations on protein-protein interaction networks: implications for molecular mechanisms for ADHD and autism

### Description
To characterize the interactome of NHE9 and quantify changes due to ADHD or autism-related mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Bait proteins were expressed in HEK293 cells, precipitated by c-Myc antibody conjugated agarose, cleaned, digested and labeled with TMT reagents for MS/MS analysis. comparison groups include WT and two mutant baits, as well as no-bait control immunoprecipitates.  TMTsixplex™ reagents were used to label the digested peptides following manufacturing protocols (Piercenet, Rockford, IL). For biological replicates of each group, isobaric tags were assigned in a balanced design and labeled matching samples were pooled for a total of four MS samples which were subsequently cleaned using Cation Exchange cartridges and desalted using a reversed phase Oasis® HLB Elution plate (2 mg sorbent per well, 30 µm particle size; Waters Assoc, MA)before LC/MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in line with an LTQ Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, about 0.5 – 1 µg protein were loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 µm i.d.nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) followed by separation on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm × 75 µm i.d.nanoVipercolumn, packed with 2 µm C18 beads).The separated peptides were sprayed directly into the Mass spectrometer during a 120 min. LC run (the gradient composition was 5-8%B over 0.5 min, then 8–35%B over 84.5 min followed by 35–90%B over 10 min. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column were performed during 5 minutes isocratic elution with 90%B and 12 minutes isocratic elution with 5%B respectively), and desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 120 000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target value of 1e6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 300ms). The 10 most intense eluting peptides above a ion threshold value of 3 000 counts and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated in the high-pressure linear ion trap to a a target value of 5e5 at a maximum allowed accumulation time of 300ms, and isolation width maintained at 2 Da. Fragmentation in the HCD (Higher-Energy Collision Dissosiation) cell was performed with a normalized collision energy of 40%, and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000 with first mass fixed at m/z 100. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap raw files were searched against reviewed human protein sequences (Uniprot, downloaded April 2013) using the SequestHT search engine implemented in Proteome Discoverer 1.4(Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search settings were as follows: Trypsin were selected as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and carbamidomethyl cysteine and TMT6plex both at peptide N-terminus and Lysine side chain as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation was selected as variable modification with a maximum of three such modifications per peptide. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error 0.05Da. A signal-to-noise filter of 1.5 was applied for precursor ions, and only charge states from two to five were used in the search. Filtering out the false positive peptide identifications were performed by means of False Discovery Rate (FDR) on the reversed database, estimated using the Percolator algorithm (http://per-colator.com). Peptide hits were filtered for a FDR of q<0.01. In addition to the FDR filter, high confident threshold score filters for Sequest HT (cross correlation scores, XCorr) were as follows: 1.9 (z = 2), 2.3 (z = 3), 2.6 (z = 4 or higher). Only proteins/protein groups that were identified by two or more independent peptide hits were accepted as true positive identifications.Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were considered an equivalence class by using the protein grouping algorithm. Only master proteins from each group were considered for the following quantification analysis. Calculations of fold change were performed on Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XIC) of the reporter ions corrected for isotopic impurities. Reported ratios include each bait protein IP channel (WT and Mut) vs. the negative control group (CT), as well as the Mut vs. WT ratios

### Publication Abstract
Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> Exchanger 9 (NHE9) is an endosomal membrane protein encoded by the Solute Carrier 9A, member 9 gene (SLC9A9). SLC9A9 has been implicated in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), epilepsy, multiple sclerosis and cancers. To better understand the function of NHE9 and the effects of disease-associated variants on protein-protein interactions, we conducted a quantitative analysis of the NHE9 interactome using co-immunoprecipitation and isobaric labeling-based quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 100 proteins that interact with NHE9. These proteins were enriched in known functional pathways for NHE9: the endocytosis, protein ubiquitination and phagosome pathways, as well as some novel pathways including oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, mTOR signaling, cell death and RNA processing pathways. An ADHD-associated mutation (A409P) significantly altered NHE9's interactions with a subset of proteins involved in caveolae-mediated endocytosis and MAP2K2-mediated downstream signaling. An ASD nonsense mutation in SLC9A9, R423X, produced no-detectable amount of NHE9, suggesting the overall loss of NHE9 functional networks. In addition, seven of the NHE9 interactors are products of known autism candidate genes (Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative, SFARI Gene) and 90% of the NHE9 interactome overlap with SFARI protein interaction network PIN (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001), supporting the role of NHE9 interactome in ASDs molecular mechanisms. Our results provide a detailed understanding of the functions of protein NHE9 and its disrupted interactions, possibly underlying ADHD and ASDs. Furthermore, our methodological framework proved useful for functional characterization of disease-associated genetic variants and suggestion of druggable targets.

### Keywords
Adhd, Autism, Nhe9, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY, 13210
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Yanli Zhang-James

### Lab Head
Dr Yanli James
SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY, 13210


