### Accession
PXD040492

### Title
Crosstalk with lung fibroblasts shapes the growth and therapeutic response of mesothelioma cells

### Description
Mesothelioma is an aggressive cancer of the mesothelial layer associated with an extensive fibrotic response. The latter is in large part mediated by cancer-associated fibroblasts which mediate tumour progression and poor prognosis. However, understanding of the crosstalk between cancer cells and fibroblasts in this disease is mostly lacking. Here, using co-cultures of patient-derived mesothelioma cell lines and lung fibroblasts, we demonstrate that fibroblast activation is a self-propagated process producing a fibrotic extracellular matrix (ECM) and triggering drug resistance in mesothelioma cells. Following characterisation of mesothelioma cells/fibroblasts signalling crosstalk, we identify several FDA-approved targeted therapies as far more potent than standard-of-care Cisplatin/Pemetrexed in ECM-embedded co-culture spheroid models. In particular, the SRC family kinase inhibitor, Saracatinib, extends overall survival well beyond standard-of-care in a mesothelioma genetically-engineered mouse model. In short, we lay the foundation for the rational design of novel therapeutic strategies targeting mesothelioma/fibroblast communication for the treatment of mesothelioma patients.

### Sample Protocol
The decellularized extracellular matrix was dissolved in 300μl of Urea Buffer (8M urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5mM dithiothreitol) by shaking for 20 min at 4oC. Total protein concentration for each sample was measured using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Subsequently, 33μg of total protein per condition were incubated with 10mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine); Sigma Aldrich, Dorset, UK) for 1h at 56oC to reduce disulphide bonds and alkylated with 100mM iodoacetamide, a 40 min incubation at RT. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration in 2M urea and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to protein digestion with 1.3μg of trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK) overnight at 37oC. Peptides were then desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 Light Cartridge (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Samples were resuspended in 33μl of 100mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate buffer prior to labelling with 1/3 rd of Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex Isobaric Mass Tag Labelling Reagents (Thermo Scientific, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) as per manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Acquired LC-MS/MS data were processed by the MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package (Version 1.6.2.6; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany, (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova, Temu and Cox, 2016)) and searched against the human protein database Swissprot (20,317 protein sequences, downloaded on 03/08/2018) using the Andromeda search engine and the following parameters: 1) MS-2 reported ion quantification with reported ion mass tolerance of 0.003kDa, 2) maximum of 2 miscleavages, 3) fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteins, TMT label on lysin and peptide N-terminus, 4) variable modification of deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine, 5) calibration search peptide tolerance of 20ppm and 6) 1% FDR threshold on peptide and protein level. Results from three replicates were further combined and processed using the Perseus Software (Version 1.5.6.0; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany, (Tyanova et al., 2016)). Raw protein quantity values were Log2 transformed and each sample was median-centred. Proteins identified in only one technical replicate were removed from the dataset while quantity of the remaining proteins was calculated as average across all three replicates. The values obtained for  proteins in the CAF-derived ECM were subsequently normalized to those in the NF(met)-derived ECM sample (NF(met) and subsequently Log2-transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Mesothelioma is an aggressive cancer of the mesothelial layer associated with an extensive fibrotic response. The latter is in large part mediated by cancer-associated fibroblasts which mediate tumour progression and poor prognosis. However, understanding of the crosstalk between cancer cells and fibroblasts in this disease is mostly lacking. Here, using co-cultures of patient-derived mesothelioma cell lines and lung fibroblasts, we demonstrate that fibroblast activation is a self-propagated process producing a fibrotic extracellular matrix (ECM) and triggering drug resistance in mesothelioma cells. Following characterisation of mesothelioma cells/fibroblasts signalling crosstalk, we identify several FDA-approved targeted therapies as far more potent than standard-of-care Cisplatin/Pemetrexed in ECM-embedded co-culture spheroid models. In particular, the SRC family kinase inhibitor, Saracatinib, extends overall survival well beyond standard-of-care in a mesothelioma genetically-engineered mouse model. In short, we lay the foundation for the rational design of novel therapeutic strategies targeting mesothelioma/fibroblast communication for the treatment of mesothelioma patients.

### Keywords
Signalling crosstalk, Targeted therapy, Mesothelioma, Cancer associated fibroblast

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Reaserach Moecular and Systems Oncology
The Institute of Cancer Research 

### Submitter
Madhumeeta Chadha

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
The Institute of Cancer Reaserach Moecular and Systems Oncology


