### Accession
PXD043934

### Title
The interactome of the UapA transporter reveals putative new players in anterograde membrane cargo trafficking: UapA Interactome

### Description
Neosynthesized plasma membrane (PM) proteins co-translationally translocate to the ER, concentrate at regions called ER-exit sites (ERes) and pack into COPII secretory vesicles which are sorted to the early-Golgi through membrane fusion. Following Golgi maturation, membrane cargoes reach the late-Golgi, from where they exit in clathrin-coated vesicles destined to the PM, directly or through endosomes. Post-Golgi membrane cargo trafficking also involves the cytoskeleton and the exocyst. The Golgi-dependent secretory pathway is thought to be responsible for the trafficking of all major membrane proteins. However, our recent findings in Aspergillus nidulans showed that several plasma membrane cargoes, such as transporters and receptors, follow a sorting route that seems to bypass Golgi functioning. To gain insight on membrane trafficking and specifically Golgi-bypass, here we used proximity dependent biotinylation (PDB) coupled with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for identifying transient interactors of the UapA transporter.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of A. nidulans were grown in minimal medium (MM) supplemented with 1% glucose (w/v) and 10 mM NH4+ (di-ammonium tartrate) at 37°C for 16 h at 140 rpm. To enable the expression of UapA-TurboID or UapA-DYDY-TurboID, the culture was shifted to a minimal medium with 1% glucose, 10 mM NaNO3, 50 μM biotin at 30oC for 4 h at 140 rpm. The collected mycelia were washed thoroughly with cold sterilized water to remove the residual biotin and subsequently were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and pulverized in a mortar with a pestle. For each strain (Δ3, UapA-TurboID, UapA-DYDY-TurboID, ΔartA: UapA-TurboID) three biological replicates were prepared, using approximately 700 mg of fine powder from A. nidulans mycelium. The powder was dissolved in 3 mL lysis buffer [4% (w/v) SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCL, 0.1 M dithioerythritol (DTE) pH = 7.6] (Lysis buffer), and lysis took place in a water bath sonication (4 cycles, 30 min each at 45° C) apparatus [Dimou et al., 2021]. After complete solubilization, centrifugation took place for 10 min, at 12,000 rpm and the remaining debris was discarded. The protein extracts collected were stored at -80oC until further processing. Protein extracts were transferred into an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter device (10 kDa MWCO, Merck) for buffer exchange [50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTE] and protein concentration. This step was crucial for depletion of free biotin from the samples (Mair et al., 2019). The protein concentration of each extract was then measured by Bradford Assay. For each replicate, a volume corresponding to 5 mg protein was transferred into an Eppendorf tube containing Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen) from 100 μl bead slurry that were pre-washed twice with extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTE). The incubation took place on a rotor wheel at 4˚C overnight (~16 h). The next day, the beads were separated from the protein extract on a magnetic rack and washed with the following solutions: 2x 1 mL cold extraction buffer, 1x 1 mL cold 1 M KCL, 1x cold 100 mM Na2CO3 , 1x 1mL 2M Urea in 10 mM Tris pH 8 at room temperature (Branon et al., 2018). 2.4 On-Bead Tryptic Digestion-MS sample preparation After the discard of the final wash solution, 100 μL of Tryptic digestion Buffer (1 M Urea, 1 mM DTE, 50 mM Tris pH 8.2, 1 μg Trypsin/Lys-C Protease Mix, Thermo) were added and the incubation took place on a thermoshaker at 37oC, 1300 rpm, for 3 h. Then, the supernatant was collected and the beads were washed twice with 25 μL of 1 M urea, 1 mM DTE, 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.2. Supernatants were pooled on new tubes and DTE was added to a final concentration of 4 mM on each sample for 30 min, on a thermoshaker at 37oC, 1300 rpm. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM on each sample and incubation took place in the dark for 45 min. Additional 0,5 μg of trypsin was added for overnight digestion (12-13 h), at 37°C (Zhang et al., 2019).  The next day, the peptides were purified with C-18 desalting 100 µL zip-tips (Pierce™ C18 Tips) according to manufacturer instructions and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280 nm measurement using a nanodrop instrument. 2.5 LC-MS/MS Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled in line with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an  25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75 µm ID) using an one-hour long  run, starting with a gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5 min and then  kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375- 1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60 ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy  (NCE) of 26. Each sample (e.g. three biological replicas) was analyzed in three technical replicas.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Aspergillus (Emericella) nidulans Reference Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot (UP000000560), 10,561proteins entries, downloaded in February 2022) using the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to re-analyze them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Neosynthesized plasma membrane (PM) proteins co-translationally translocate to the ER, concentrate at regions called ER-exit sites (ERes) and pack into COPII secretory vesicles which are sorted to the early-Golgi through membrane fusion. Following Golgi maturation, membrane cargoes reach the late-Golgi, from where they exit in clathrin-coated vesicles destined to the PM, directly or through endosomes. Post-Golgi membrane cargo trafficking also involves the cytoskeleton and the exocyst. The Golgi-dependent secretory pathway is thought to be responsible for the trafficking of all major membrane proteins. However, our recent findings in Aspergillus nidulans showed that several plasma membrane cargoes, such as transporters and receptors, follow a sorting route that seems to bypass Golgi functioning. To gain insight on membrane trafficking and specifically Golgi-bypass, here we used proximity dependent biotinylation (PDB) coupled with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) for identifying transient interactors of the UapA transporter. Our assays, which included proteomes of wild-type and mutant strains affecting ER-exit or endocytosis, identified both expected and novel interactions that might be physiologically relevant to UapA trafficking. Among those, we validated, using reverse genetics and fluorescence microscopy, that COPI coatomer is essential for ER-exit and anterograde trafficking of UapA and other membrane cargoes. We also showed that ArfA<sup>Arf1</sup> GTPase activating protein (GAP) Glo3 contributes to UapA trafficking at increased temperature. This is the first report addressing the identification of transient interactions during membrane cargo biogenesis using PDB and proteomics coupled with fungal genetics. Our work provides a basis for dissecting dynamic membrane cargo trafficking via PDB assays.

### Keywords
Golgi-bypass; uapa; proximity dependent biotinylation; proteomics, Er-exit; copii; copi; traffic; fungi; a. nidulans

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimioupolis, Athens, 15784, Greece.  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology, Heraklion, 70013, Greece.

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr George Diallinas
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimioupolis, Athens, 15784, Greece.  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology, Heraklion, 70013, Greece.


