### Accession
PXD001848

### Title
Global Analysis of Protein Folding Thermodynamics for Disease State Characterization, MCF7 vs MDAMB231

### Description
Protein biomarkers can be used to characterize and diagnose disease states such as cancer.  They can also serve as therapeutic targets. Current methods for protein biomarker discovery, which generally rely on the large-scale analysis of gene and/or protein expression levels, fail to detect protein biomarkers with disease-related functions and unaltered expression levels. Here we describe the large-scale use of thermodynamic measurements of protein folding and stability for disease state characterization and the discovery of protein biomarkers. Using the Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture and Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SILAC-SPROX) technique, we assayed ~800 proteins for protein folding and stability changes in three different cell culture models of breast cancer including the MCF-10A, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. The thermodynamic stability profiles generated here created distinct molecular markers for the three cell lines, and a significant fraction (~45%) of the differentially stabilized proteins did not have altered expression levels. Thus, the protein biomarkers reported here created novel molecular signatures of breast cancer and provided additional insight into the molecular basis of the disease. Our results establish the utility of protein folding and stability measurements for the study of disease processes.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lysates were prepared according to established SILAC protocols. Aliquots of each lysate were distributed into a series of denaturant-containing buffers, reacted with hydrogen peroxide under conditions that selectively oxidize exposed methionine residues, and quenched with the addition of excess methionine. The light and heavy samples generated at matching denaturant concentration were combined. Each combined protein sample was  submitted to a bottom-up, solution-phase, shotgun proteomics analysis using LC-MS/MS. Ultimately, L/H ratios were obtained for the peptides detected at each denaturant concentration, and the denaturant dependence of the L/H ratio’s was examined.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from the raw LC-MS/MS data files and the data were searched against the 20265 human proteins in the 2014-04 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase (downloaded at ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_releases/release-2014_04/knowledgebase/) using Maxquant 1.3.0.5.41 The following modifications were used: methyl methanethiosulfonate at cysteine as a fixed modification, SILAC labeling of lysine (13C614N2) and arginine (13C6), and variable (0-1) oxidation of methionine and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine (N and Q), and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The enzyme was set as Trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages were permitted. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1%, and rest of the parameters were set at the default settings.  As part of the default settings the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search where initial mass recalibration was completed and a 6 ppm precursor mass tolerance was used for the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. We also included match between runs and re-quantification of the searched peptides. The search results were exported to Excel for further data analysis as described below.  Only the protein and peptide identifications with non-zero positive ratios (H/L >0) were used in subsequent data analysis steps.  The methionine-containing peptides were selected, and those methionine-containing peptides consistently identified in the protein samples derived from six or more denaturant-containing buffers were assayed.    For the methionine-containing peptides, a single averaged H/L ratio was calculated for each peptide sequence and each charge state at each denaturant concentration.  Similarly, for each analysis a median H/L ratio was determined for each protein using the H/L ratios measured for all the non-methionine-containing peptides identified in all the denaturant concentrations for a given protein.  These median H/L ratios were used to select hits with H/L>2 fold in the protein expression level analyses.  For hit peptide and protein selection in the thermodynamic analyses, all the H/L ratios generated for the non-methionine containing peptides from a given protein were divided by the median H/L ratio for that protein in order to generate normalized H/L ratios for each non-methionine containing peptide. These normalized H/L ratios were log2 transformed. The normalized and log2 transformed H/L ratios generated for the non-methionine-containing peptides in a given analysis were used to determine the 5th and 95th percentiles values used in subsequent analysis of methionine-containing peptides. The averaged H/L ratios calculated for each methionine-containing peptides were also normalized and log2 transformed. The methionine-containing peptides and proteins with log2 transformed H/L ratios less than the 5th percentile or greater than the 95th percentile values determined above were selected and then visually inspected to determine which peptides had altered H/L ratios at 2 or more consecutive denaturant concentrations to generate an initial list of protein hits.

### Publication Abstract
Current methods for the large-scale characterization of disease states generally rely on the analysis of gene and/or protein expression levels. These existing methods fail to detect proteins with disease-related functions and unaltered expression levels. Here we describe the large-scale use of thermodynamic measurements of protein folding and stability for the characterization of disease states. Using the Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture and Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SILAC-SPROX) technique, we assayed &#x223c;800 proteins for protein folding and stability changes in three different cell culture models of breast cancer including the MCF-10A, MCF-7, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. The thermodynamic stability profiles generated here created distinct molecular markers to differentiate the three cell lines, and a significant fraction (&#x223c;45%) of the differentially stabilized proteins did not have altered expression levels. Thus, the differential thermodynamic profiling strategy reported here created novel molecular signatures of breast cancer and provided additional insight into the molecular basis of the disease. Our results establish the utility of protein folding and stability measurements for the study of disease processes, and they suggest that such measurements may be useful for biomarker discovery in disease.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Protein folding, Proteomics, Mcf-10a, Breast cancer, Silac, Chemical denaturation, Mda-mb-231, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry Duke University
Duke University

### Submitter
Jagat Adhikari

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry Duke University


