### Accession
PXD029627

### Title
Comparative O-GlcNAc Proteomic Analysis Reveals a Role of O-GlcNAcylated SAM68 in Lung Cancer Aggressiveness

### Description
O-GlcNAcylation is a reversible and dynamic post-translational protein modification catalyzed by O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Despite the reported association of O-GlcNAcylation with cancer metastasis, the O-GlcNAc proteome profile for cancer aggressiveness remains largely uncharac-terized. Here we report our comparative O-GlcNAc proteome profiling of 2 differentially invasive lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, which identified 158 down-regulated and 106 up-regulated can-didates in highly invasive cells. Among these differential proteins, a nuclear RNA-binding protein SAM68 (SRC associated in mitosis of 68 kDa) was further investigated. Results showed that SAM68 is O-GlcNAcylated and may interact with OGT in the nucleus. Eleven O-GlcNAcylation sites were identified, and data from mutant analysis suggested that multiple serine residues in the N-terminal region are important for O-GlcNAcylation and the function of SAM68 in modulating cancer cell migration and invasion. Analysis of clinical specimens found that high SAM68 ex-pression was associated with late cancer stages, and patients with high-OGT/high-SAM68 ex-pression in their tumors had poorer overall survival compared to those with low-OGT/low-SAM68 expression. Our study has revealed an invasiveness-associated O-GlcNAc proteome profile and connected O-GlcNAcylated SAM68 to lung cancer aggressiveness.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins eluted from WGA resin were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and stained using the VisPRO 5 minutes Protein Stain Kit (Visual Protein Biotechnology Corpora-tion, Taipei, Taiwan). Each sample lane was excised, cut into pieces, and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Electron). Dried gel pieces of each sample were first incubated in 1% -mercaptoethanol in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 20 min at RT in the dark, and further incubated for 20 min after an equal volume of 5% 4-vinylpyridine in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile was added. After the removal of solvent, gel slices were washed in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min, and dried in a SpeedVac. For in-gel digestion, gel piec-es were incubated with cold 0.1% modified trypsin (Promega) first at 4oC for 20 min, and subsequently at 37oC overnight. The digest solution containing tryptic peptides was collected, dried in a Speed-Vac, and stored at -20°C until further analysis. Each trypsin-digested sample was suspended in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid and an-alyzed using the nanoACQUITY™ system (Waters, USA), which was connected to an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated by reverse-phase LC using a BEH-C18 column (25 cm × 75 µm, Waters, USA) with a segmented gradient of 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 210 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were ionized at a spray voltage of 1.7 kV and introduced into the LTQ-Orbitrap for MS analysis in the positive ion mode with data-dependent acquisi-tion (2.0 Da isolation width). A full MS scan was set at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. Spectrum data of peptides were obtained by full-mass survey scan (m/z range: 350–1600). MS/MS scan by collision-induced dissociation was performed on 10 most intense multiply charged ions (2+ and 3+).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the acquired MS data were analyzed by using the Peaks7.5 Studio software for proteomics (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada) to search against the UniProt human protein database (containing 192,901 sequences; released in January 2021; http://www.uniprot.org/). Search parameters were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; parent and fragment mass error tolerance, 50 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively; al-lowing two missed cleavages, oxidation on methionine (+15.99 Da), and carbami-domethylation on cysteine (+57.02 Da) as variable modifications. The average local confidence (ALC) was > 80%. A decoy database was constructed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR), and FDR was controlled at < 0.1%. A protein was identified when at least one unique peptide was matched. Protein quantitation based on the MS spectra was performed with an in-house software [24]. Differential WGA-bound nuclear and cytosolic glycoproteins were analyzed using the PANTHER classification system (http://www.pantherdb.org/) [25] for molecular function, biological process and protein class-based gene ontology. Pathway analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA) based on experimental observa-tions of the target genes reported in the literature to determine differentially regulated signaling networks with significance calculated using Fisher's exact test (P-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is a reversible and dynamic post-translational protein modification catalyzed by <i>O</i>-GlcNAc transferase (OGT). Despite the reported association of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation with cancer metastasis, the <i>O</i>-GlcNAc proteome profile for cancer aggressiveness remains largely uncharacterized. Here, we report our comparative <i>O</i>-GlcNAc proteome profiling of two differentially invasive lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, which identified 158 down-regulated and 106 up-regulated candidates in highly invasive cells. Among these differential proteins, a nuclear RNA-binding protein, SAM68 (SRC associated in mitosis of 68 kDa), was further investigated. Results showed that SAM68 is <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated and may interact with OGT in the nucleus. Eleven <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation sites were identified, and data from mutant analysis suggested that multiple serine residues in the <i>N</i>-terminal region are important for <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation and the function of SAM68 in modulating cancer cell migration and invasion. Analysis of clinical specimens found that high SAM68 expression was associated with late cancer stages, and patients with high-OGT/high-SAM68 expression in their tumors had poorer overall survival compared to those with low-OGT/low-SAM68 expression. Our study revealed an invasiveness-associated <i>O</i>-GlcNAc proteome profile and connected <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylated SAM68 to lung cancer aggressiveness.

### Keywords
Lung adenocarcinoma; o-glcnac transferase; o-glcnacylation; sam68

### Affiliations
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei 11221, Taiwan


