### Accession
PXD024599

### Title
Dynamic methylation of histone H3K18 in differentiating Theileria parasites

### Description
Lysine methylation on histone tails impacts genome regulation and cell fate determination in many developmental processes. Apicomplexa intracellular parasites cause major diseases and they have developed complex life cycles with fine-tuned differentiation events. Yet, apicomplexa genomes have few transcription factors and little is known about their epigenetic control systems. Tick-borne Theileria apicomplexa species have relatively small, compact genomes and a remarkable ability to transform leukocytes in their bovine hosts. Here we report enriched H3 lysine 18 monomethylation (H3K18me1) on the gene bodies of repressed genes in Theileria macroschizonts. Differentiation to merozoites (merogony) led to decreased H3K18me1 in parasite nuclei. Pharmacological manipulation of H3K18 acetylation or methylation impacted parasite differentiation and expression of stage-specific genes. Finally, we identified a parasite SET-domain methyltransferase (TaSETup1) that can methylate H3K18 and represses gene expression. Thus, H3K18me1 emerges as an important epigenetic mark which controls gene expression and stage differentiation in Theileria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis 50 µg of a H3 derived 14-mer peptide flanking the lysine 18 (GGKAPRKQLATKAA-NH2, Proteogenix) were incubated with 3 µg TaSETup1 and with or without 1 mM SAM for 2h at room temperature. The reaction was then stopped by cooling and the samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as follows. LC-MS/MS acquisition  The peptide solution was desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) and analyzed by an Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer in positive mode (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1200 equipped with a NSI EASY-spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column reversed phase (2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å), EASY-spray C18 column reversed phase (P/N ES805A, 75 cm, 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, gradient from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over a period of 120 minutes, followed by a column regeneration of 20 min, giving a total run time of 140 minutes. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 4 x105. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 27%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Ion trap in a Top-Speed mode with 3 seconds cycles, with an AGC target of 1x104 and with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. MS/MS of most intense precursor were firstly acquired. Peptides with charge states = 1 to 8 and unassigned charge states were included for the acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS acquisition and 35 ms for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS .raw files were processed using the Sequest search engine of Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide identification was done in No-enzyme mode with a custom database containing only the peptide sequence. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Validation of spectra was done with the “Fixed value PSMs validator” node, which perform validation of PSMs (Peptide Spectrum Matches) based on score thresholds defined for the search nodes. On proteome Discoverer 2.4, the following dynamic modifications were searched: Methylation (K), Dimethylation (K), Trimethylation (K), amidated (C-terminus of peptide) and HCysThiolactone (K).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tasetup1, Host parasite interactions, H3k18, Theileria, Epigenetic

### Affiliations
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University)
Proteomic facility of Institut Jacques Monod (UMR7592) - CNRS & Université de Paris 

### Submitter
Laurent Lignières

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume Chevreux
Proteomic Facility, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 (CNRS and Paris University)


