### Accession
PXD008583

### Title
Several proteins are altered in serum of patients having colorectal cancer with variable levels of C-Reactive protein and different survival times 

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide. Increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), which occur during local and systemic inflammation, have been linked to poor prognosis in CRC patients. on the other hand there are no biomarkers associated with 5 year survival of CRC patients. We divided the serum samples into either high (>30 mg/L) or low CRP (<30 mg/L) or long and short 5-year survival. In this study, we have quantified 256 proteins with two or more unique peptides. Data were further analyzed by ANOVA, principal component analysis (PCA), Orthogonal Projections to Latent Structures Discriminant Analysis (OPLS-DA)-modeling and OPLS-DA-associated S-plot. Pathway analysis was performed using Integrated Molecular Pathway Level Analysis (IMPaLa) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). We propose several proteins associated with prognosis and survival in patients with CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were thawed and TOP 12 proteins were depleted using the TOP12 protein depletion kit (Pierce, ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total protein concentration was assessed with Pierce BCA assay kit (Pierce, ThermoFisher). Serum equivalent to 100 μg protein was aliquoted and dried by speedvac (Savant, ThermoFisher). The resulting dried serum was dissolved 35 μL in 50 mmol/L Tris buffer, pH 7.8 containing 6M urea and 1.8 μL of 200 mmol/L DTT was added to the samples and allowed to shake at RT for 1 h. Thereafter, 7 μL of iodoacetamide (200 mmol/L stock solution) was added to the samples with shaking at RT for 1 h. To prevent overalkylation, 7 μL of DTT (200 mmol/L) was added to samples to quench excess iodoacetamide with shaking for 1 h at RT. After diluting the samples with 270 μL of MQ water, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio and protein mixture was digested at 37°C overnight. 30 μg protein digests were cleaned with C18 spin columns (Pierce, ThermoFisher). Cleaned peptides were dissolved in 86 μL of 0.1% formic acid containing 12.5 fmol/μL of Hi3 spike-in standard peptides (Waters, MA, USA) for quantification.

### Data Protocol
rogenesis QI for proteomics software (Version 3, Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for processing of raw files. The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. The samples were spiked with 12.5 fmol/µL of CLPB_ECOLI (P63285, ClpB protein) peptides (Hi3 E. Coli Standard, Waters). Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR to less than 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. These are default parametersin the software. The quantified proteins in all comparisons were compared by ANOVA on a protein-to-protein basis and their expression levels were considered significantly different, if ANOVA p-value was less than 0.05. Principal component analysis (PCA), offering the visualization of the main axes of variation in the data groups, was performed by Progenesis QI for proteomics. Processing the Progenesis QI data with EZinfo 3.0 software (a statistical tool released in December 2014, Umetrics, Sweden), supervised OPLS-DA modelling was performed. With a p(corr) cut-off of ±0.80, a variance versus correlation plot (S-Plot) and a list of S-plot proteins was generated from OPLS-DA data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colerectal cancer; serum proteomics; multivariate data analysis; opls-da; insulin growth factor binding protein-2

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory, Haartmaninkatu 3, PO Box 21, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory, Haartmaninkatu 3, PO Box 21, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland


