### Accession
PXD031160

### Title
Wild-type and SeMeCo yeast proteomes with microFlow-SWATH & DIANN

### Description
Proteomic analysis of FACS-sorted and unsorted auxotrophic amd prototrophic subpopulations inSelf-establishing metabolically cooperating (SeMeCo) and control wild-type yeast communities. Microbial communities are composed of cells of varying metabolic capacity and regularly include auxotrophs; cells that lack essential metabolic pathways. By analysing auxotrophs for amino acid biosynthesis pathways in microbiome data  microbiome data derived from over 12,000 natural microbial communities obtained as part of the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP), and studying auxotrophic-prototrophic interactions in self-establishing metabolically cooperating yeast communities (SeMeCos), we reveal a metabolically imprinted mechanism that links the presence of auxotrophs to an increase in metabolic interactions and gains in antimicrobial drug tolerance. As a consequence of the metabolic adaptations necessary to uptake specific metabolites, auxotrophs obtain altered metabolic flux distributions, export more metabolites, and in this way metabolite-enrich the community environments. Moreover, the increased efflux activities reduce intracellular drug concentrations, allowing cells to grow in the presence of drug levels that are above the minimal inhibitory concentrations. For example, the antifungal action of azoles is greatly diminished in auxotrophs and prototrophs that uptake metabolites from a metabolically enriched environment. Our results hence show why cells are more robust to drug exposure when they interact metabolically.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics on FACS samples, 20 million sorted WT (that had just passed through the FACS), CFP+ (prototrophic cells) and CFP- (auxotrophic cells) SeMeCo cells were immediately spun down at 4000 r.p.m., SN was partially discarded, 600 µl were transferred to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and spun down at 4000 r.p.m. for 5 min, SN was discarded and cell pellets were then immediately stored at -80ºC, until all samples were collected. Cell pellets were processed in a bead beater for 5 min at 1,500 r.p.m. (Spex Geno/Grinder) in a lysis buffer where proteins were denatured in 8 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, 33247) and 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, 09830) at pH 8.0. Samples were spun down for 1 min at 4000 r.p.m before they were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, 43815) for 1h at 30 ºC. Samples were then alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, I1149) for 30 min at RT protected from light. Samples were diluted to less than 1.5 M urea in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.0, before proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega, V511X). Trypsin was neutralised with 1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific, 13454279), before peptides were purified in 96-well MacroSpin plates (Nest Group): 1. plates were first equilibrated in a series of Methanol (1x) (Greyhound Chromatography, BIO-13684102), 50% ACN (2x) (Greyhound Chromatography, Bio-012041-2.5L), and 3% ACN 0.1% FA (2x), between each wash plates were spun down for 1 min at 100 g and flow through was discarded; 2. samples were loaded into the plates and peptides were cleaned-up in a series of 3% ACN, 0.1% FA (3x), between each wash samples were spun down for 1 min at 100 x g and flow through was discarded; 3. peptides were eluted into a new collection plate with 50% ACN (3x) and spun dried overnight at RT in speed vacuum. Peptides were then dissolved in 40 µL of 3% ACN 0.1% FA. Peptide concentration was measured at Absorbance 280 nm using the Lunatic (Unchained Labs).  The digested peptides were analysed on a nanoAcquity (Waters) (running as 5 µl min−1 microflow liquid chromatography) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX). Protein digest (2 µg) was injected and the peptides were separated with a 23 min non-linear gradient starting with 4% acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and increasing to 36% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. A Waters HSS T3 column (150 mm × 300 µm, 1.8 µm particles) was used. The DIA method consisted of an MS1 scan from m/z 400 to m/z 1250 (50 ms accumulation time) and 40 MS2 scans (35 ms accumulation time) with a variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range from m/z 400 to m/z 1250.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with DIA-NN 1.7.1 using default settings, except the mass tolerances were fixed to 20 and 12 ppm for MS2 and MS1 spectra, respectively. Scan window size was set to 6.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sccharomyces cerevisiae, Semeco, Microflow-swath & diann, Proteomics, Facs auxotrophs and prototrophs, Wild-type

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, UK Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Clara Correia-Melo

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
The Francis Crick Institute, UK Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany


