### Accession
PXD011183

### Title
Urinary proteomics by 2DE and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Despite research progresses, the chance to accurately predict the risk for diabetic nephropathy (DN) is still poor. Our goal is to develop new predictive tools of nephropathy starting from urine, which can be easily obtained using noninvasive procedures and it is directly related to kidney. In this study, urine from children with recent diagnosis of type 1 diabetes was subjected to proteomic analysis in comparison to age-matched controls. Targeted confirmation was performed on children with a longer history of diabetes using Western Blotting and applying a urinary lipidomic approach. To definitively understand whether the observed alterations could be related to diabetic nephropathy, urine from diabetic adults with or without albuminuria, which is an indication of nephropathy, was also examined. Our results showed that lipid metabolisms of prostaglandin and ceramide, which are significantly and specifically modified in association with DN, are already altered in children with a recent diabetes diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
For 2D electrophoresis, second morning urine samples were collected and concentrated. Highly abundant proteins were immuno-depleted using Genway Spin IgY-12 kit. Proteins in the flow through were precipitated with acetone: methanol= 8:1 overnight at –20°C and  dissolved in a buffer containing 40 mM Tris, 8M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 0.05% (w/v) zwittergent. 50 µg of proteins were loaded on 13 cm strips, with a non-linear gradient pH 4-7 to run the first dimension of isoelectrofocusing. Upon reduction with DTE (1,4-dithioerythritol) and alkylation with iodoacetamide of the strips, the second dimension was run on SDS-PAGE 12.5% subsequently Silver stained. Each sample was run in triplicates in comparison to the technical replicates of three pools of urine (12, 12 and 11 urine samples per pool) from healthy age-matched donors. In this way, it was possible to obtain a statistically significant image analysis of the spot volume intensities. Gel images were acquired by ProXPRESS 2D Proteomic Imaging System and quantitative comparisons of spot intensities were carried out using Progenesis SameSpots (Nonlinear Dynamics). In the comparison between healthy donors and each type-1 diabetic child, spots intensities, characterized by a fold-change≥1.5 and a p-value<0.01 (as evaluated by using parametric ANOVA), were subjected to subsequent analysis to create the hierarchical clustering by means of MeV software (version 4_9_0). The differentially displayed spots in the indicated two groups (t-student’s test p<0.06) were identified by in-gel digestion followed by nLC-MS/MS analysis. The 61 spots of interest were manually excised from the gels, de-stained, sequentially reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin. Aliquots of the sample containing tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 and analysed by nLC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75 µm i.d., 25 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 3-µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ. A gradient of eluents A (distilled water with 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.5% v/v acetic acid) and B (acetonitrile and 2% v/v distilled water with 0.5% v/v acetic acid) was used to achieve separation (0.15 µL/min flow rate), from 8% B to 50% B in 50 minutes. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 60,000 and mass range from m/z 300 to 1750 Da. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (version 2.6, Matrix Science) search engine to search to search firstly the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) and then the the UniProt_Human Complete Proteome_cp_hum_2018_0523 (93614 sequences; 37039836 residues). Searches were performed with 2-missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification, N-terminus-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 0.6 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Despite research progresses, the chance to accurately predict the risk for diabetic nephropathy (DN) is still poor. So far, the first evidence of DN is micro-albuminuria, which is detected only 10-20&#x202f;years after the onset of diabetes. Our goal is to develop new predictive tools of nephropathy starting from urine, which can be easily obtained using noninvasive procedures and it is directly related to kidney. Since it is reasonable to suppose that, in predisposed patients, the mechanisms leading to nephropathy start acting since the diabetes onset, urine from children with recent diagnosis of type 1 diabetes was subjected to proteomic analysis in comparison to age-matched controls. Targeted confirmation was performed on children with a longer history of diabetes using Western Blotting and applying a urinary lipidomic approach. To definitively understand whether the observed alterations could be related to diabetic nephropathy, urine from diabetic adults with or without albuminuria was also examined. For the first time, lipid metabolisms of prostaglandin and ceramide, which are significantly and specifically modified in association with DN, are shown to be already altered in children with a recent diabetes diagnosis. Future studies on larger cohorts are needed to improve the validity and generalizability of these findings. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011183 Submission details: Project Name: Urinary proteomics by 2DE and LC-MS/MS. Project accession: PXD011183 Project DOI: https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD011183 SIGNIFICANCE: Nephropathy is a very common diabetic complication. Once established, its progression can only be slowed down but full control or remission is achieved in very few cases, thus posing a large burden on worldwide health. The first evidence of diabetic nephropathy (DN) is micro-albuminuria, but only 30% of patients with micro-albuminuria progress to proteinuria, while in some patients it spontaneously reverts to normo-albuminuria. Thus, there is clear need for biomarkers that can accurately predict the risk to develop DN. Herein, by applying proteomic and lipidomic approaches on urine samples, we show that alteration of prostaglandin and ceramide metabolisms specifically occurs in association with DN. Interestingly, we demonstrate that the modification of these metabolic pathways is an early event in diabetic patients, suggesting the identified changed proteins as possible predictive biomarkers of diabetes-induced renal function decline.

### Keywords
Urine, Type 1 diabetes, Predictive biomarkers, Diabetic nephropathy

### Affiliations
ProMiFa, Protein Microsequencing Facility San Raffaele Scientific Institute Via Olgettina, 60  20132-Milan Italy
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Annapaola Andolfo
ProMiFa, Protein Microsequencing Facility San Raffaele Scientific Institute Via Olgettina, 60  20132-Milan Italy


