### Accession
PXD026768

### Title
Candida auris extracellular vesicle proteomics

### Description
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles from Candida auris MMC1 and MMC2 strains.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles from four independent cell cultures were submitted to metabolite, protein and lipid extraction (MPLEx) according to the protocol by Nakayasu et al. (DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00043-16). Extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and resulting peptides were extracted with 1 mL Discovery C18 SPE columns (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA) as previously described (DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00085-15). Digested peptides were suspended in water, quantified by BCA assay and 0.5 μg of peptides were loaded into trap column (4 cm x 100 μm ID packed in-house with 5 μm C18, Jupiter). Peptide separation was carried out an analytical column (70 cm x 75 µm ID packed with C18, 3 μm particles) using a gradient of acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) in water/0.1% formic acid (solvent A). The flow was set to 300 nL/min with 1% solvent B and kept for 15 min. Then concentration of solvent B was increased linearly as following: 19 min, 8% B; 60 min, 12% B; 155 min, 35% B; 203 min, 60% B; 210 min, 75% B; 215 min, 95% B; 220 min, 95% B. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed by electrospray in an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by scanning a window of 400-2000 m/z with resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Tandem mass spectra were collected using HCD (32% NCE) on the 12 most intense multiple-charged parent ions at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.5.1) (DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2016.136). Peptide identification was performed by searching against the C. auris sequences from Uniprot Knowledge Base (downloaded December 6, 2017). Searching parameters included the variable modifications protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine, in addition to carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Parent and fragment mass tolerance were kept as the default setting of the software. Only fully tryptic digested peptides were considered, allowing up to two missed cleaved sites per peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Candida auris is a recently described multidrug-resistant pathogenic fungus that is increasingly responsible for health care-associated outbreaks across the world. Bloodstream infections of this fungus cause death in up to 70% of cases. Aggravating this scenario, the disease-promoting mechanisms of C. auris are poorly understood. Fungi release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that carry a broad range of molecules, including proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, pigments, and RNA, many of which are virulence factors. Here, we carried out a comparative molecular characterization of C. auris and Candida albicans EVs and evaluated their capacity to modulate effector mechanisms of host immune defense. Using proteomics, lipidomics, and transcriptomics, we found that C. auris released EVs with payloads that were significantly different from those of EVs released by C. albicans. EVs released by C. auris potentiated the adhesion of this yeast to an epithelial cell monolayer, while EVs from C. albicans had no effect. C. albicans EVs primed macrophages for enhanced intracellular yeast killing, whereas C. auris EVs promoted survival of the fungal cells. Moreover, EVs from both C. auris and C. albicans induced the activation of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. Together, our findings show distinct profiles and properties of EVs released by C. auris and by C. albicans and highlight the potential contribution of C. auris EVs to the pathogenesis of this emerging pathogen. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Candida auris is a recently described multidrug-resistant pathogenic fungus that is responsible for outbreaks across the globe, particularly in the context of nosocomial infections. Its virulence factors and pathogenesis are poorly understood. Here, we tested the hypothesis that extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by C. auris are a disease-promoting factor. We describe the production of EVs by C. auris and compare their biological activities against those of the better-characterized EVs from C. albicans. C. auris EVs have immunoregulatory properties, of which some are opposite those of C. albicans EVs. We also explored the cargo and structural components of those vesicles and found that they are remarkably distinct compared to EVs from C. auris's phylogenetic relative Candida albicans.

### Keywords
Candida auris, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto Nakayasu
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


