### Accession
PXD014205

### Title
Evolution Anaerobic peroxisome in Mastigamoeba balamuthi

### Description
Adaptation of eukaryotic cells to anaerobic condition is reflected by deep changes in mitochondrial metabolism and their functional reduction. The most modified types of mitochondria are hydrogenosomes that generate molecular hydrogen with concomitant ATP synthesis and mitosome that completely lost energy metabolism. The reduction of mitochondria is associated with loss of peroxisomes that evolved from ER to compartmentalize pathways generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) and thus prevent cellular oxidative damage. Biogenesis and function of peroxisomes is tightly coupled with mitochondria. They share the fission machinery, pathways of oxidative metabolism, ROS scavenging, and metabolic products. The loss of peroxisomes in anaerobic eukaryotes with reduced mitochondria is thus not unexpected. Surprisingly, we identified peroxisomes in anaerobic, hydrogenosome bearing protist Mastigamoeba balamuthi. Initially, we identified conserved set of peroxisomal proteins peroxins that are required for protein import, peroxisomal growth and division. Key membrane associated peroxins (MbPex3, MbPex11, and MbPex14) were visualized in numerous vesicles that were distinct from hydrogenosomes, ER and Golgi body. Proteomic analysis of cellular fractions and prediction of peroxisomal targeting signals (PTS1/PTS2) allows identification of 51 putative peroxisomal matrix proteins. Expression of selected proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed that they are specifically targeted to yeast peroxisomes. Matrix protein includes components of acyl CoA and carbohydrate metabolism, pyrimidine and CoA biosynthesis, whereas neither components of β-oxidation nor catalase were present. In conclusion, we identified new subclass of peroxisomes named “anaerobic” peroxisome that shifts the current paradigm and rises attention to reductive evolution of peroxisomes in anaerobic organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples (50 g) were processed and trypsin digested as described  (101). Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents were added to each sample according to manufacturer protocol (Thermo, Pierce) and after 60 minutes the reaction was stopped by addition of 0,5% hydroxylamine. The samples were pooled, vacuum dried, dissolved in loading buffer  (1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile (ACN)), and desalted on Michrom C18 Opti Trap Macro column (Optimize Technologies 10-04818-TN). Peptides (250 g/100 l) were injected on to C18 column (kinetex 1.7 m, EVO C18, 150 x 2.1 mm) and separated with linear gradient from 0% A buffer (20 mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN, pH 10) to 50% B buffer (20 mM ammonium formate, 80% ACN, pH10) in 32 minutes, flow rate 300 l/min. Thirty four fractions were collected and each of two most distant fractions were pooled into 17 fractions as described (102). Resulting fractions were dried and resuspended in 20 l of 1% TFA. Data acquisition was performed as described using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo) (101). For quantification of TMT, ten most intense fragments were isolated (simultaneous precursor selection) and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on 65% energy, max accumulation time 140 ms, and fragments were measured using 60 K resolution (103).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.)  and TMT reporter ions ratios were used for estimation of relative amount of each protein. Searches were performed against local M. balamuthi protein database with 14841 entries and common contaminant database. Modification were set: peptide N terminus, lysine (unimod nr:737) and Cystein  (unimod nr:39) as static, and methionoine oxidation (unimod :1384),  and protein N terminus acetylation (unimod :1) as variable. TMT values were reported as a ratio to the sum of reporters in each spectrum (i.e., the sum of the 10 values for each spectrum was equal to 1000). To predict cellular localization of peroxisomal proteins, marker proteins with expected localization were used for detection of fractions with maximum of TMT values. Following markers were used: peroxisomes - Pex3, Pex10, Pex11, Pex12, Pex14; hydrogenosomes - Tom40, voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), Cpn60, Cpn10, succinate dehydrogenase (Sdh) subunits A and C, ADP/ATP carrier, hydrogenosomal NifS, T- and H-protein of glycine cleavage system (Gcs); ER - Sec61, Sec22, reticulon, signal recognition particle receptor subunit alpha (SRPRA), calnexin, and PDI. To filter putative peroxisomal matrix proteins, we used following criteria: the protein was detected by more than one peptide in at least one of two independent fractionations with maximum of TMT value within range of peroxisomal markers, it possesses predicted PTS1 or PTS2 consensus, and it lacks predicted transmembrane domain.

### Publication Abstract
The adaptation of eukaryotic cells to anaerobic conditions is reflected by substantial changes to mitochondrial metabolism and functional reduction. Hydrogenosomes belong among the most modified mitochondrial derivative and generate molecular hydrogen concomitant with ATP synthesis. The reduction of mitochondria is frequently associated with loss of peroxisomes, which compartmentalize pathways that generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and thus protect against cellular damage. The biogenesis and function of peroxisomes are tightly coupled with mitochondria. These organelles share fission machinery components, oxidative metabolism pathways, ROS scavenging activities, and some metabolites. The loss of peroxisomes in eukaryotes with reduced mitochondria is thus not unexpected. Surprisingly, we identified peroxisomes in the anaerobic, hydrogenosome-bearing protist <i>Mastigamoeba balamuthi</i> We found a conserved set of peroxin (Pex) proteins that are required for protein import, peroxisomal growth, and division. Key membrane-associated Pexs (<i>Mb</i>Pex3, <i>Mb</i>Pex11, and <i>Mb</i>Pex14) were visualized in numerous vesicles distinct from hydrogenosomes, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and Golgi complex. Proteomic analysis of cellular fractions and prediction of peroxisomal targeting signals (PTS1/PTS2) identified 51 putative peroxisomal matrix proteins. Expression of selected proteins in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> revealed specific targeting to peroxisomes. The matrix proteins identified included components of acyl-CoA and carbohydrate metabolism and pyrimidine and CoA biosynthesis, whereas no components related to either &#x3b2;-oxidation or catalase were present. In conclusion, we identified a subclass of peroxisomes, named "anaerobic" peroxisomes that shift the current paradigm and turn attention to the reductive evolution of peroxisomes in anaerobic organisms.

### Keywords
Anaerobiosis, Mastigamoeba balamuthi, Peroxisome

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic
Charles University

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic


