### Accession
PXD007976

### Title
Landscape of nuclear transport receptor cargo specificity

### Description
Nuclear transport receptors (NTRs) recognize localization signals of cargos to facilitate their passage across the central channel of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). About 30 different NTRs constitute different transport pathways in humans and bind to a multitude of different cargos. The exact cargo spectrum of the majority of NTRs, their specificity and even the extent to which active nucleocytoplasmic transport contributes to protein localization remains largely unknown because of the transient nature of these interactions and the wide dynamic range of cargo concentrations. To systematically map cargo-NTR relationships in situ, we used proximity ligation coupled to mass spectrometry (BioID). We systematically fused the engineered biotin ligase BirA* to 16 NTRs. We estimate that at least one third of the human proteome is subject to active nuclear transport. We quantified the specificity and redundancy in cargo-NTR interactions, and identified transport pathways for various protein complexes and transcription factors. We extended the BioID method by the direct identification of biotinylation sites. This approach enabled us to identify interaction interfaces and to discriminate direct versus piggyback transport mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
For each experiment 4e7 snap frozen cells were used. The AP was performed as previously described (Coyaud et al., 2015). Instead of a protease inhibitor mixture, 1 mg/ml Aprotinin and 0.5 mg/ml Leupeptin was used. 1 µg of Trypsin (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) was added and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h shaking at 500 rpm. Subsequently, 0.5 µg of Trypsin was added and the on-bead digest continued for additional 2 h. The beads were transferred to a spin column and the digested peptides were eluted with two times 150 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. To remove the biotinylated peptides still bound to the beads, 150 µl of 80 % ACN and 20 % TFA was added, briefly mixed and eluted; this step was done twice. The ACN/TFA elutions were merged. The samples were dried using a vacuum centrifugation. The elutions were resuspended in 200 µl buffer A. The desalting and clean-up of the samples was carried out using Micro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus). The samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH) connected online to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH). Peptides were separated on a BEH300 C18 (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm) nanoAcquity UPLC column (Waters GmbH) using a stepwise 145 min gradient between 3 and 85% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) FA. The elutions of biotinylated peptides were measured using the same settings but with a stepwise gradient lasting 90 minutes. Data acquisition was performed by collision-induced dissociation using a TOP-20 strategy with standard parameters. Charge states 1 and unknown were rejected.

### Data Protocol
For the quantitative label-free analysis, raw files from a Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo) were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28) (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB (database release 2016_09, 19594 entries) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The protein sequences of BirA* and Streptavidin were added to the database. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and biotinylation (K) were applied as variable modifications, if applicable; mass tolerance of 20 ppm (precursor) and 0.5 Da (fragments). The retention times were matched between runs, using a time window of 3 minutes. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Additionally, only protein groups identified by at least 2 unique peptides were retained. The intensity per protein of the proteinGroups.txt output of MaxQuant was used for further analysis. All comparative analyses were performed using R version 3.2.2. (R Core Team, 2012). The R packages MSnbase (Gatto and Lilley, 2012) was used for processing proteomics data, and the included package imputeLCMD was used for imputing missing values based on the definitions for missing at random (MAR) and missing not at random (MNAR) values. MNAR were defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were (i) missing in 4 out of 4, or 3 out of 4 biological replicates in one sample group, and (ii) present in at least 3 out of 4 biological replicates in the second sample group. Because of their non-random distribution across samples, these values were considered as underlying biological difference between sample groups. MNAR values were computed using the method “MinDet” by replacing values with minimal values observed in the sample. MAR were consequently defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were missing in 1 out of 4 biological replicates per sample group. MAR values were imputed based on the method “knn” (k-nearest neighbors) (Gatto and Lilley, 2012). All the other cases (e.g., protein groups that had 2 or fewer values in both sample groups) were filtered out because of the lack of sufficient information to perform robust statistical analysis. The data was quantile normalized to reduce technical variations (Gatto and Lilley, 2012). Protein abundance variation was evaluated using the Limma package (Smyth et al., 2005). Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t-test (one-sided) with variances moderated by Limma’s empirical Bayes method.  The pairwise comparisons of the AP of NTRs to the control data set were used to define the NIP and background proteome. The comparisons were done one-sided and separately for the NIP and the background proteome. The Sime’s adjusted p-values were calculated for each protein using the R cherry package (Goeman and Solari, 2011). The minimum Sime’s p-value per protein, which defines if this protein is significant in the NIP or background proteome, was adjusted using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg. This idea was adapted from (Lun and Smyth, 2014): The minimum Sime’s p-value will be small if the protein of interest is truly significantly differentially abundant in at least one of the comparisons to the control conditions under consideration. The specificity score per protein in each experiment was calculated by multiplying all significant p-values (p-values < 0.01) of the selected protein obtained in the pairwise comparisons (p-values of those pairwise comparisons where the protein was identified as enriched). Subsequently, an average adjusted fold change (FC) was calculated by using all FC corresponding to the previously considered p-values. The Fisher transformation was used to define a p-value per experiment. The Fisher p-values were adjusted using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear transport receptors (NTRs) recognize localization signals of cargos to facilitate their passage across the central channel of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). About 30 different NTRs constitute different transport pathways in humans and bind to a multitude of different cargos. The exact cargo spectrum of the majority of NTRs, their specificity and even the extent to which active nucleocytoplasmic transport contributes to protein localization remains understudied because of the transient nature of these interactions and the wide dynamic range of cargo concentrations. To systematically map cargo-NTR relationships <i>in&#xa0;situ</i>, we used proximity ligation coupled to mass spectrometry (BioID). We systematically fused the engineered biotin ligase BirA* to 16 NTRs. We estimate that a considerable fraction of the human proteome is subject to active nuclear transport. We quantified the specificity and redundancy in NTR interactions and identified transport pathways for cargos. We extended the BioID method by the direct identification of biotinylation sites. This approach enabled us to identify interaction interfaces and to discriminate direct versus piggyback transport mechanisms. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007976.

### Keywords
Nuclear pore complex, Interaction network, Proteomics, Proximity ligation, Protein transport

### Affiliations
EMBL
Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Marie-Therese Mackmull

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstr. 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany


