### Accession
PXD027302

### Title
Identification of GBP2- and NAB2-interacting proteins in malaria parasites

### Description
The quality control and export of mRNA by RNA-binding proteins are necessary for the survival of malaria parasites, which have complex life cycles. Malarial nuclear poly(A) binding protein 2 (NAB2), ALWAYS EARLY (ALY) and serine/arginine-rich (SR) proteins, such as nucleolar protein 3 (NPL3), G-strand binding protein 2 (GBP2) and SR1, are involved in nuclear mRNA export in malaria parasites. However, their functions and cellular localization are not fully understood. In this study, we found that NAB2 and SR1, but not ALY, NPL3 or GBP2, played essential roles in the asexual development of malaria parasites, while GBP2 was involved in gametocyte production. Moreover, GBP2 localized to both the nucleus and cytoplasm of malaria parasites and interacted with the proteins ALBA4, DOZI and CITH, which play roles in translational repression. Our findings suggest that malarial GBP2 may be involved in the recruitment of ALBA4, DOZI and CITH. Immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (IP-MS) revealed that PHAX domain-containing protein, an adaptor protein for exportin-1, also interacted with GBP2, suggesting that mRNA export occurs via the PHAX domain-containing protein pathway in malaria parasites. Fluorescence live cell imaging revealed that malarial NAB2 localized at the nuclear periphery and co-localized with NUP205. Moreover, using IP-MS, we found that malarial NAB2 interacted with transportin. RNA immunoprecipitation coupled to RNA sequencing revealed that malarial NAB2 bound directly to 143 mRNAs, including those encoding 40S and 60S ribosomal proteins. This indicates that malarial NAB2 is involved in general mRNA assembly and is shuttled between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Our findings suggest that unique mRNA export and post-transcriptional gene regulation mediated by RNA-binding proteins occur in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Protein IP Infected erythrocytes were transferred to RPMI1640 medium supplemented with 25% fetal bovine serum, 0.05 mg/mL penicillin and 0.05 mg/mL streptomycin. The infected erythrocytes were incubated for 18 h in 90% N2, 5% CO2 and 5% O2. Mature schizonts and gametocytes were harvested by Nycodenz density gradient centrifugation, as described previously15. Proteins were then extracted using Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein IP in transgenic parasites expressing mCherry fused to GBP2 or NAB2 was performed using GFP- or RFP-Trap Agarose and the GFP-Trap-A kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Chromotek, Planegg, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The database search engines Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and MASCOT 2.6 (Matrix Science) were used to identify and quantify proteins from the MS, MS/MS and reporter ion spectra of the peptides. Peptide mass data were matched by searching the protein database (PlasmoDB-46_PbergheiANKA.fasta), downloaded from PlasmoDB (updated November 4, 2019). The false discovery rate (FDR)21 was calculated via peptide sequence analysis using Percolator software22. High-confidence peptide identifications were obtained by setting a target false discovery rate threshold of ≤ 1.0% at the peptide level. Proteins exhibiting at least three peptide spectral matches were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
The quality control and export of mRNA by RNA-binding proteins are necessary for the survival of malaria parasites, which have complex life cycles. Nuclear poly(A) binding protein 2 (NAB2), THO complex subunit 4 (THO4), nucleolar protein 3 (NPL3), G-strand binding protein 2 (GBP2) and serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SR1) are involved in nuclear mRNA export in malaria parasites. However, their roles in asexual and sexual development, and in cellular localization, are not fully understood. In this study using the rodent malaria parasite, <i>Plasmodium berghei</i>, we found that NAB2 and SR1, but not THO4, NPL3 or GBP2, played essential roles in the asexual development of malaria parasites. By contrast, GBP2 but not NPL3 was involved in male and female gametocyte production. THO4 was involved in female gametocyte production, but had a lower impact than GBP2. In this study, we focused on GBP2 and NAB2, which play important roles in the sexual and asexual development of malaria parasites, respectively, and examined their cellular localization. GBP2 localized to both the nucleus and cytoplasm of malaria parasites. Using immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (IP-MS), GBP2 interacted with the proteins ALBA4, DOZI, and CITH, which play roles in translational repression. IP-MS also revealed that phosphorylated adapter RNA export protein (PHAX) domain-containing protein, an adaptor protein for exportin-1, also interacted with GBP2, implying that mRNA export occurs <i>via</i> the PHAX domain-containing protein pathway in malaria parasites. Live-cell fluorescence imaging revealed that NAB2 localized at the nuclear periphery. Moreover, IP-MS indicated that NAB2 interacted with transportin. RNA immunoprecipitation coupled to RNA sequencing revealed that NAB2 bound directly to 143 mRNAs, including those encoding 40S and 60S ribosomal proteins. Our findings imply that malaria parasites use an evolutionarily ancient mechanism conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine
Kyorin University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Mamoru Niikura

### Lab Head
Dr Mamoru Niikura
Kyorin University School of Medicine


