### Accession
PXD011691

### Title
Comparison of DIA and TMT based protein quantification in complex background

### Description
Label free quantification (LFQ) and isobaric labelling quantification (ILQ) are among the most popular protein quantification workflows in discovery proteomics. Here, we compared the TMT 10-plex workflow to label free single shot data-independent acquisition (DIA) method on a controlled sample set. The sample set consisted of ten samples derived from 10 different mouse cerebelli spiked with the UPS2 protein standard in five different concentrations. To match instrument time between the methods, the combined TMT sample was fractionated into ten fractions. The LC-MS data were acquired at two facilities to assess inter-laboratory reproducibility.  Both methods resulted in a high proteome coverage (>5,000 proteins) with low missing values on protein level (<2%) The TMT workflow led to 15-20% more identified proteins and a slightly better quantitative precision whereas the quantitative accuracy was better for the DIA method. The quantitative performance was benchmarked by the number of true positives (UPS2 proteins) within the top 100 candidates. TMT and DIA performed similar. The quantitative performance of the DIA data could be even improved by searching them directly against a database instead of using a project specific library. Our experiments also demonstrated that both methods can be easily transferred between facilities.

### Sample Protocol
Ten mouse cerebellum were reduced and alkylated by TCEP and CAA and afterwards digested by trypsin overnight. Afterwards digested UPS2 (Sigma) was spiked into the samples in 5 different concentrations. All MS experiments were performed on two Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (BGS and FLI). For DIA analysis, two ug of the digest were separated by a 2h gradient (BGS: Thermo Easy nLC 1200, FLI: Waters NanoAcquity UPLC. MS settings: 1 MS1 scan at 120k resolution with an AGC target of 4e5 and max injection time of 20 ms in the range of 350 to 1,650 Th followed by 40 DIA scans with segment widths adjusted to the precursor density; Scan resolution was set to 30k with an AGC target of 1e6 and max injection time of 60 ms. The HCD collision energy was set to 27%. For library generation, unlabeled digests from all samples were pooled and fractionated by high pH reverse fractionation into 6 fractions. Two ug of the fractions were analyzed by the same LC setups and following MS settings: MS1 scan: 60k, AGC target: 5e5, max injection time: 20 ms; MS2 scan: MIPS: peptide, intensity threshold: 2e4, charge state: 2-5, dynamic exclusion: 60 s, isolation width: 1.6 Th, activation time: HCD, HCD collision energy: 27%, orbitrap resolution: 15k, AGC target: 2e5, max injection time: 25 ms, cycle time: 3 s. For TMT analysis, the 10 samples were labeled differentially by the TMT 10plex kit according to manufactors instructions. The pooled sample was fractionated into 10 fractions and analyzed by the same LC setups and following SPS-MS3 method: for MS1 scan: resolution: 60k; scan range: 375-1,500; AGC target: 4e5; max injection time: 20ms; MIPS: peptide; Intensity threshold: 5e3; charge state: 2-5; dynamic exclusion: 20 s; for MS2 scan: isolation window: 1 Th; activation type: HCD; collision energy: 35%; detector type: ion trap; ion trap scan rate: rapid; AGC target: 1e4; max injection time: 50 ms; for SPS-MS3 scan: precursor selection range: 400-2,000; precursor ion exclusion: low: 18 Th, high: 5 Th; isobaric tag loss exclusion: TMT; synchronous precursor selection (SPS): enabled; number of SPS precursors: 8; MS isolation window: 2 Th; activation type: HCD; collision energy: 65%; detector type: Orbitrap; resolution: 50k; first mass: 100 Th; AGC target: 5e4; max injection time: 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
DA files for the library were searched against the UniProt mouse database (downloaded on Jan 6th, 2016 as FASTA file) and the UPS2 database (www.sigma.com/ups) using MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 with the following settings: fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term); enzyme: Trypsin/P; max. missed cleavages: 2; first search peptide tolerance: 20 ppm; main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; second peptide search was enabled. All other settings were set to default. Result were filtered by 1% FDR on PSM and protein level. Library was generated in Spectronaut Pulsar X (Biognosys).  DIA data were analyzed in Spectronaut Pulsar X using the previously generated library and default settings. Results were filtered by an FDR of 1% on precursor and protein group level (Q value <0.01). For direct searching against a database the DIA data were searched against the previously mentioned FASTA files. Results were filtered by 1% FDR on precursor and protein level.  TMT samples were analyzed in ProteomeDiscoverer 2.2 (Thermo) using the same databases as described above using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings:  Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage.  MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method (as defined in Mascot). The quan method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Dia

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG

### Submitter
Jan Muntel

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas Reiter
Biognosys AG


