### Accession
PXD035877

### Title
A method for targeting a specified segment of DNA to a bacterial microorganelle

### Description
Our work presents a protocol for the encapsulation and subsequent affinity isolation of the proteinaceous compartment carrying a DNA segment. To this end, we have repurposed the microcompartment of Citrobacter freundii for propaneadiol utilisation (Pdu) and constructed a LacI transcription repressor that allows the assembly of a synthetic organelle containing the LacI-DNA complex. High-throughput sequencing of extracted DNA from the affinity-isolated MCPs shows that our strategy results in leads to packaging of a DNA segment carrying multiple LacI binding sites, but not the flanking regions.

### Sample Protocol
Expression of MCPs was performed using E. coli strain JW0336-1 as the host. Cells were cultured in M9 minimal salt medium, which allows repression of the pBAD promoter, with the addition of 0.2% glucose, 0.04% MgSO4 and, as appropriate, chloramphenicol (25 µg/ml) and tetracycline (12.5 µg/ml). The 0.4% L-arabinose was added to induce transcription of genes under the pBAD promoter - synthesis of the yeast meganuclease I-SceI, bacteriophage λ Gam protein, Pdu subunits (Twin-Strep-PduA, PduB, -J, -K, -N, -U), and fluorescently labelled LacI. After one hour, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8000 x g for 15 min (4 °C). Pelleted cells were lysed by adding Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) (5 ml per gram of cell debris), lysozyme (100 µg/ml) and an EDTA-free cocktail of protease inhibitors (Roche, USA). DNase I (0.4 U/ml), TURBO™ DNase (0.8 U/ml), 10 mM MgCl2 and RNase A (20 µg/ml) were then added (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Cells were left at room temperature for 1 hour and then centrifuged at 15000 x g for 5 min (4 °C). Clear cell lysate was loaded onto the column with pre-loaded 500 µl suspension of Strep-Tactin®XT Superflow® High Capacity Agarose Beads (IBA Lifesciences, Germany). To allow the labelled MCPs to bind to Strep-Tactin®XT, the mixture was left at room temperature for 1 hour. Subsequently, non-specific binding proteins were washed off with 2 x 10 ml of physiological wash buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl). Twin-Strep-Tag-bound MCPs were eluted in 1.5 ml BXT buffer (IBA Lifesciences, Germany). To identify different proteins in SDS-PAGE gels, ~5 mm gel slices were excised and reduced in 10 mM DTT and cysteines were alkylated by addition of 50 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were then digested with Trypsin Gold (1.5 ng/µl, Promega, UK) for 12 hours at 37°C. Peptides were dried down and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid solution in water. Peptides were captured on Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (Dionex, USA) precolumn and separated in Nano Series™ column packed with C18 PepMap100 (Dionex, USA). Peptides from each slice were analysed on the Brunker SolariX XR mass spectrometer using a Triversa Nanomate chip-based electrospray system operated by the University of Birmingham Advanced Mass Spectrometry Facility, UK. The spray voltage of QE HF was set to 1.7 kV through Triversa NanoMate and heated capillary at 275°C.  The mass spectrometer performed a full fourier transform mass spectrometry scan (m/z 360−1600). Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120000 at m/z 200 and ACG target of 3×106. Precursor ions were fragmented in higher-energy collisional (HCD) MS/MS with resolution set up at 15000 and a normalized collision energy of 28. ACG target for HCD MS/MS was 1x105. The width of the precursor isolation window was 1.2 m/z and only multiply-charged precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Spectra were acquired for 56 mins.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS scans were searched against Uniprot database using Protein Discovery 2.2 software, Sequest HT algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Variable modifications were deamidation (N and Q), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y). The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Two missed cleavage was allowed and data were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Protein with at least two high confidence peptides were accepted as real hit.

### Publication Abstract
Encapsulation of a selected DNA molecule in a cell has important implications for bionanotechnology. Non-viral proteins that can be used as nucleic acid containers include proteinaceous subcellular bacterial microcompartments (MCPs) that self-assemble into a selectively permeable protein shell containing an enzymatic core. Here, we adapted a propanediol utilization (Pdu) MCP into a synthetic protein cage to package a specified DNA segment in vivo, thereby enabling subsequent affinity purification. To this end, we engineered the LacI transcription repressor to be routed, together with target DNA, into the lumen of a Strep-tagged Pdu shell. Sequencing of extracted DNA from the affinity-isolated MCPs shows that our strategy results in packaging of a DNA segment carrying multiple LacI binding sites, but not the flanking regions. Furthermore, we used LacI to drive the encapsulation of a DNA segment containing operators for LacI and for a second transcription factor.

### Keywords
Repressor laci, Escherichia coli, Propanediol utilisation (pdu) microcompartment, Citrobacter freundii

### Affiliations
University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical Faculty, Department of biology, Chair of biochemistry, Večna pot 111, 1000 Ljubljana
University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical Faculty, Večna pot 111, 1000 Ljubljana

### Submitter
Matej Butala

### Lab Head
Dr Matej Butala
University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical Faculty, Department of biology, Chair of biochemistry, Večna pot 111, 1000 Ljubljana


