### Accession
PXD013090

### Title
Chromatin isolation for mass spectrometry

### Description
The histone acetyl-reader BRD4 is an important regulator of chromatin structure and transcription, yet factors modulating its activity have remained elusive. Here we describe two complementary screens for genetic and physical interactors of BRD4, which converge on the folate pathway enzyme MTHFD1. We show that a fraction of MTHFD1 resides in the nucleus, where it is recruited to distinct genomic loci by direct interaction with BRD4. Inhibition of either BRD4 or MTHFD1 results in similar changes in nuclear metabolite composition and gene expression, and pharmacologic inhibitors of the two pathways synergize to impair cancer cell viability in vitro and in vivo. Our finding that MTHFD1 and other metabolic enzymes are chromatin-associated suggests a direct role for nuclear metabolism in the control of gene expression.  BRD4 is an important chromatin regulator with roles in gene regulation, DNA damage, cell proliferation and cancer progression1-4. The protein is recruited to distinct genomic loci by the interaction of its tandem bromodomains with acetylated lysines on histones and other nuclear proteins5. There, BRD4 acts as a transcriptional activator by P-TEFb-mediated stimulation of transcriptional elongation6. The activating function of BRD4 on key driver oncogenes like MYC have made this epigenetic enzyme an important therapeutic target in both BRD4 translocated and BRD4 wild-type cancers3,7-12, and at least seven bromodomain inhibitors have reached the clinical stage13. Genome-wide studies have identified the role of BRD4-induced epigenetic heterogeneity in cancer cell resistance14, and factors defining BRD4 inhibitor response15,16. However, despite its clinical importance and the broad role of BRD4 in chromatin organization, surprisingly little is known about factors that are directly required for BRD4 function. To systematically expand the list of known BRD4 interactors5 and to characterize proteins directly required for BRD4 function, we developed a strategy of two complementary screens for genetic and physical partners of BRD4. The two approaches converge on a single factor, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 (MTHFD1). Our description of a transcriptional role for this C-1-tetrahydrofolate synthase highlights a direct connection between nuclear folate metabolism and cancer regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell fractionation and chromatin enrichment: Briefly, for 100 million cells, the chromatin enriched pellet was taken up in 250 µl benzonase digestion buffer after washing, and sonicated for 120 seconds on the Covaris S220 focused-ultrasonicator. After addition of 0.25U benzonase and 2.5 µg RNase, the chromatin was incubated for 40 minutes at 4°C on a rotary shaker. For P5464, P5494, and P7964 samples, 2x SDS lysis buffer was added to the samples in a 1:1 ratio and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature followed by 5 minutes denaturation at 99°C. After centrifugation at 16.000 x g for 10 minutes at room temperature, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube.  Sample Prep (samples P5464 & P5494): FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter. 40 µL of each sample were mixed with 20 µL of freshly prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (UA) in the filter unit and centrifuged. After a second washing step with 200µL of UA, proteins were alkylated. After three washings with 100 µL of UA and three washings with 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptides were recovered using 40 µL of 50mM TEAB buffer followed by 5 µL of 0.5 M NaCl. Peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns and peptides were labeled with TMT 6plex reagents. Peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 column operated on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system using a 30 min gradient ranging from 5 to 90% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. 96 time-based fractions were collected and reconstituted into 50 fractions. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system via nanoelectrospray ion source using a liquid junction. For the MS/MS experiment, the mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with the 10 most intense precursor ions selected for HCD dissociation. MS1-scans were acquired in the orbitrap using a scan range of 350 to 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1E6 and a max injection time of 500 ms. MS2-scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 (at 400 m/z) with AGC target of 1E5 and a max injection time of 200 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and the HCD normalized collision energy set to 40%. The threshold for precursor selection was set to 5,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 sec.  Chromatin purification and LC-MS/MS analysis (sample P7964): Cell fractionation, chromatin enrichment and FASP procedure was carried out as previously described above.  Extracted tryptic peptides were cleaned up and desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction and labeled with TMT 10plex reagents. Peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 column operated on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system. 96 time-based fractions were collected and reconstituted into 20 fractions. After removal of solvent in a vacuum concentrator, peptides were were reconstituted in 5% formic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Agilent 1200 series dual pump nano HPLC system via nanoflex source interface. Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode.  Full MS scans were acquired with a scan range of 350 - 1800 m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200Th). AGC was set to a target of 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions for MS2 analysis were selected using a Top10 dependant scan approach with MS2 spectra acquired in the orbitrap (FT) at a resolution of 35,000 (at 200 Th). Precursor isolation in the quadrupole was set to 1.2 Da and normalized collision energy (NCE) for HCD set to 34%. AGC was set to 2E5 with a maximum injection time of 120 msec. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 sec.  MTHFD1 immunoprecipitation from chromatin and LC-MS/MS analysis (samples P8596/7 & P8707/8): Proteins were recovered by incubation in lysis buffer containing 50mM HEPES, 2% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 1mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail. FASP was performed as described before and peptides desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano system. Analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 spectra were acquired with a mass range of 375 - 1650 m/z in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200Th). AGC was set to a target of  2E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired in the orbitrap (FT) at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200Th) using HCD and a normalized collision energy of 30%. Intensity threshold for precursor selection was set to 2E4 with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da and a maximum injection time of 70 msec. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was set to 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS Data Analysis (Samples P5464, P5494, and P7964): The raw MS data ﬁles were processed with msconvert and converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) ﬁles. The resultant peak lists were searched against the human SwissProt database (version v2013.01 for the samples P5464, P5494 and version 2015.06 for the sample P7964) with the search engines Mascot and Phenyx.  Submission to the search engines was via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (Mascot only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-conﬁdence peptide identiﬁcations were used to recalibrate all precursor and fragment ion masses prior to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.025 Da). One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal, and lysine-modiﬁed TMT 6plex were set as ﬁxed modiﬁcations, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modiﬁcation. To validate the proteins, Mascot and Phenyx output ﬁles were processed by internally developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1 or with a single peptide above a score T2 were selected as unambiguous identiﬁcations. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score >T3 were also accepted. T1, T2, and T3 values for Mascot were 12, 24, and 10, and for Phenyx were 5.5, 9.5, 3.5, respectively (p-value <10−3). Following the selection criteria, proteins were grouped on the basis of shared peptides, and only the group reporters are considered in the ﬁnal output of identiﬁed proteins. Spectral conﬂicts between Mascot and Phenyx peptide identiﬁcations were discarded. The whole procedure was repeated against a reversed database to assess the protein group false discovery rate (FDR). The T1, T2, T3 thresholds were set such that the expected peptide and protein group identiﬁcations were at 1% FDR. The absolute abundance of proteins observed in P5464, P5494, and P7964 samples were compared using the normalized spectral count abundance factors (NSAF) method (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16944946). LC-MS Data Analysis (Samples P8596/7 & P8707/8): Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0. platform, utilizing the Sequest HT database search engine and Percolator validation software node (V3.04) to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.12 (42356 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions (HCD), respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and 1% FDR peptide confidence. Quantitative comparison was performed using a ‘label free quantitation’ (LFQ) approach utilizing the Minora feature detection with default settings in PD2.2. Precursor intensity values of unique and razor peptides were used for summed abundance calculation and samples normalized according to total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
The histone acetyl reader bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) is an important regulator of chromatin structure and transcription, yet factors modulating its activity have remained elusive. Here we describe two complementary screens for genetic and physical interactors of BRD4, which converge on the folate pathway enzyme MTHFD1 (methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, cyclohydrolase and formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase 1). We show that a fraction of MTHFD1 resides in the nucleus, where it is recruited to distinct genomic loci by direct interaction with BRD4. Inhibition of either BRD4 or MTHFD1 results in similar changes in nuclear metabolite composition and gene expression; pharmacological inhibitors of the two pathways synergize to impair cancer cell viability in vitro and in vivo. Our finding that MTHFD1 and other metabolic enzymes are chromatin associated suggests a direct role for nuclear metabolism in the control of gene expression.

### Keywords
Folate metabolism, Transcription, Gene regulation, Mthfd1, Brd4

### Affiliations
CeMM, Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria
CeMM, Reserach Center for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Peter Májek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
CeMM, Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria


