### Accession
PXD003358

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of cultured suspension cells of the halophyte Halogetonglomeratus by iTRAQ provides insights into response mechanisms to salt stress

### Description
Comparative proteomic analysis of cultured suspension cells of the halophyte Halogetonglomeratus by iTRAQprovides insights into response mechanisms to salt stress

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings of H.glomeratus were used for generating callus. Seeds of H.glomeratus were sterilized in 25% sodium hypochlorite, and germinated on MS solid medium under continuous light (300 umol m-2 s-1) at 25 °C and 70% relative humidity

### Data Protocol
Proteins identification and quantification were analyzed against the H. glomeratusprotein database containing non-redundant 30,124 sequences (Source: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pce.12428/full) with Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) simultaneously

### Publication Abstract
Soil salinity severely threatens land use capability and crop yields worldwide. An analysis of the molecular mechanisms of salt tolerance in halophytes will contribute to the development of salt-tolerant crops. In this study, a combination of physiological characteristics and iTRAQ-based proteomic approaches was conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the salt response of suspension cell cultures of halophytic Halogeton glomeratus. These cells showed halophytic growth responses comparable to those of the whole plant. In total, 97 up-regulated proteins and 192 down-regulated proteins were identified as common to both 200 and 400 mM NaCl concentration treatments. Such salinity responsive proteins were mainly involved in energy, carbohydrate metabolism, stress defense, protein metabolism, signal transduction, cell growth, and cytoskeleton metabolism. Effective regulatory protein expression related to energy, stress defense, and carbohydrate metabolism play important roles in the salt-tolerance of H. glomeratus suspension cell cultures. However, known proteins regulating Na(+) efflux from the cytoplasm and its compartmentalization into the vacuole did not change significantly under salinity stress suggesting our existing knowledge concerning Na(+) extrusion and compartmentalization in halophytes needs to be evaluated further. Such data are discussed in the context of our current understandings of the mechanisms involved in the salinity response of the halophyte, H. glomeratus.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Halophyte halogetonglomeratus, Itraq

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Gansu AgriculturalUniversity, Lanzhou 730070, China

### Submitter
Wang Juncheng

### Lab Head
Dr Huajun Wang
College of Agronomy, Gansu AgriculturalUniversity, Lanzhou 730070, China


