### Accession
PXD029193

### Title
Identification of antimicrobial peptides isolated from the skin mucus of African Catfish, Clarias gariepinus (Burchell, 1822)

### Description
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) constitute a broad range of bioactive compounds in diverse organisms, including fish. They are effector molecules for the innate immune response, against pathogens, tissue damage and infections. Still, AMPs from African Catfish, Clarias gariepinus skin mucus are largely unexplored despite their possible therapeutic role in combating antimicrobial resistance. In this study, African Catfish Antimicrobial peptides (ACAPs) were identified from the skin mucus of African Catfish, C. gariepinus. Native peptides were extracted from fish mucus scrapings in 10% acetic acid (v/v) and ultra-filtered using 5kDa molecular cut-off membrane. The extract was purified using C18 Solid Phase Extraction. The antibacterial activity was determined using the Agar Well Diffusion method and broth-dilution method utilizing Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923) and Escherichia coli (ATCC 25922). Thereafter, Sephadex G-25 gel filtration was further utilized in bio-guided isolation of the most active fractions prior to peptide identification using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometry. The skin mucus extracted from African Catfish from all the three major lakes of Uganda exhibited antimicrobial activity on E. coli and S. aureus. Lake Albert’s C. gariepinus demonstrated the best activity with the lowest MIC of 2.84 µg/mL and 0.71 µg/mL on S. aureus and E. coli respectively. Sephadex G-25 peak I mass spectrometry analysis alongside in silico analysis revealed seven short peptides (11-15 amino acid residues) of high antimicrobial scores (0.561-0.905 units). In addition, these peptides had a low molecular weight (1005.57-1622.05 Da), and had percentage hydrophobicity above 54%. Up to four of these antimicrobial peptides demonstrated α-helix structure conformation, rendering them amphipathic. The ﬁndings of this study indicate that novel antimicrobial peptides can be sourced from the skin mucus of C. gariepinus. Such antimicrobial peptides are potential alternatives to the traditional antibiotics and can be of great application to food and pharmaceutical industries; however, further studies are still needed to establish their drug-likeness and safety profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of peptides was carried out using a method adopted from (Subramanian et al., 2009), with minor modifications. Briefly, lyophilized skin mucus (0.4 g) was reconstituted in 15 mL of 10% (v/v) acetic acid and heated for 5 min in a boiling water bath at 95 °C. The acid mucus mixtures were then homogenized for 1 minute using a polytron homogenizer (Kinematica, Malters, Switzerland). Insoluble components were removed by centrifuging at 10,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 hour (Hermle, Wehingen, Germany). The supernatant (14 ml) was then collected into Vivaspin tubes containing a 5 kDa Molecular Weight Cut-off membrane (Sartorius, Gloucestershire, UK) and centrifuged at 6000 x g at 4 °C for 10 hours. The ultra-filtered peptides with Molecular weight below 5 kDa were collected for Solid Phase Extraction (SPE). Lake Albert’s C. gariepinus extract (SPE lowest MIC across both bacterial strains) were further purified by a Sephadex G‐25 gel filtration column (1.2 × 55 cm) (Cytiva, Uppsala, Sweden) (Neumann et al., 1996). Briefly, 5 mL of the peptides in 0.01 M PBS with a 10 mg/mL concentration were loaded into the column and eluted by deionized water (pH 7.01) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The fractions were collected at 9‐minutes intervals with a fraction collector and absorbance was monitored at 280 nm using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, New York, USA). The antibacterial activity of each of the peak fractions on E. coli and S. aureus was evaluated using the broth-dilution method as previously described. The peak fraction with the highest antibacterial activity was lyophilized and shipped to Proteomics platform, de Duve Institute, UClouvain (Belgium) for peptide sequencing by High-Resolution, Accurate-Mass (HR/AM) mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against a custom database containing 102,688 sequences from catfish species (compiled from Uniprot proteins entries with taxonomy ID: 175774 Bagarius yarrelli; 310915 Pangasianodon hypophtalmus; 7998 Ictalurus punctatus; 35657 Clarias microcephalus; 219545 Ameiurus melas). No enzyme was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum peptide length of 30 residues, four modifications per peptide b- and y- ions for HCD fragmentation, b- c- z- and y- ions for EThcD fragmentation. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine (Met) was considered as variable modification. Peptide matches were filtered using the q-value and Posterior Error Probability calculated by the Percolator algorithm ensuring an estimated false positive rate (FDR) below 5%. The filtered Sequest HT output files for each peptide were grouped according to the protein from which they were derived. Using FASTA file input, all the identified peptides from different precursor proteins were subjected to a Discriminant Analysis (DA) machine learning algorithm at the Collection of Anti-Microbial Peptides (CAMPR3) server (http://www.camp.bicnirrh.res.in/) (Waghu et al., 2016), to reveal their antimicrobial probability. The server gives a score on 0 to1 scale, with a score of >0.5 classified as Antimicrobial Peptide (AMP) and those below 0.5 are Non-Antimicrobial Peptide (NAMP). Subsequently, the FASTA file sequences of AMPs with the highest score (Antimicrobial score >0.9), were then inputted to a more rigorous and accurate the Deep Learning algorithm cross-validation using Deep-AmPEP30 server at https://cbbio.online/AxPEP/ (Yan et al., 2020). The server’s default antimicrobial peptide classification cut-off of 0.5 was maintained. Its positive sequence (Product Probability >0.5) is scored as 1, negative sequence (Product Probability <0.5) is 0 and invalid sequence is -1. All the raw positive sequence files were then used to predict the molecular weights, net charge at pH 7 and percentage hydrophobicity using the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) tool; EMBOSS PepStats at (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/seqstats/emboss_pepstats/). Thereafter, the same ACAPs sequences were utilized in the classification of their secondary structures using Profile network prediction HeiDelberg (PHD) software at https://npsa-prabi.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_phd.html (Combet et al., 2000).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Skin mucus, Mic, Antimicrobial peptides, And uganda, African catfish

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Pharm-Biotechnology and Traditional Medecine centre, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Mbarara, Uganda

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Ogwang Engeu
Pharm-Biotechnology and Traditional Medecine centre, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Mbarara, Uganda


