### Accession
PXD024093

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of proteins containing Lys48-linked polyUb chains in wild-type C. elegans at day 5 of adulthood

### Description
We performed immunoprecipitation experiments in young worms using an antibody against Lys48-linked polyUb followed by single shot label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type worms were collected at day 5 of adulthood with M9 buffer and washed 5 times with M9 to remove bacteria. Then, worms were lysed in protein lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 6.7, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaF, 25 mM N-Ethylmaleimide, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 r.p.m. for 10 min at 4 °C and supernatants were collected. We measured protein concentration and used 2.5 mg of protein as starting material for each sample. The samples were incubated on ice for 3 h with anti-Ubiquitin Antibody, Lys48-Specific, clone Apu2 (Merck, #05-1307, 1:50. RRID: AB_1587578). As a co-immunoprecipitation control, the same amount of protein was incubated with anti-FLAG antibody (SIGMA, F7425, 1:100. RRID: AB_439687) in parallel. Then, samples were incubated with 50 μl of μMACS MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, #130-071-001) for 1 h on the overhead shaker at 4 °C. Subsequently, samples were loaded to pre-cleared μMACS column (Miltenyi Biotec, #130-042-701). Beads were washed three times with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol and 0.05% Triton and then washed five times with 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl. After that, columns were subjected to in-column tryptic digestion containing 7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml-1 trypsin. Peptides were eluted using two times 50 μl of elution buffer 1 containing 2 M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic, and 15 mM chloroacetamide and incubated overnight at room temperature with mild shaking. Then, samples were stage-tipped the next day for label-free quantitative proteomics assay

### Data Protocol
All samples were analysed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18 (Agilent)). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nl min-1 using the 150-min method: 3-5 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 1 min, 5–30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 65 min, 30-50 % solvent B within 13 min and 50-95% solvent B within 1 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27% and the AGC target was set to 5e5 charges. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters as described above. LFQ was performed using the LFQ mode and MaxQuant default settings.All downstream analyses were carried out on LFQ values with Perseus (version 1.6.2.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aging, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Cologne
CECAD, University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD, University of Cologne


