### Accession
PXD031050

### Title
Plasma proteomic profile by regular training in male and female basketball players: a preliminary study

### Description
Aim of the present study is to identify sex-related sport adaptation proteins in female and male basketball players using proteomics approach on plasma samples withdraw from athletes during in-season training period but far from a competition. A cohort of 20 professional basketball players, 10 females (BF) and 10 males (BM), and 20 sedentary males (10 CM) and females (10 CF) as control, of comparable age and BMI were involved in this study. Protein profiles of plasma samples obtained from BM, BF, CM and CF were analysed by 2-DE. Differentially expressed proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. The computational 2-DE gel image analysis pointed out 33 differentially expressed protein spots (ANOVA p-value<0.05) and differences between male and female are more evident among the players than controls. The expression profile of 54.5% of the total proteins is affected by the sport activity. 14 proteins are differentially expressed in basket female players in comparison with their relative controls while 7 are differentially expressed in basket male players in comparison with their controls. In conclusion, we identify in female athletes a reduction in proteins related to transcription regulation, most of these modulate chronic inflammation confirming the anti-inflammatory effect of regular training in female muscle metabolism. In male and female athletes, we found a decrease in Transthyretin involved in muscle homeostasis and regeneration and Dermcidin a stress-induced myokine linked to inflammatory and it will be interesting to fully understand the role of its different isoforms in male and female skeletal muscle contraction.

### Sample Protocol
We performed an "in gel-digestion" on 2D spots from human plasma samples

### Data Protocol
The acquired data, containing MS and MS/MS spectra, were transformed in.mgf format and used for protein identification with a licensed version of Mascot Software. Mascot search parameters included: NCBI as database; Homo sapiens as taxonomy; trypsin as an enzyme, allowed number of missed cleavage 3; carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, Glu and Gln pyro-Glu at N-term of G and Q as variable modifications; 10 ppm MS tolerance, 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance and peptide charge, from +2 to +4. Every protein was selected as significant when at least 1 peptide displayed a p-value 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring fatigue and recovery during training periods contributes to identifying the best training methods to achieve sports performance. To date, little is known about sex-related differences in sports adaptations. The aim of the present study is to identify sex-related sports adaptation proteins in female basketball players and male basketball players using proteomics approach on plasma samples withdrawn from athletes during in-season training period but far from a competition. A cohort of 20 professional basketball players, 10 female (BF) and 10 male (BM), and 20 sedentary male (10 CM) and female (10 CF) as control, of comparable age and BMI, were involved in this study. Protein profiles of plasma samples obtained from BM, BF, CM, and CF were analyzed by two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE). Differentially expressed proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. The computational 2-DE gel image analysis pointed out 33 differentially expressed protein spots (ANOVA <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05) and differences between male and female basketball players are more evident among the players than controls. The expression profile of 54.5% of the total proteins is affected by sports activity. Furthermore, 14 proteins are differentially expressed in basket female players in comparison with their relative controls while seven are differentially expressed in basket male players in comparison with their controls. In conclusion, we identify in female athletes a reduction in proteins related to transcription regulation, most of these modulate chronic inflammation confirming the anti-inflammatory effect of regular training in female muscle metabolism. In male and female athletes, we found a decrease in Transthyretin involved in muscle homeostasis and regeneration and Dermcidin a stress-induced myokine linked to inflammatory and it will be interesting to fully understand the role of its different isoforms in male and female skeletal muscle contraction.

### Keywords
Sex differences, Plasma proteome, Basketball, Exerkines, Regular training

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Science of University of Naples federico II
Department of chemical science University of Naples

### Submitter
Gabriella Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Angela Amoresano
Department of Chemical Science of University of Naples federico II


