### Accession
PXD028356

### Title
Rat DRG CIPN versus Vehicle-treatment_DIA-MS

### Description
Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a serious side effect of cancer treatment, often leading to cessation of therapy due to lack of adequate treatment options. In the peripheral nervous system the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel impairs mitochondrial function and induces vast changes in gene expression. However, changes at the protein level remain so far unexplored. Here we used an unbiased approach of quantitative proteome profiling in a clinically-relevant rat model of paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy. We analysed two critical timepoints: (1) day 7, equivalent to 1 day after cessation of paclitaxel treatment, prior to neuropathy development; (2) approximately 4 weeks after paclitaxel initiation, when neuropathy has developed.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using similar protocols as described in Pogatzki-Zahn et al., 2021 (DOI:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002207).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys AG, Switzerland, version 13.11.200127). Additionally, raw data were reprocessed with a newer Spectronaut software version (15.4.210913.50606) and corresponding data files are specified by the exetnsion '[...]_SN15'.

### Publication Abstract
Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a debilitating side-effect of cancer therapies. So far, the development of CIPN cannot be prevented, neither can established CIPN be reverted, often leading to the cessation of necessary chemotherapy. Thus, there is an urgent need to explore the mechanistic basis of CIPN to facilitate its treatment. Here we used an integrated approach of quantitative proteome profiling and network analysis in a clinically relevant rat model of paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy. We analysed lumbar rat DRG at two critical time points: (1) day 7, right after cessation of paclitaxel treatment, but prior to neuropathy development (pre-CIPN); (2) 4&#xa0;weeks after paclitaxel initiation, when neuropathy has developed (peak-CIPN). In this way we identified a differential protein signature, which shows how changes in the proteome correlate with the development and maintenance of CIPN, respectively. Extensive biological pathway and network analysis reveals that, at pre-CIPN, regulated proteins are prominently implicated in mitochondrial (dys)function, immune signalling, neuronal damage/regeneration, and neuronal transcription. Orthogonal validation in an independent rat cohort confirmed the increase of &#x3b2;-catenin (CTNNB1) at pre-CIPN. More importantly, detailed analysis of protein networks associated with &#x3b2;-catenin highlights translationally relevant and potentially druggable targets. Overall, this study demonstrates the enormous value of combining animal behaviour with proteome and network analysis to provide unprecedented insights into the molecular basis of CIPN. In line with emerging approaches of network medicine our results highlight new avenues for developing improved therapeutic options aimed at preventing and treating CIPN.

### Keywords
Rat, Cipn, Dia-ms, Hf-x, Drg-proteome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine
Systems Biology of Pain  Head of the Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Christin Kappert 

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Schmidt
Systems Biology of Pain  Head of the Division of Pharmacology & Toxicology Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Vienna, Austria


