### Accession
PXD036393

### Title
Hypothesis-generating Proteome Perturbation to Identify Molecular Modes of Drug Action: NEU-4438 and Acoziborole in the African Trypanosome

### Description
Aim of the project was to investigate drug induced proteomic changes in T. brucei within 6 h of treatment with NEU-4438 or SCYX-7158

### Sample Protocol
Trypanosomes were cultured for at least 7 days (~28 doublings) in HMI-9 medium modified for Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) as follows. Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium (IMDM) depleted of Lys and Arg was supplemented either with L-Arg (120 µM) and L-Lys (240 µM) for ‘light’, or with 13C6-L-Arg (120 µM) and 13C6-L-Lys (240 µM) for ‘medium’, or with 13C6, 15N4-L-Arg (120 µM) and 13C6, 15N2-L-Lys (240 µM) for heavy medium. Heavy, medium, or light-labeled trypanosomes (5×105 cells/mL) were treated with SCYX-7158 (500 nM) or NEU-4438 (150 nM) or DMSO. After 6 h, 1×108 cells were harvested from each of the three flasks and combined. The pellet of ~3×108 trypanosomes was lysed in 2X SDS-PAGE sample buffer (final volume 300 µL), and proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE (12%) after loading the entire lysate in a single lane. The gel was silver-stained, fragmented into 6-pieces, each of which was separately destained following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Pierce™ Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry). Experiment was performed thrice with biological replicated indicated as A, B and C Gel slices were washed with water, 50% acetonitrile/50% water, acetonitrile, ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM), followed by 50% acetonitrile/50% ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested as described. Eight microliters of desalted peptides were analyzed by LC/ESI MS/MS using a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) a nano HPLC system coupled to a Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). In-line de-salting was accomplished using a reversed-phase column (100 μm × 20 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-μm 200Å resin; Michrom Bioresources, Bruker, Billerica, MA), followed by peptide separation on a reversed-phase column (75 μm × 270 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-μm 100Å resin; Michrom Bioresources, Bruker, Billerica, MA) that was directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. The heated capillary temperature was set to 300°C and a static spray voltage of 2100 V was applied to the electrospray tip.  A 90-minute gradient from 7% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (flow rate of 300 nL/minute) was used for chromatographic separation. The Orbitrap Fusion instrument was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between MS survey scans in the Orbitrap (AGC target value 500,000, resolution 120,000, and maximum injection time 50 milliseconds) with MS/MS spectra acquisition in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation. A 3 second cycle time was selected between master full scans in Fourier-transform (FT) and the ions selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds and exclusion mass by mass width was set to +/- 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The data were searched against Tbrucei427 version 4.2, Tbrucei427 version 9.0 and cRAP (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) Fasta files. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modifications included SILAC (+6.020 Da) on lysine and arginine, oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl on cysteine (+57.021 Da), and acetylation at protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). Data were searched using Sequest HT and results were run through Percolator for scoring. Quantification was performed using the canned SILAC method in Proteome Discoverer.  Proteins with ≥ two-fold change in abundance ratio of heavy (SCYX-7158 treated): light (DMSO-treated) or medium (NEU-4438 treated): light (DMSO-treated) in at least two out of three biological replicates are presented in Supplemental Table S1-Table S6. The data were filtered at the peptide level for a false discovery rate of 1% or less. The sum posterior error probability (PEP) of protein score was calculated as the sum of the negative logarithms of the PEP values of connected peptide spectrum match (PSM).

### Publication Abstract
Lapatinib, an approved epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor, was explored as a starting point for the synthesis of new hits against Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of human African trypanosomiasis (HAT). Previous work culminated in 1 (NEU-1953), which was part of a series typically associated with poor aqueous solubility. In this report, we present various medicinal chemistry strategies that were used to increase the aqueous solubility and improve the physicochemical profile without sacrificing antitrypanosomal potency. To rank trypanocidal hits, a new assay (summarized in a cytocidal effective concentration (CEC<sub>50</sub>)) was established, as part of the lead selection process. Increasing the sp<sup>3</sup> carbon content of 1 resulted in 10e (0.19 &#x3bc;M EC<sub>50</sub> against T. brucei and 990 &#x3bc;M aqueous solubility). Further chemical exploration of 10e yielded 22a, a trypanocidal quinolinimine (EC<sub>50</sub>: 0.013 &#x3bc;M; aqueous solubility: 880 &#x3bc;M; and CEC<sub>50</sub>: 0.18 &#x3bc;M). Compound 22a reduced parasitemia 10<sup>9</sup> fold in trypanosome-infected mice; it is an advanced lead for HAT drug development.

### Keywords
Drug-perturbome proteomics, Acoziborole, Scyx-7158, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei, Human african trypanosomiasis, Neu-4438

### Affiliations
Kennesaw State University

### Submitter
Amrita Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Amrita Sharma
Kennesaw State University


