### Accession
PXD040470

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Extracellular Vesicles from In Vitro Models of the Human Airway.

### Description
Extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated intercellular communication significantly influences pulmonary cell health and disease outcomes, yet in vitro methods to investigate these pathophysiological mechanisms are limited. We hypothesize that organotypic models of the airway can be leveraged to investigate EV-mediated intercellular signaling, focusing on EV proteomic content as a case study. in this study, two in vitro airway culture models were evaluated using mass spectrometry-based proteomics: a tri-culture model consisting of alveolar epithelial, fibroblast, and lung microvascular endothelial cells and a co-culture model consisting of alveolar epithelial and fibroblast cells. EVs isolated from the tri-culture model showed enrichment for EV proteins regulating RNA-to-protein translation. EVs isolated from the co-culture model were enriched with EV biogenesis and extracellular matrix signaling proteins. These model-specific differences suggest that different pulmonary cell types uniquely affect EV composition and the biological pathways influenced by the EV proteome in recipient cells. These findings inform future study designs surrounding EV-related pulmonary disease pathogenesis and therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: EVs from three cell culture models (1) alveolar epithelial cells, (2) fibroblasts, and (3) lung microvascular endothelial cells; were isolated using Invitrogen’s total isolation kit, following the manufacturer’s protocol. Exosomes were precipitated using the kit’s reagent, centrifuged, and resuspended in PBS. A full set of n = 6 EV biological replicates per culture model group – co-culture of (1) and (2) “epithelial and fibroblasts”, or tri-culture of (1), (2), (3) “Complete Acre Format”; and condition (Woodsmoke vs. Vehicle) were analyzed for proteomic signatures. Acetone protein precipitation was performed, and protein pellets were reconstituted in 8M urea. Samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 45 min at 37C, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at RT, and trypsin digested overnight at 37C. C18 desalting spin columns (Thermo) were used to clean resulting peptide samples. Peptide concentration was determined via Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Assay. All samples were normalized to 0.25 ug/ul and a pooled sample was created for each set (based on sample type) by combining equal volumes of each sample within that batch to assess technical reproducibility. All samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC/MS/MS Analysis: Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5 - 40% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode, where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using SequestHT within Proteome Discoverer (v.2.5, Thermo Fisher). Data were searched against the reviewed human database from Uniprot (downloaded Jan 2022, containing 20360 sequences), appended to a common contaminants database (MaxQuant; 245 proteins). Samples were searched as two separate sets, depending on sample type (Epithelial and Fibroblasts, or Complete Acre Format) along with their respective 2 pooled replicates.  The following settings were used in all three searches: enzyme specificity set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) of 1% and 5% were used to filter peptides and proteins, respectively. Proteins with less than two peptides and/or > 50% missing values across the samples were excluded from the results .

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated intercellular communication significantly influences pulmonary cell health and disease, yet <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> methods to investigate these mechanisms are limited. We hypothesize that organotypic models of the airway can be leveraged to investigate EV-mediated intercellular signaling, focusing on EV proteomic content as a case study. Two <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> airway culture models were evaluated by mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis: a tri-culture model consisting of alveolar epithelial, fibroblast, and lung microvascular endothelial cells and a co-culture model of alveolar epithelial and fibroblasts. EVs isolated from the tri-culture model were enriched with EV proteins regulating RNA-to-protein translation. EVs isolated from the co-culture model were enriched with EV biogenesis and extracellular matrix signaling proteins. These model-specific differences suggest that different pulmonary cell types uniquely affect EV composition and the biological pathways influenced by the EV proteome in recipient cells. These findings can inform future studies surrounding EV-related pulmonary disease pathogenesis and therapeutics.

### Keywords
Proteome; lc-ms/ms; extracellular vesicles; in vitro models; intercellular communication; cell signaling; human airway; pulmonary disease

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering (ENVR; Institute for Environmental Health Solutions (IEHS; UNC Superfund Research Program (UNC-SRP; Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology (CEMALB; Curriculum in Toxicology & Environmental Medicine (CiTEM)
UNC Proteomics Core, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Angie Mordant

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Rager
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering (ENVR; Institute for Environmental Health Solutions (IEHS; UNC Superfund Research Program (UNC-SRP; Center for Environmental Medicine and Lung Biology (CEMALB; Curriculum in Toxicology & Environmental Medicine (CiTEM)


