### Accession
PXD045992

### Title
Profiling the interactome of oligonucleotide drugs by proximity biotinylation

### Description
Drug-ID applies proximity biotinylation to identify drug-protein interactions inside living cells. The covalent conjugation of a drug molecule with a biotin ligase enables targeted biotinylation of the drug-bound proteome and its identification by SILAC-MS/MS. We investigate the interactome of two well-known small molecule drugs, JQ1 and SAHA, and applied it for the identification of the interactome of RNaseH-recruiting antisense oligonucleotides (ASO). Drug-ID allows to de novo profile the drug-protein interactome under native conditions, directly inside living cells and at the pharmacologically effective concentration of the drug using minimal amount of input material. We apply the technology to study the dose-dependent aggregation of ASOs and the effect of different wing chemistries (LNA, Fluoro, MOE) and ASO lengths on the ASO-protein interactome. Finally, we demonstrate the detection of stress-induced interactome changes (Actinomycin D treatment) in living cells. Particularly broadly applicable in the field of oligonucleotide therapeutics is the in situ variant of the approach, which uses a recombinant biotin ligase and does not require genetic manipulation of the target cell.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity biotinylation experiment. Hek293T FlpIn T-REx cells expressed the biotin ligase BASU fused to a Halo-Tag and eGFP. Hela cells expressed the biotin ligase BASU fused to a SNAP-tag and eGFP. Cells were labeled for triple SILAC using DMEM containing light (Lys0/Arg0), medium (Lys4/Arg6) and heavy (Lys8/Arg10) amino acids. Cells were treated with different small molecule drugs modified with a chloroalkane moiety or RNase H recruiting Gapmers modified with a benzyl guanine moiety. For in situ experiments, Hela wildtype cells were fixated after Gapmer treatment (modified with either chloroalkane or benzyl guanine moiety) with 3.7% formaldehyde (10 min, at r.t.), conjugated a recombinant biotin ligase (SNAP-BASU-His or Halo-BASU-His) and biotinylation was induced by incubation in biotinylation buffer.  Lysates of three SILAC conditions were pooled and biotinylated proteins were enriched on streptavidin magnetic sepharose. Beads were subjected to either harsh washing conditions or soft washing conditions. After elution, proteins were loaded on an 8-16% Tris-Glycine Mini Gel with 1x Lämmli. The gels were stained using Coomassie Stain and destained with water. Lanes were excised, the streptavidin band was separated and measured independently. Gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin, and desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using a 57 minute and 87 minute segmented gradient, respectively of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. In each scan cycle, the 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105 charges, and for the MS scan 3×106 charges.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 or 1.6.14.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot). In addition, depending on the experiment, data were searched against the sequences of NLS-Halo-eGFP-BASU, NES-Halo-eGFP-BASU, NLS-SNAP-eGFP-BASU, and SNAP-eGFP-BASU, respectively. For isASO-ID, data were searched against the sequences of Halo-BASU-His or SNAP-BASU-His, depending on the experiment. In database search, full trypsin digestion specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. The amino acids Lys4/Arg6 and Lys8/Arg10 were defined as medium and heavy labels, respectively. For protein group quantitation a minimum of two quantified peptides were required. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Live cell, Bioid, Proximity biotinylation, Bet inhibitors, In situ biotinylation, Biotin ligase, Silac, Hdac inhibitors, Antisense oligonucleotide, Basu, Drug protein interactome

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Stafforst
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


