### Accession
PXD003360

### Title
Biochemical partitioning of RNA collectives  reveals ProQ as a global RNA chaperone in bacteria

### Description
The vast number of noncoding RNAs in bacteria suggests that major post-transcriptional circuits beyond those controlled by the global RNA-binding proteins Hfq and CsrA may exist. To identify additional globally acting RNPs we have developed a method (gradient profiling by sequencing; Grad-seq) to partition the full ensemble of cellular RNAs based on their biochemical behavior. Consequently, we discovered transcripts that commonly interact with the osmoregulatory protein ProQ in Salmonella enterica. We show that ProQ is a conserved abundant RNA-binding protein with a wide range of targets, including a new class of ProQ-associated small RNAs that are highly structured and function to regulate mRNAs in trans. Based on its ability to chart the functional landscape of all cellular transcripts irrespective of their length and sequence diversity, Grad-seq promises to aid the discovery of major functional RNA classes and RNA-binding proteins in many organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample (gradient fraction or affinity chromatography pull-down) was subjected to one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. We followed the protocol published in (Bonn et al., 2014) with minor modifications. In brief, each of the 20 gel lanes was cut into 10 equidistant pieces and subjected to tryptic digestion. Eluted peptides were then loaded and desalted on a self-packed reversed phase C18 column using a Proxeon EasynLC II. Peptides were separated in a binary gradient of 85 minutes from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile; buffer A: (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid)) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS and MS/MS data were recorded with an LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo) coupled online to the LC- setup. Each scan cycle consisted of a survey scan with a resolution of R = 30,000 in the Orbitrap section followed by dependent scans (MS/MS) of the five most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of the MS/MS ‘*.raw’ data was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST (ThermoFinnigan; version v.27, rev. 11) against the S. enterica strain SL1344 using a target decoy protein sequence database (complete proteome set of S. enterica strain SL1344 with a set of common laboratory contaminants). The resulting out files were compiled with Scaffold 4. Proteins were only considered as identified if at least 2 unique peptides matching quality criteria (delta cN > 0.1 and XCorr > 2.2; 3.5; 3.75 for doubly, triply or higher charged peptides) have been identified. For reconstruction of in-gradient profiles, only proteins with ≥5 spectral counts in at least one fraction were retrieved. The raw spectral counts were then normalized by the total number of spectral counts in each fraction and multiplied by the intensity of the Coomassie staining across the corresponding lane.

### Publication Abstract
The functional annotation of transcriptomes and identification of noncoding RNA (ncRNA) classes has been greatly facilitated by the advent of next-generation RNA sequencing which, by reading the nucleotide order of transcripts, theoretically allows the rapid profiling of all transcripts in a cell. However, primary sequence per se is a poor predictor of function, as ncRNAs dramatically vary in length and structure and often lack identifiable motifs. Therefore, to visualize an informative RNA landscape of organisms with potentially new RNA biology that are emerging from microbiome and environmental studies requires the use of more functionally relevant criteria. One such criterion is the association of RNAs with functionally important cognate RNA-binding proteins. Here we analyze the full ensemble of cellular RNAs using gradient profiling by sequencing (Grad-seq) in the bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica, partitioning its coding and noncoding transcripts based on their network of RNA-protein interactions. In addition to capturing established RNA classes based on their biochemical profiles, the Grad-seq approach enabled the discovery of an overlooked large collective of structured small RNAs that form stable complexes with the conserved protein ProQ. We show that ProQ is an abundant RNA-binding protein with a wide range of ligands and a global influence on Salmonella gene expression. Given its generic ability to chart a functional RNA landscape irrespective of transcript length and sequence diversity, Grad-seq promises to define functional RNA classes and major RNA-binding proteins in both model species and genetically intractable organisms.

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica, Ncrna

### Affiliations
Andreas Otto, Institute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University of Greifswald, F.-L. Jahnstrasse 15, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Andreas Otto, Institute for Microbiology, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University of Greifswald, F.-L. Jahnstrasse 15, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


