### Accession
PXD034588

### Title
Splenectomy of patients with hereditary spherocytosis improves erythrocyte functionality in a septin-dependent manner

### Description
Splenectomy improves clinical parameters of patients with hereditary spherocytosis but its potential benefit to red blood cell (RBC) morphology and deformability and the mechanism behind remain unknown. We here compared 7 non-splenectomized and 12 splenectomized patients with mutations in the β-spectrin (SPTB) or the ankyrin (ANK1) gene. We showed that hematological parameters, spherocyte abundance, osmotic fragility, intracellular calcium and extracellular vesicle release were largely restored by splenectomy, but cryohemolysis was not. To elucidate the only partial improvement of RBC morphology and deformability by splenectomy, we performed a quantative proteomic analysis and cytoskeleton characterization. Patients exhibited decreased ankyrin and/or β-spectrin contents but the extent of RBC alteration only slightly and negatively correlated with the ankyrin and not with β-spectrin content nor membrane association. In contrast, patients exhibited increased abundance of septins, small GTP-binding cytoskeletal proteins involved  in cytokinesis. Among the four septins detected, septins-2,7 and 8 but not 11 were less abundant upon splenectomy and correlated with the disease severity. The septin increase was accompanied by exacerbated oxidative stress especially in the non splenectomized patients. Except cryohemolysis, all the RBC morphology and deformability alterations and oxidative stress correlated with septin content. Impairments can result from RBC maturation defects since endoplasmic reticulum remnants were found in RBCs from non-splenectomized patients and lysosomal and mitochondrial remnants in splenectomised patients. The correlation between septin abundance and disease severity opens the way towards using septins as disease biomarkers. Moreover, the absence of restoration of septin-independent cryohemolysis by splenectomy could question its systematic recommendation

### Sample Protocol
RBC ghosts were prepared and samples further processed for mass spectrometry and relative quantification by TMT labeling  as in Pollet et al. Biomolecules 2020;10(8)

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed through Proteome Discoverer 2.5 using Sequest for protein identification and TMTpro 16plex for relative quantification. Reporter ion intensities where further analysed as described below.For proteomic data analysis, it was unavoidable to only include a subgroup of splenectomized patients for comparison with the non-splenectomized cohort, due to the imbalance between the number of splenectomized and non-splenectomized patients resulting into a confounding effect (with the group of patients effect (control or disease)) in statistical analysis. Among those splenectomized patients, P12 and P19 were chosen because they belong to the same family than splenectomized P13 and P21. Proteomic data analysis was conducted in R [R Core Team, 2021]. Proteins with more than 60 % of missing values were excluded, as well as keratins. Using these criteria, a total of 1000 proteins were selected. The expression values were log2 transformed and median normalized. The differential expression between splenectomized and non-splenectomized patients, identified as the splenectomy effect where the absence of splenectomy (indicated by “no”) is the reference level, was statistically assessed through linear models using empirical Bayes methods for variance modelling, as implemented in the Bioconductor limma package. Besides the splenectomy effect, a quantitative storage effect was included, representing the time of sampling storage in months, as well as a categorical effect corresponding to the group of patients (control or disease). P-values for the splenectomy effect were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure. Proteins having a splenectomy effect with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were deemed differentially expressed between splenectomized and non-splenectomized patients

### Publication Abstract
Splenectomy improves the clinical parameters of patients with hereditary spherocytosis, but its potential benefit to red blood cell (RBC) functionality and the mechanism behind this benefit remain largely overlooked. Here, we compared 7 nonsplenectomized and 13 splenectomized patients with mutations in the &#x3b2;-spectrin or the ankyrin gene. We showed that hematological parameters, spherocyte abundance, osmotic fragility, intracellular calcium, and extracellular vesicle release were largely but not completely restored by splenectomy, whereas cryohemolysis was not. Affected RBCs exhibited decreases in &#x3b2;-spectrin and/or ankyrin contents and slight alterations in spectrin membrane distribution, depending on the mutation. These modifications were found in both splenectomized and nonsplenectomized patients and poorly correlated with RBC functionality alteration, suggesting additional impairments. Accordingly, we found an increased abundance of septins, small guanosine triphosphate-binding cytoskeletal proteins. Septins-2, -7, and -8 but not -11 were less abundant upon splenectomy and correlated with the disease severity. Septin-2 membrane association was confirmed by immunolabeling. Except for cryohemolysis, all parameters of RBC morphology and functionality correlated with septin abundance. The increased septin content might result from RBC maturation defects, as evidenced by (1) the decreased protein 4.2 and Rh-associated glycoprotein content in all patient RBCs, (2) increased endoplasmic reticulum remnants and endocytosis proteins in nonsplenectomized patients, and (3) increased lysosomal and mitochondrial remnants in splenectomized patients. Our study paves the way for a better understanding of the involvement of septins in RBC membrane biophysical properties. In addition, the lack of restoration of septin-independent cryohemolysis by splenectomy may call into question its recommendation in specific cases.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Rbc maturation, Calcium, Spectrin network, Red blood cell fragility, Extracellular vesicle release, Ankyrin

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
CELL Unit & PICT Imaging Platform, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, UCL B1.75.05, Avenue Hippocrate, 75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. Phone: +32-2-764.75.91; Fax: +32-2-764.75.43

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Donatienne Tyteca
CELL Unit & PICT Imaging Platform, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, UCL B1.75.05, Avenue Hippocrate, 75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. Phone: +32-2-764.75.91; Fax: +32-2-764.75.43


