### Accession
PXD025430

### Title
Biogenesis of hepatitis B virus e antigen is driven by translocon-associated protein complex and regulated by conserved cysteine residues within its signal peptide sequence

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) uses e antigen (HBe) which is dispensable for virus infectivity to modulate host immune responses and to achieve viral persistence in human hepatocytes. The HBe precursor (p25) is directed to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where cleavage of the signal peptide (sp) gives rise to the first processing product, p22. The p22 can be retro-translocated back to the cytosol or it can enter the secretory pathway and undergo a second cleavage event resulting in secreted p17 (HBe). Here, we report that translocation of p25 precursor is promoted by translocon-associated protein complex (TRAP). We found that p25 is not completely translocated into the ER since a fraction of p25 is phosphorylated and remains present in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Within the sp sequence of p25 we identified three cysteine residues which control the efficiency of sp cleavage and correct subcellular distribution of the precore pool.  Highlights • A fraction of the HBV e antigen precursor p25 is not translocated into the ER and is phosphorylated in cytosol. • Cysteine residues in the signal peptide sequence regulate the p25 N-terminal processing and resulting p22 intracellular level. • Mutations of all three Cys residues within the signal peptide lead to a mislocalization of intracellular precore protein. • P25 translocation requires assistance of TRAP complex for an efficient mature HBe secretion. • The depletion of individual TRAP subunits results in a change of precore subcellular distribution.

### Sample Protocol
Cells co-transfected with either HBe-HA or HBe3CA-HA constructs and DNA encoding individual TRAP c-myc tagged subunits were 48 h post transfection lysed for 1 h in Co-IP buffer (50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5% DOC, pH 7.9) supplemented with Complete™ EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000g for 10 min and subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-HA magnetic beads for 2 h at 4 °C. Collected beads were washed by Co-IP buffer without DOC. Samples were boiled in 2x sample buffer for 5 min to elute the proteins and analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by western blot using anti c-myc antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, C3956). Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). The detailed sample preparation was described previously (Langerová et al., 2020). Briefly, HBe-HA producing cells were treated for 4 h with Brefeldin A (5µg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) and harvested in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Hepes, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Nonidet P40, pH 7.9. HA-tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated using anti-HA beads, washed, eluted by HA peptide (0.5 mg/mL), and fragmented using chymotrypsin. The resulting peptides were separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Mass Spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were trapped and desalted with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 30 μL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 column (5 μm, 5 mm by 300-μm internal diameter (ID); Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (2 μm, 50-cm by 75-μm ID; ThermoFisher Scientific). The 125-min elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min was set to 5% phase B (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile) and 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) for the first 1 min. Then, the content of acetonitrile was increased gradually. The orbitrap mass range was set from m/z 350 to 2000, in the MS mode, and the instrument acquired fragmentation spectra for ions of m/z 100 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
A Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification using Sequest and Amanda as search engines and databases of sequences of HA-tagged HBe or HBe3CA, Swiss-Prot human proteins (downloaded on 15 February 2016), and common contaminants. The data were also searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) and the same set of protein databases in order to obtain peptide and protein intensities applied at the label-free quantification (LFQ) step. Perseus software (version 1.650, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) was used to perform LFQ comparison of three biological replicates of HA-tagged HBe (or HBe3CA) cells and three biological replicates of cells transfected with empty vector. The data were processed to compare the abundance of individual proteins by statistical tests in form of Student’s t-test and resulted in Volcano plot comparing the statistical significance and proteins abundance difference (Fold change)

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus uses e antigen (HBe), which is dispensable for virus infectivity, to modulate host immune responses and achieve viral persistence in human hepatocytes. The HBe precursor (p25) is directed to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where cleavage of the signal peptide (sp) gives rise to the first processing product, p22. P22 can be retro-translocated back to the cytosol or enter the secretory pathway and undergo a second cleavage event, resulting in secreted p17 (HBe). Here, we report that translocation of p25 to the ER is promoted by translocon-associated protein complex. We have found that p25 is not completely translocated into the ER; a fraction of p25 is phosphorylated and remains in the cytoplasm and nucleus. Within the p25 sp sequence, we have identified three cysteine residues that control the efficiency of sp cleavage and contribute to proper subcellular distribution of the precore pool.

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus, Er translocation, Cysteine residues, Signal peptide, Hbe, Hbv precore protein, Trap complex

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science
Institute of organic chemistry and biochemistry, CAS, Prague, Czech republic

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubálek
Institute of organic chemistry and biochemistry, CAS, Prague, Czech republic


