### Accession
PXD004977

### Title
Enabling phenotypic drug discovery for neurological mitochondrial DNA disorders with patient-derived neural progenitor cells

### Description
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations predominantly cause neurological diseases. Searching for therapeutic strategies is hindered by the absence of viable neural model systems due to the challenges of engineering mtDNA. We demonstrate that neural progenitor cells (NPCs), rapidly obtained from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), retain the parental mtDNA profile and exhibit mitochondrial maturation coupled with a metabolic switch away from glycolysis. Altered calcium homeostasis and mitochondrial hyperpolarization, both potential causes of neural impairment, were observed in iPSC-derived NPCs from patients carrying a deleterious homoplasmic mutation in the mitochondrial gene MT-ATP6 (m.9185T>C). Phenotype-based high-content screenings (HCS) with FDA-approved compounds were carried out, leading to the identification of possible innovative counteracting agents. We propose iPSC-derived NPCs, displaying mild proliferative properties and proper genotype/metabotype, as a bona fide model system for the establishment of personalized phenotypic drug discovery for untreatable mtDNA disorders affecting the nervous system. Associated GEO accession number: GSE70071.

### Sample Protocol
Four control NPC lines (NI H1, NI H9, NI TFBJ, NI TFC1) and three ATP6-NPCs (NI A1, NI A2, NI A3) were harvested and lysed under denaturing conditions in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 8.0. Lysates were sonicated and boiled at 95°C, each for 5 min. Proteins were precipitated in 100% acetone ON at -20°C and re-dissolved in a buffer containing 6 M GdmCL, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. A dilution buffer (10% ACN, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5) in the ratio 1:10 (lysate:buffer) was added. 1% of the total lysates were finally digested by 1 µg trypsin at 37°C, ON. Peptides were acidified with a final concentration of 1% FA. 10% of the digest was directly used for LC-MS/MS analysis, the remaining 90% were further fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography with the following 5 SCX buffers: 2, 3, 4, 5 and buffer X, according to (Kulak, et al. 2014). Dried fractions were dissolved in 5% ACN, 2% FA and subsequently injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC−MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 40 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID (New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 2.1-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) under controlled temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted using a non-linear gradient from 2 to 40% solvent B over 180 min at a flow rate of 266 nL/min (solvent A: 99.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid). 3kV were applied for nanoelectrospray generation. A cycle of one full FT scan mass spectrum (300−1700 m/z, resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans with normalized collision energy of 25 eV. In order to avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. (see paper)

### Data Protocol
The label-free software MaxLFQ (Cox, et al. 2014), which is integrated into MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.0) , was used for quantification (Cox and Mann 2008) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 88.717 entries, released in 11/2014. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations frequently cause neurological diseases. Modeling of these defects has been difficult because of the challenges associated with engineering mtDNA. We show here that neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) retain the parental mtDNA profile and exhibit a metabolic switch toward oxidative phosphorylation. NPCs derived in this way from patients carrying a deleterious homoplasmic mutation in the mitochondrial gene MT-ATP6 (m.9185T&gt;C) showed defective ATP production and abnormally high mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), plus altered calcium homeostasis, which represents a potential cause of neural impairment. High-content screening of FDA-approved drugs using the MMP phenotype highlighted avanafil, which we found was able to partially rescue the calcium defect in patient NPCs and differentiated neurons. Overall, our results show that iPSC-derived NPCs provide an effective model for drug screening to target mtDNA disorders that affect the nervous system.

### Keywords
Neural progenitors; npcs; ipscs; mitochondrial disorders; mtdna mutations; mt-atp6

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany
MDC

### Submitter
Barbara Mlody

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Prigione
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany


