### Accession
PXD044150

### Title
GSK3 phosphorylation sites in Lpd

### Description
Neural crest cells are multipotent cells that delaminate from the neuroepithelium, migrating throughout the embryo. Aberrant migration causes developmental defects. Animal models are improving our understanding of neural crest anomalies, but in vivo migration behaviours are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that murine neural crest cells display actin-based lamellipodia and filopodia in vivo. Using neural crest-specific knockouts or inhibitors, we show that the serine-threonine kinase Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 (GSK3), and the cytoskeletal regulator Lamellipodin (Lpd), are required for lamellipodia formation whilst preventing focal adhesion maturation. Lpd is a novel substrate of GSK3 and phosphorylation of Lpd favours interactions with the Scar/WAVE complex (lamellipodia formation) at the expense of VASP and Mena interactions (adhesion maturation and filopodia formation). This improved understanding of cytoskeletal regulation in mammalian neural crest migration has general implications for neural crest anomalies and cancer.

### Sample Protocol
12 x 106 HEK293FT cells were plated in 15 cm diameter dishes. After 24 hours, cells were transfected using a calcium phosphate protocol with the following conditions: Lpd-EGFP (45 µg pCAG-Lpd-EGFP, 5 µg pBSII KS-), Lpd-EGFP + GSK3 inhibitor (45 µg pCAG-Lpd-EGFP, 5 µg pBSII KS-) and Lpd-EGFP + dominant active (DA)-GSK3b (45 µg pCAG-Lpd-EGFP, 5  µg pCDNA3-hsS9A-GSK3b-HA). 24 hours after transfection, the Lpd + GSK3 inhibitor condition was treated with 1 µM 6-bromoindirubin-3-oxime (BIO) for 24h. 48 hours after transfection, cells were lysed in GST buffer (10% Glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2). Samples were incubated with pre-blocked (1% BSA-GST) GFP-Trap® beads for 2 hours at 4°C for pulldown. Following washes with GST buffer, the pulldown samples were re-suspended in 2x sample buffer and run on 6% Novex WedgeWell™ Tris-Glycine mini protein gels at 225 V for 45 min before Colloidal Coomassie staining (Severn Biotech). Following de-staining (HPLC-grade water), the protein band corresponding to Lpd-EGFP (approximately 230 kDa) was excised and in gel digestions completed using a tri-enzyme mix (trypsin-chymotrypsin-AspN). Collision-induced dissociation (CID) / electron transfer dissociation (CID/ETD) tandem mass spectrometry was then performed. Chromatographic separation was completed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75 mm C18 Pepmap column (50 cm length) using a three-step linear gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 60 min starting at 5% B (0-5 minutes) and increasing solvent to 40% B (5-40 minutes) prior to a wash step at 99% B (40-45 minutes) followed by an equilibration step at 5% B (45-60 minutes). The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) operating under Xcalibur v4.3. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using an Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3 second cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation by collision induced dissociation. Orbitrap spectra (FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 375-1600 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4.0e5 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Monoisotopic precursor ions were filtered using charge state (+2 to +7) with an intensity threshold set between 5.0e3 to 1.0e20 and a dynamic exclusion window of 35 seconds ± 10 ppm. MS2 precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole set to a mass width filter of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap fragmentation spectra (ITMS2) were collected with an AGC target  setting of 1.0e4 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms with CID collision energy set at 35%. Neutral loss scans were performed to trigger fragmentation in the presence of phosphorylation with simultaneous triggering of ETD fragmentation scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data was processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.5 using Sequest algorithm searched against seqyuence specific database. Modifications included carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T & Y) and ubiquitination (K) as variable modifications. Processed msf files were uploaded to Scaffold software v5.1.2 (Proteome Software) for visualsation and manual veirifcation of PTM fragmentation assigned spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cid/etd tandem mass spectrometry, Lpd, Phosphorylation, Gsk3

### Affiliations
King's College London
Centre for Craniofacial & Regenerative Biology, King’s College London/ Randall Centre for Cell & Molecular Biophysics, King’s College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Karen J. Liu
Centre for Craniofacial & Regenerative Biology, King’s College London/ Randall Centre for Cell & Molecular Biophysics, King’s College London


