### Accession
PXD001564

### Title
Comparative proteomics of the ewe cerebrospinal fluid under long or short photoperiod

### Description
Photoperiod, the main physical synchronizer of seasonal functions, is now acknowledged as a key player for the modulation of molecule access to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). From previous work showing a different transfer rate from steroids or protein hormones from blood to CSF according to photoperiod and, a modulation of choroid plexus (CP) tight junction protein content with photoperiod, we hypothesized that CSF proteome under long days (LD) would differ from that of CSF sampled under short days (SD) in ovariectomized-estradiol replaced ewes. CSF protein expression variability between SD- or LD-treated ewes was therefore studied from pools of CSF collected for 48H from ewes of similar age and weight.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated, concentrated and included in a polyacrylamide gel without protein fractionation. After coloration with Coomassie blue, the SDS-PAGE lanes were sectioned into one band for each individual sample. Excised proteins were in-gel digested with bovine trypsin and analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS  using LTQ velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against the mammalia section of nr NCBI database (1426555 sequences, downloaded on 2013/05/13). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches. Mascot results obtained from the target and decoy databases searches were incorporated to Scaffold 4 software (version 4.4, Proteome Software, Portland, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Photoperiod is the main physical synchronizer of seasonal functions and a key factor in the modulation of molecule access to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in animals. Previous work has shown that photoperiod affects the transfer rate of steroids and protein hormones from blood to CSF and modulates choroid plexus tight junction protein content. We hypothesized that the CSF proteome would also be modified by photoperiod. We tested this hypothesis by comparing CSF obtained from the third ventricle of mature, ovariectomized, estradiol-replaced ewes exposed to long day length (LD) or short day length (SD). Variations in CSF protein expression between SD- or LD-treated ewes were studied in pools of CSF collected for 48&#xa0;h. Proteins were precipitated, concentrated, and included in a polyacrylamide gel without protein fractionation. After in-gel tryptic digestion of total protein samples, we analyzed the resulting peptides by nanoliquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC-MS/MS). Quantitative analysis was performed using 2 methods based on spectral counting and extracted ion chromatograms. Among 103 identified proteins, 41 were differentially expressed between LD and SD ewes (with P &lt; 0.05 and at least a 1.5-fold difference). Of the 41 differentially expressed proteins, 22 were identified by both methods and 19 using extracted ion chromatograms only. Eighteen proteins were more abundant in LD ewes and 23 were more abundant in SD ewes. These proteins are involved in numerous functions including hormone transport, immune system activity, metabolism, and angiogenesis. To confirm proteomic results, 2 proteins, pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) and gelsolin, for each individual sample of CSF collected under SD or LD were analyzed with Western blots. These results suggest an important photoperiod-dependent change in CSF proteome composition. Nevertheless, additional studies are required to assess the role of each protein in seasonal functions.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
INRA-Nouzilly-PRC
Ph. D, HDR Responsable de l’équipe « Neurobiologie intégrative de la reproduction »- ER2 NIGER UMR 7247 INRA-CNRS-Univ. Tours-IFCE Centre INRA de Tours, PRC F-37380 Nouzilly France

### Submitter
G HARICHAUX

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Dufourny
Ph. D, HDR Responsable de l’équipe « Neurobiologie intégrative de la reproduction »- ER2 NIGER UMR 7247 INRA-CNRS-Univ. Tours-IFCE Centre INRA de Tours, PRC F-37380 Nouzilly France


