### Accession
PXD003674

### Title
The CLASP2 Protein Interaction Network in Adipocytes Links CLIP2 to AGAP3, CLASP2 to G2L1, MARK2, and SOGA1, and Identifies SOGA1 as a Microtubule-Associated Protein

### Description
CLASP2 is a microtubule-associated protein that undergoes insulin-stimulated phosphorylation and co-localization with reorganized actin and GLUT4 at the plasma membrane. To gain insight to the role of CLASP2 in this system, we developed and successfully executed a streamlined interactome approach and built a CLASP2 protein network in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Using two different commercially available antibodies for CLASP2 and an antibody for epitope-tagged, overexpressed CLASP2, we performed multiple affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) experiments in combination with label-free quantitative proteomics and analyzed the data with the bioinformatics tool Significance Analysis of Interactome (SAINT). We discovered that CLASP2 co-immunoprecipitates (co-IPs) the novel protein SOGA1, the microtubule-associated protein kinase MARK2, and the microtubule/actin-regulating protein G2L1. The GTPase-activating proteins AGAP1 and AGAP3 were also enriched in the CLASP2 interactome, although subsequent AGAP3 and CLIP2 interactome analysis suggests a preference of AGAP3 for CLIP2. Follow-up MARK2 interactome analysis confirmed reciprocal co-IP of CLASP2 and also revealed MARK2 can co-IP SOGA1, glycogen synthase, and glycogenin. Investigating the SOGA1 interactome confirmed SOGA1 can reciprocal co-IP both CLASP2 and MARK2 as well as glycogen synthase and glycogenin. SOGA1 was confirmed to colocalize with CLASP2 and also with tubulin, which identifies SOGA1 as a new microtubule-associated protein. These results introduce the metabolic function of these proposed novel protein networks and their relationship with microtubules as new fields of cytoskeleton-associated protein biology.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain. For the interactome experiments, each lane of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into either seven or eight slices (the number of slices was consistent for each specific protein’s interactome),placed in a 0.6 mL LoBind polypropylene tube, destained twice with 375 ul of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 40 mm NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% ACN for 15 min. After removal of the ACN by aspiration, the gel pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 60 °C for 30 min. Trypsin (250 ng) in 20 ul of 40 mM NH4HCO3 was added, and the samples were maintained at 4 °C for 15 min prior to the addition of 50-100 ul of 40 mM NH4HCO3. The digestion was allowed to proceed at 37 °C overnight and was terminated by addition of 10 ul of 5% formic acid (FA). After further incubation at 37 °C for 30 min and centrifugation for 1 min, each supernatant was transferred to a clean LoBind polypropylene tube. The extraction procedure was repeated using 40 ul of 0.5% FA, and the two extracts were combined and dried down to approximately 5-10 uL followed by the addition of 10 uL 0.05% heptafluorobutyric acid:5% FA (v/v) and incubation at room temperature for 15 min. The resulting peptide mixtures were loaded on a solid phase C18 ZipTip and washed with 35 uL 0.005% heptafluorobutyric acid:5% FA (v/v) followed by elution first with 4 ul of 50% ACN:1% FA (v/v) and then a more stringent elution with 4 ul of 80% ACN:1% FA (v/v). The eluates were combined and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation and 6 ul of 0.1% FA (v/v) was added followed by sonication for 2 min. 2.5 ul of the final sample was then analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS was performed in positive ion mode on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite Velos Pro hybrid mass spectrometer fitted with an EASYSpray Source. NanoLC was performed using a Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System with an EASY Spray C18 LC column (50cm x 75 μm inner diameter, packed with PepMap RSLC C18 material, 2 um, cat. #ES803, Thermo Scientific); loading phase for 15 min; mobile phase, linear gradient of 1–47% ACN in 0.1% FA in 106 min, followed by a step to 95% ACN in 0.1% FA over 5 min, hold 10 min, and then a step to 1% ACN in 0.1% FA over 1 min and a final hold for 19 min (total run 156 min); Buffer A = 100% H2O in 0.1% FA; Buffer B = 100% ACN in 0.1% FA; flow rate, 300 nl/min. All solvents were liquid chromatography mass spectrometry grade. Spectra were acquired using XCalibur, version 2.1.0(Thermo Scientific). A “top 15” data-dependent MS/MS analysis was performed (acquisition of a full scan spectrum followed by collision-induced dissociation mass spectra of the 15 most abundant ions in the survey scan). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 sec, an exclusion list size of 500, and an exclusion duration of 40 sec. Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were then searched against the mouse SwissProt_2015_08 database (16,724 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.0) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.0; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA), and the Scaffold reported decoy false discovery rate across all sixteen samples in the CLASP2 Antibody #1 interactome experiments was 0.19%, which is representative of typical rates calculated throughout the remainder of the interactome experiments. Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made through the use of Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered.

### Publication Abstract
CLASP2 is a microtubule-associated protein that undergoes insulin-stimulated phosphorylation and co-localization with reorganized actin and GLUT4 at the plasma membrane. To gain insight to the role of CLASP2 in this system, we developed and successfully executed a streamlined interactome approach and built a CLASP2 protein network in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Using two different commercially available antibodies for CLASP2 and an antibody for epitope-tagged, overexpressed CLASP2, we performed multiple affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) experiments in combination with label-free quantitative proteomics and analyzed the data with the bioinformatics tool Significance Analysis of Interactome (SAINT). We discovered that CLASP2 coimmunoprecipitates (co-IPs) the novel protein SOGA1, the microtubule-associated protein kinase MARK2, and the microtubule/actin-regulating protein G2L1. The GTPase-activating proteins AGAP1 and AGAP3 were also enriched in the CLASP2 interactome, although subsequent AGAP3 and CLIP2 interactome analysis suggests a preference of AGAP3 for CLIP2. Follow-up MARK2 interactome analysis confirmed reciprocal co-IP of CLASP2 and revealed MARK2 can co-IP SOGA1, glycogen synthase, and glycogenin. Investigating the SOGA1 interactome confirmed SOGA1 can reciprocal co-IP both CLASP2 and MARK2 as well as glycogen synthase and glycogenin. SOGA1 was confirmed to colocalize with CLASP2 and with tubulin, which identifies SOGA1 as a new microtubule-associated protein. These results introduce the metabolic function of these proposed novel protein networks and their relationship with microtubules as new fields of cytoskeleton-associated protein biology.

### Keywords
Clip2, G2l1, Ap-ms, Interactome, Clasp2, Agap3, Saint, Soga1, Mark2

### Affiliations
University of Arizona, College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Endocrinology Division
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Paul R. Langlais
University of Arizona, College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Endocrinology Division


