### Accession
PXD042266

### Title
Direct mass spectrometry-based detection and antibody sequencing of Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance from patient serum

### Description
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a plasma cell disorder, leading to the presence of monoclonal antibody (i.e., M-protein) in serum, without clinical symptoms. Here we present a case study in which we detect MGUS by liquid-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS) profiling of IgG1 in human serum. We detected a Fab-glycosylated M-protein and determined the full heavy and light chain sequences by bottom-up proteomics techniques using multiple proteases, further validated by top-down LC-MS. Moreover, the composition and location of the Fab-glycan could be determined in CDR1 of the heavy chain.

### Sample Protocol
IgG purification and Fab production: Analysis was performed by reversed-phase LC-MS using a Vanquish Flex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument. Chromatographic separation was performed on a 1 x 150 mm MAbPac column at 80 °C and using a flow rate of 150 µL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of MilliQ water with 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were run starting with a 10%-25% B ramp with the spray voltage turned off for 2 minutes to wash away salts. This was followed by a 54 min linear gradient of 25%-40% B, a 95% B wash and re-equilibration at 10% B. The mass spectrometer was operated at low pressure setting in Intact Protein mode at a set resolution of 7,500 at 200 m/z. For every scan, 5 µscans were acquired with an m/z range of 500 - 4,000 using an AGC target of 300% with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The RF lens was set to 40% and a source fragmentation energy of 15 V was used.  Bottom-up proteomics: Fab (3 μg/lane) was loaded on a 4%-12% Bis-Tris precast gel in non-reducing conditions and run at 120 V in 3-Morpholinopropane-1-sulfonic acid (MOPS) buffer. Bands were visualized with Imperial Protein Stain, and the size of the fragments evaluated by running a protein standard ladder. The Fab bands were cut and reduced by 10 mM TCEP at 37°C, then alkylated in 40 mM IAA at RT in the dark, followed by alkylation in 40 mM IAA at RT in the dark. The Fab bands were digested by trypsin, chymotrypsin, thermolysin, and alpha lytic protease at 37 °C overnight in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The peptides were extracted with two steps incubation at RT in 50% ACN, and 0.01% TFA, and then 100% ACN respectively. The peptides were dried in speed-vac. To obtain the sequence of the glycosylated Fab, the N-linked glycan was removed by PNGaseF at 37 °C overnight then in gel digested as described above.    The digested peptides were separated by online reversed phase chromatography on an Dionex UltiMate 3000 (column packed with Poroshell 120 EC C18; dimensions 50 cm × 75 μm, 2.7 μm, Agilent Technologies) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer or Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer. Samples were eluted over a 90 min gradient from 0 to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Peptides were analyzed with a resolution setting of 60 000 in MS1. MS1 scans were obtained with a standard automatic gain control (AGC) target, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a scan range of 350–2000. The precursors were selected with a 3 m/z window and fragmented by stepped high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) and electron-transfer higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD). The stepped HCD fragmentation included steps of 25, 35, and 50% normalized collision energies (NCE). EThcD fragmentation was performed with calibrated charge-dependent electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) parameters and 27% NCE supplemental activation. For both fragmentation types, MS2 scans were acquired at a 30 000 resolution, a 4e5 AGC target, a 250 ms maximum injection time, and a scan range of 120–3500.  MD proteomics: The reduced Fab was freshly prepared by incubating with TCEP at 60°C for 30 min before injecting to MS. Around 1 μg sample was used for a single measurement. Reduced Fab was measured by LC-MS/MS. Samples were loaded on a Thermo Scientific Vanquish Flex UHPLC instrument, equipped with a 1 mm x 150 mm MAbPac RP analytical column, directly coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid. The samples were eluted over 22 min at a 150 μL/min flow rate. Gradient elution was achieved by using two mobile phases A (0.1% HCOOH in Milli-Q) and B (0.1% HCOOH in CH3CN) and ramping up B from 10 to 25% over one minute, from 25 to 40% over 14 min, and from 40 to 95% over one minute. MS data were collected with the instrument operating in Intact Protein and Low Pressure mode. Spray voltage was set at 3.5 kV, capillary temperature 350 °C, probe heater temperature 100 °C, sheath gas flow 15, auxiliary gas flow 5, and source-induced dissociation was set at 15 V.  Separate Fab chains were analyzed with a resolution setting of 120,000. MS1 scans were acquired in a range of 500-3,000 Th with the 250% AGC target and a maximum injection time set to either 50 ms for the 7,500 resolution or 250 ms for the 120,000 resolution. In MS1, 2 μscans were recorded for the 7,500 resolution and 5 μscans for the 120,000 resolution per scan. Data-dependent mode was defined by the number of scans: single scan for intact Fabs and two scans for separate Fab chains. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, a maximum injection time of 500 ms, a 1,000% AGC target, and 5 μscans averaged and recorded per scan for the separate Fab chains. The EThcD active was set at true. The ions of interest were mass-selected by quadrupole in a 4 Th isolation window and accumulated to the AGC target prior to fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
IgG1 clonal profiling: Raw data were processed by sliding window deconvolution using the ReSpect algorithm in BioPharma Finder v3.2 (Thermo Fisher). Further analysis was performed using an in-house python library described by Bondt et al. Components with masses between 45,000 and 53,000 Da, most intense charge states above m/z 1,000, and a Score of over 40 were considered valid Fab identifications.  Peptide Sequencing from MS/MS Spectra: MS/MS spectra were used to determine de novo peptide sequences using PEAKS Studio X (version 10.6). We used a tolerance of 20 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS1 and 0.02 Da for MS2, respectively. Carboxymethylation was set as fixed modification of cysteine and variable modification of peptide N-termini and lysine. Oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, pyroglutamic acid modification of N-terminal glutamic acid, and glutamine were set as additional variable modifications. The CSV file containing all the de novo sequenced peptides was exported for further analysis.    Template-based assembly via Stitch: Stitch (1.1.2) was used for the template-based assembly. The human antibody database from IMGT was used as template. The cutoff score for the de novo sequenced peptide was set as 90/70 and the cutoff score for the template matchin¬¬g was set as 10. All the peptides supporting the sequences were examined manually. The ions for annotation of the CDR regions were exported and visualized by Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator.  Glycoproteomics data analysis: Chymotryptic digested peptides were used to search for site specific glycosylation via Byonic (v5.0.3). The de novo obtained sequences were selected as protein database. Four missed cleavages were permitted using C-terminal cleavage at WFMLY for chymotrypsin. Carboxymethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine/tryptophan as variable rare 1, Gln to pyro-Glu and Glu to pyro-glu on the N-temmius of protein as rare 1, and N-glycan modifications were set as variable rare 1. The N-glycan 132 human database from Byonic was applied in the search. All reported glycopeptides in the Byonic result files were manually inspected for quality of fragment assignments.  MD proteomics: MS/MS spectra were used to validate the sequences using LC-MS Spectator (Version 1.1.8313.28552) and ProSight Lite (1.4.8). In LC-MS Spectator, we used a tolerance of 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2, respectively and applied the S/N thereshold filtering (1.5). All the annotated ions were exported and visualized in ProSight Lite.

### Publication Abstract
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a plasma cell disorder characterized by the presence of a predominant monoclonal antibody (i.e., M-protein) in serum, without clinical symptoms. Here we present a case study in which we detect MGUS by liquid-chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS) profiling of IgG1 in human serum. We detected a Fab-glycosylated M-protein and determined the full heavy and light chain sequences by bottom-up proteomics techniques using multiple proteases, further validated by top-down LC-MS. Moreover, the composition and location of the Fab-glycan could be determined in CDR1 of the heavy chain. The outlined approach adds to an expanding mass spectrometry-based toolkit to characterize monoclonal gammopathies such as MGUS and multiple myeloma, with fine molecular detail. The ability to detect monoclonal gammopathies and determine M-protein sequences straight from blood samples by mass spectrometry provides new opportunities to understand the molecular mechanisms of such diseases.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Antibody, M-protein, De novo

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Utrecht University


