### Accession
PXD017505

### Title
Autofluorescence positive and negative microglia constitute novel subsets found in healthy brain.

### Description
Utilizing autofluorescence (AF) as a discriminating parameter, we identified two novel microglia subsets in both mice, termed autofluorescence-positive (AF+) and negative (AF-), and characterized them by label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Direct lysis in urea of 750,000 micoglia per sample, reduction alkylation with IAA, in solution tryptic digestion, label-free single shot analysis on Orbitrap Fusion-Lumos

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in MaxQuant  Version 1.6.0.16 and searched with Andromeda against a comprehensive SwissProt release for mouse with a false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide and protein level. Identifications of MS1 features were transferred between samples using the Match Between Runs option with a 0.2 min matching tolerance. Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
To date, microglia subsets in the healthy CNS have not been identified. Utilizing autofluorescence (AF) as a discriminating parameter, we identified two novel microglia subsets in both mice and non-human primates, termed autofluorescence-positive (AF<sup>+</sup>) and negative (AF<sup>-</sup>). While their proportion remained constant throughout most adult life, the AF signal linearly and specifically increased in AF<sup>+</sup> microglia with age and correlated with a commensurate increase in size and complexity of lysosomal storage bodies, as detected by transmission electron microscopy and LAMP1 levels. Post-depletion repopulation kinetics revealed AF<sup>-</sup> cells as likely precursors of AF<sup>+</sup> microglia. At the molecular level, the proteome of AF<sup>+</sup> microglia showed overrepresentation of endolysosomal, autophagic, catabolic, and mTOR-related proteins. Mimicking the effect of advanced aging, genetic disruption of lysosomal function accelerated the accumulation of storage bodies in AF<sup>+</sup> cells and led to impaired microglia physiology and cell death, suggestive of a mechanistic convergence between aging and lysosomal storage disorders.

### Keywords
Storage-bodies, Autofluorescence, Aging, Lipofuscin, Autophagy, Microglia

### Affiliations
Biogen Inc.
Biogen

### Submitter
Dirk Walther

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Walther
Biogen Inc.


