### Accession
PXD024893

### Title
Online-2D nanoLC-MS for crude serum proteome profiling: assessing sample preparation impact on proteome composition

### Description
Although current LC-MS technology permits scientists to efficiently screen clinical samples in translational research, e.g. steroids, biogenic amines and even plasma or serum proteomes, in a daily routine, maintaining the balance between throughput and analytical depth is still a limiting factor. A typical approach to enhance the proteome depth is employing offline 2-dimensional (2D) fractionation techniques before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. These additional sample preparation steps usually require extensive sample manipulation, which could result in sample alteration and sample loss. The consequent results variability increase the risk of false discovery, regardless of time-intensive sample preparation workload. Here we present and compare 1D-nanoLC-MS with an automated online-2D high-pH RP x low pH RP separation method for deep proteome profiling using a nanoLC system coupled to a high-resolution accurate-mass mass spectrometer. The proof-of-principle study permitted the identification of ca. 500 proteins with ~10,000 peptides in 15 enzymatically digested crude serum samples collected from healthy donors in 3 laboratories across Europe. The developed method identified  60% more peptides in comparison with conventional 1D nanoLC-MS/SM analysis with ca. 4 times lower throughput while retaining the quantitative information. Serum sample preparation artifacts were revealed by applying unsupervised classification techniques, and, therefore, must be taken into account while planning multicentric biomarker discovery and validation studies. Overall, this novel method reduces sample complexity and boosts the number of peptide and protein identifications without the need for extra sample handling procedures for samples equivalent to less than 1 µL of blood, which expands the space for potential biomarker discovery by looking deeper into the composition of biofluids.

### Sample Protocol
The serum preparation at each collection site had several differences. Seven plasma samples from (i) healthy donors (n=4) and (ii) CIN0 patients (n=3) were collected at UMCG in an additive- and gel-free glass tube BD Vacutainer Glass Serum Tube, 7ml (BD 367615) and clotted from 2 to 8 hours at 20°C followed by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 10 min at room temperature according to previously described procedure23. Three samples from Lund University were collected BD Vacutainer 8.5 mL SST(TM) II PET tube with clot activator (silica) and separating gel (BD 367953) and clotted from 30 min to 2 hours at 20°C followed by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The samples from SeraLab were collected in a bleed bag unit (manufacturer not specified) centrifuged at 2,800 g for 20 min at 5°C after an overnight clotting step at 4°C. All serum samples were stored at −80°C in aliquots until analysis. All intermediate fractions that were made during sample preparation steps were stored at −20°C.  All serum samples were prepared for proteomics analysis simultaneously using the same protein digestion protocol with bovine pancreas trypsin (Sigma, cat. number 232-650-8). Individual samples were digested with trypsin using a procedure that does not include reduction or alkylation of cysteine residues and can be automated when needed. Digestion solution included 6.40 mg Trypsin dissolved in 10.0 mL 1mM HCl; 10.0 mL 250 mM Tris-Buffer pH=7.0; 1.25 mL DMSO and 28,75 mL MilliQ.  Briefly, 200 µL methanol was added to 50 µL serum aliquots in an Eppendorf LoBind 96-well plate for protein precipitation. The plate was vortexed for 5 minutes at 1250 rpm and subsequently centrifuged (10 min, 2500g, room temperature). After discarding the supernatant, the plate was inverted and allowed to dry for 15 minutes. 200 µL digestion mix (pH 7.0) was added to each well and the plate vortexed until the pellet was re-dissolved. Another 200 µL digestion mix was added, and digestion proceeded for 3 hours at 37°C and 1250 rpm. The digestion was quenched using 50 µL of a 10% aqueous formic acid (FA). Finally, 100 µL of the digest was loaded onto a HyperSep C18 cartridge (100 mg bed weight, 1 mL capacity), washed with 400 µL 0.1% FA, eluted with 400 µL 0.1% FA in 50% ACN, dried and resuspended in 200 µL of 0.1% FA. 160 µL was then transferred to a polypropylene vial with a glass insert before nanoLC-MS measurement. Pierce HeLa protein digest standard (Thermo Scientific 88329) was used to optimize and test the online-2D nanoLC-MS platform. The vial with the sample was reconstituted to a final concentration of 800 ng/µL by consecutively dissolving the 20 µg pellet with 0.1% FA in water.

### Data Protocol
All DDA .raw files were processed with the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD 2.4) using the Sequest HT search algorithm against the human Uniprot Reference Proteome and spectral library search against NIST and ProteomeTool libraries generated with NCE 28 that was close to the NCE 30 used in this work 24. Trypsin was specified as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation, and pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications. Any peptides identified with a carbamidomethylated cysteine based on a spectral library match was removed from the list for protein quantification. All fractions for online-2D nanoLC-MS analysis were acquired within one LC-MS .raw file and processed similarly to results of 1D nanoLC-MS. The false discovery rate (FDR) was below 1% at the peptide and the protein level. Label-free quantification was performed by peptide area, followed by protein abundances normalized by total peptide amount within Proteome Discoverer software package and further analysis using R scripts25. Only proteins identified by at least 2 peptides were considered during the quantitative comparison between 1D nanoLC-MS and online-2D nanoLC-MS and corresponding cluster analysis of results. The cluster analysis of samples was done using normalized protein abundances. The data were scaled before clustering. Pearson correlation was used to estimate the distance between each pair of observations.

### Publication Abstract
Although current LC-MS technology permits scientists to efficiently screen clinical samples in translational research, e.g., steroids, biogenic amines, and even plasma or serum proteomes, in a daily routine, maintaining the balance between throughput and analytical depth is still a limiting factor. A typical approach to enhance the proteome depth is employing offline two-dimensional (2D) fractionation techniques before reversed-phase nanoLC-MS/MS analysis (1D-nanoLC-MS). These additional sample preparation steps usually require extensive sample manipulation, which could result in sample alteration and sample loss. Here, we present and compare 1D-nanoLC-MS with an automated online-2D high-pH RP &#xd7; low pH RP separation method for deep proteome profiling using a nanoLC system coupled to a high-resolution accurate-mass mass spectrometer. The proof-of-principle study permitted the identification of ca. 500 proteins with &#x223c;10,000 peptides in 15 enzymatically digested crude serum samples collected from healthy donors in 3 laboratories across Europe. The developed method identified 60% more peptides in comparison with conventional 1D nanoLC-MS/MS analysis with ca. 4 times lower throughput while retaining the quantitative information. Serum sample preparation related changes were revealed by applying unsupervised classification techniques and, therefore, must be taken into account while planning multicentric biomarker discovery and validation studies. Overall, this novel method reduces sample complexity and boosts the number of peptide and protein identifications without the need for extra sample handling procedures for samples equivalent to less than 1 &#x3bc;L of blood, which expands the space for potential biomarker discovery by looking deeper into the composition of biofluids.

### Keywords
High-resolution accurate mass-spectrometry, Proteome profiling, Peptide fractionation, Nanolc-ms, Online-2d nanolc-ms, Blood, 1d nanolc-ms, Crude serum

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific

### Submitter
Runsheng Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Boychenko
Thermo Fisher Scientific


