### Accession
PXD037167

### Title
Molecular Acclimation of Halobacterium salinarum to Halite Brine Inclusions

### Description
Halophilic microorganisms have long been known to survive within the brine inclusions of salt crystals, as evidenced by their pigmentation. However, the molecular mechanisms allowing this survival has remained an open question for decades. While protocols for the surface sterilization of halite (NaCl) have enabled isolation of cells and DNA from within halite brine inclusions, “-omics” based approaches have faced two main technical challenges: (1) removal of all contaminating organic biomolecules (including proteins) from halite surfaces, and (2) performing selective biomolecule extractions directly from cells contained within halite brine inclusions with sufficient speed to avoid modifications in gene expression during extraction. In this study, we present methods to resolve these two technical challenges. In addition, we apply these methods to perform the first examination of the early acclimation of a model haloarchaeon (Halobacterium salinarum NRC-1) to halite brine inclusions. Examinations of the proteome of Halobacterium cells two months post-evaporation revealed a high degree of similarity with stationary phase liquid cultures, but with a sharp down-regulation of ribosomal proteins. Low quantities of RNA from halite brine inclusions corroborate the hypothesis of low transcriptional and translational activities. While proteins for central metabolism were part of the shared proteome between liquid cultures and halite brine inclusions, proteins involved in cell mobility (archaellum, gas vesicles) were either absent or less abundant in halite samples. Proteins unique to cells within brine inclusions included transporters, suggesting modified interactions between cells and the surrounding brine inclusions microenvironment. The methods and hypotheses presented here enable future studies of the survival of halophiles in both culture model and natural halite systems.

### Sample Protocol
Extractions were performed with TRIzol Reagent™, based on the halophilic protein extraction protocol of Kirkland, et al. (2006). Briefly, halite crystals were fully immersed in 5 mL of TRIzol Reagent™ in 30 mL glass centrifuge tube and crushed using autoclaved glass stir-rod. After 20 min incubation at 60 °C, total RNA was extracted from the resulting cell lysate by adding 1 mL of 100 % chloroform, incubating for 5 min at RT°C followed by phase separation by centrifugation (10 000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). The chloroform-containing aqueous phase was removed with autoclaved glass Pasteur pipet and 1.5 mL of 100 % ethanol was added to precipitate DNA. After 3 min at RT°C, supernatant was collected by centrifugation (2 000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C). Proteins were precipitated with 7.5 mL of 100 % isopropanol and collected by centrifugation (10 000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). The resulting protein pellet was washed twice to remove phenol traces using 5 mL of 0.3 M guanidine-HCl in 95 % ethanol to denature the proteins, followed by a third wash step with 5 mL of 100 % ethanol to remove any residual guanidine-HCl. Each wash step was performed by incubating the cell pellet in the solution for 20 min at RT°C followed by centrifugation (10 000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). Protein desalting was accomplished by two successive protein precipitations with 2 mL of 100 % glacial acetone (-20 °C) and centrifugation (10 000 x g, 20 min, 4 °C). After acetone removal, the pellet was completely dried under laminar flow. Then, proteins were solubilized in 1 M NaHCO3 with 0.1 % SDS at RT°C for two days and quantified with a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) proteins assay (Pierce) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) standards concentration from manufacturer’s instruction in the case of quantitative mass spectrometry and adapted BSA standard concentrations (enable low protein concentration assay) for surface proteins removal procedure. Proteolysis rate was determined by proteins quantity comparison with and without treatments.             Total proteins were extracted from H. salinarum cultures in stationary growth stage using the same procedure. For this, 2.0 x1010 cells from liquid cultures were pelleted by centrifugation (7 500 x g, 10 min, 20 °C) and the cell pellets directly resuspended in 5 mL TRIzol Reagent™ solution, prior to following all steps described above for halite samples. After solubilization of the protein pellet, solubilization with 1M NaHCO3 with 0.1 % SDS at RT°C, protein quantification was performed using the BCA assay (Pierce) protein assays as per the manufacturer’s instructions.   Aliquots of 100 µg of proteins for each sample condition and replicate were reduced using 2 mM of tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 37 °C for 1 h, and alkylated with 5 mM of iodoacetamide 30 min in the dark at RT°C prior to digestion with 5 µg of trypsin Gold (Promega) for 15 h at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were directly desalted by solid phase extraction (SPE) using C18 cartridges (Sep-Pak C18 Plus Short 400 mg Sorbent, Waters). The resulting peptides were dried by speed-vac and resuspended in tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) 0.5 M prior to labelling. iTRAQ® labelling was performed according manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, each of the iTRAQ® isobaric labelling reagents were reconstituted with isopropanol and then added to the 50 µg of protein digest (113, 114, 115 and 116 iTRAQ® isobaric labels for proteins from liquid controls and 117, 118, 119 and 121 for halite brine inclusions protein extractions). After 2 h at RT°C, samples were desalted again with C18 SPE. The labelled peptides eluted were then dried by speed-vac and resuspended in 2 % acetonitrile, 98 % H2O with 0.1 % formic acid.              Labelled peptide samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry as previously described (Pinel-Cabello et al., 2021) on a Q Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC System. Peptides were desalted online on an AcclaimPepmap100 C18 precolumn (5µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d x 5 mm) and further resolved on a nanoscale AcclaimPepmap100 C18 column (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 500 mm) at a flow rate of 200 nL min-1 using a 120-min gradient of 4-32% acetonitrile. A Top 20 strategy was applied in data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired from 350 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target set at 3 ×106 ions. MS/MS fragmentation was initiated when the ACG target reached 105 ions with an intensity threshold of 9 × 104. Only precursor ions with potential charge states of 2+ and 3+ were selected for fragmentation applying a dynamic exclusion time of 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were performed using PEAKS® X-Pro software (64 bits version, 2020, BioInformatics solutions). It allows database search assisted de novo sequencing against the protein coding sequences from H. salinarum NRC-1 (8 533 entries from NCBI, download date 2021/08/03). Spectral peptides matching was carried out with the following parameters: (1) mass tolerance of 10 ppm on the parent ion, (2) mass tolerance of 0.005 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS; (3) carbamidomethylated Cys (+57.0215) and iTRAQ® isobaric tag Lys and N-terminal (+304.2054) as fixed modifications; and (4) oxidized Met (+15.9949), deamidated Asn and Gln (+0.9840) and iTRAQ® isobaric tag Tyr (+304.2054) as variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with decoy-fusion option included in the software. Proteins were then filtered with FDR < 1 % (corresponding to a -10logP score above 25) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and a valid protein identification required minimum 2 unique peptides with a -10logP score above the peptide filtering threshold that can be mapped to only one protein group.  For iTRAQ® quantitation, the eight labelled samples (four replicates each of proteins from liquid stationary cultures called Liquid B1, B2, B3 and B4 and four halite brine inclusions extract called CX3, CX4, CX5 and CX6) were mixed in equimolar ratios and injected in nanoLC-MS/MS in triplicate to reduce instrument variability as previously described (replicates were called Rep1, Rep2 and Rep3). Quantitation was performed using PEAKS Q (quantitation program) iTRAQ 8-plex type with 10 ppm mass tolerance and only peptides with a score above FDR threshold 1 % are used to quantify the identified proteins. Resulted quantitation was filtered accepting only proteins groups with fold change ≥ 2, at least two unique peptides and FDR adjusted ≤ 1 % for both proteins identification and fold change significance using ANOVA significance method.

### Publication Abstract
Halophilic microorganisms have long been known to survive within the brine inclusions of salt crystals, as evidenced by the change in color for salt crystals containing pigmented halophiles. However, the molecular mechanisms allowing this survival has remained an open question for decades. While protocols for the surface sterilization of halite (NaCl) have enabled isolation of cells and DNA from within halite brine inclusions, "-omics" based approaches have faced two main technical challenges: (1) removal of all contaminating organic biomolecules (including proteins) from halite surfaces, and (2) performing selective biomolecule extractions directly from cells contained within halite brine inclusions with sufficient speed to avoid modifications in gene expression during extraction. In this study, we tested different methods to resolve these two technical challenges. Following this method development, we then applied the optimized methods to perform the first examination of the early acclimation of a model haloarchaeon (<i>Halobacterium salinarum</i> NRC-1) to halite brine inclusions. Examinations of the proteome of <i>Halobacterium</i> cells two months post-evaporation revealed a high degree of similarity with stationary phase liquid cultures, but with a sharp down-regulation of ribosomal proteins. While proteins for central metabolism were part of the shared proteome between liquid cultures and halite brine inclusions, proteins involved in cell mobility (archaellum, gas vesicles) were either absent or less abundant in halite samples. Proteins unique to cells within brine inclusions included transporters, suggesting modified interactions between cells and the surrounding brine inclusion microenvironment. The methods and hypotheses presented here enable future studies of the survival of halophiles in both culture model and natural halite systems.

### Keywords
Halite, Halobacterium, Halophile

### Affiliations
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle

### Submitter
Severine Zirah

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Grellier
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle


