### Accession
PXD030939

### Title
A compound-based therapy approach for epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS)

### Description
Keratin cytoskeletal proteins are crucial for the maintenance of skin integrity. Mutations in genes coding for K5 and K14 cause the human skin disorder epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) leading to substantial alterations in keratin assembly and collapse of keratin filaments into cytoplasmic protein aggregates. The phenotypic consequences of K5 and K14 mutations comprise fragility of basal keratinocytes and skin blistering upon mild mechanical trauma. Treatment of EBS is only supportive and consists primarily of wound care and avoidance of mechanical stress. Besides symptomatic care, no efficient therapeutic treatment is available for EBS.  In the present study, we used patient-derived keratinocytes carrying the most frequent K14.R125C mutation as a reproducible EBS model to understand EBS pathomechanisms and to develop a therapy approach aimed to restore a functional keratin network. Numerous post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as phosphorylation have been reported to occur on keratins, which affect the organization of keratin networks. Whether keratin mutations affect the occurrence of PTMs and thereby keratin aggregation in EBS is yet unknown. We find that the K14.R125C mutation alters keratin and keratin-associated protein PTMs in distinct ways and suggest that disease mutations and altered PTMs aggravate keratin aggregation. We reason that chemical compounds affecting the interplay of mutations and PTMs enable the reformation of a keratin cytoskeleton from aggregates are potential candidates for combating EBS.

### Sample Protocol
To perform phospho-proteome analysis, EBS K14.R125C keratinocytes were seeded in quintuples onto 10 cm dishes (3.5 x 105 cells/ml). Next day, cells were treated with 0.8 µM PKC412 or DMSO in 1.2mM Ca2+ medium and incubated for additional 24h. Next day, cells were washed twice in PBS and lysed in 8 M Urea/50 mM TEAB buffer (500 µl per two 10cm dishes). To degrade chromatin, cell lysates were sonified (10 min, cycle 30/30 sec), centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000 x g and supernatants were transferred to new 1.5 ml tubes. For mass spectrometry analysis, lysates were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and digested using LysC and trypsin in solution. Digested peptides were loaded on C18 double layer Stage Tips for further analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-Select Tio2 Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Scientific #A32993). Samples were analyzed by the Proteomics Facility at CECAD on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 121.0 min, 30-40% solvent B within 19.0 min, 40-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 25.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical Uniprot Human FASTA (reference UP000005640, downloaded at 26.08.2020) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Phospho (STY), and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Further data handling was done in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Keratins, Therapy, Phosphorylation, Multi-kinase inhibitor, Epidermolysis bullosa simplex

### Affiliations
Department Cell Biology of the Skin, Cologne Excellence Cluster for Stress Responses in Ageing-associated diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Carien M. Niessen
Department Cell Biology of the Skin, Cologne Excellence Cluster for Stress Responses in Ageing-associated diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany


