### Accession
PXD032406

### Title
USP18-dependent muscle proteome

### Description
USP18 is an interferon type 1 (IFN-1) induced gene that negatively regulates the IFN-1 signalling pathway, which plays a role in many immune related pathologies. Dermatomyositis (DM) is characterised by excessive IFN-1 immune response and muscle degeneration. We found USP18 to be expressed in DM myofibers suggesting a role in muscle cell biology. USP18 depletion induced muscle cell differentiation under nutrient-rich conditions independent of IFN-1 signalling. Downregulation of cell cycle gene network and sarcomeric protein networks, and dysregulation of myogenic (co-)transcription regulators were found in USP18-depleted differentiated cells. Sarcomeric integrity of USP18-depleted cells deteriorated during muscle cell maturation. Our results revealed USP18 as a critical regulator at the intersection between proliferation and differentiation as well as during the maturation of muscle cells. We suggest that a USP18 IFN-1-independent pathway may contribute to muscle regeneration in muscle pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
7304.1 cell cultures were harvested by directly adding lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% NP40, 10% glycerol and freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) to the cell culture dishes. 100 μg protein lysate was taken for in-solution digestion. First, samples were reduced using DTT (5 mM final concentration) for 30 min at 37 °C. Next, iodoacetamide was used to alkylate the samples (final concentration 20 mM, 15 min room temperature in dark). Methanol/chloroform extraction method was then used to precipitate proteins, after which proteins were resuspended in 50 μL of 6 M urea and subsequently diluted to reduce urea concentration to <1M. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (final concentration 0.2 μg/μL) on an overhead rotor at 12rpm overnight. Digested peptides were subsequently acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 1%) and desalted using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges following the manufacturer’s instructions (SEP-PAK plus, Waters). Reconstituted peptides (in 98% MilliQ, 2% CH3CN and 0.1 %TFA) were then analysed by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using the Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a one-hour gradient and universal settings for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant software (v1.6.10.43) was then used to search the raw MS files against the UniProtKB human sequence database (UP000005640, 79,038 human sequence entries). Next, the following parameters were set to perform label free quantification: Modification were set on Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed and Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) as variable and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin proteasomal system is a critical regulator of muscle physiology, and impaired UPS is key in many muscle pathologies. Yet, little is known about the function of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) in the muscle cell context. We performed a genetic screen to identify DUBs as potential regulators of muscle cell differentiation. Surprisingly, we observed that the depletion of ubiquitin-specific protease 18 (USP18) affected the differentiation of muscle cells. USP18 depletion first stimulated differentiation initiation. Later, during differentiation, the absence of USP18 expression abrogated myotube maintenance. USP18 enzymatic function typically attenuates the immune response by removing interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) from protein substrates. However, in muscle cells, we found that USP18, predominantly nuclear, regulates differentiation independent of ISG15 and the ISG response. Exploring the pattern of RNA expression profiles and protein networks whose levels depend on USP18 expression, we found that differentiation initiation was concomitant with reduced expression of the cell-cycle gene network and altered expression of myogenic transcription (co) factors. We show that USP18 depletion altered the calcium channel gene network, resulting in reduced calcium flux in myotubes. Additionally, we show that reduced expression of sarcomeric proteins in the USP18 proteome was consistent with reduced contractile force in an engineered muscle model. Our results revealed nuclear USP18 as a critical regulator of differentiation initiation and maintenance, independent of ISG15 and its role in the ISG response.

### Keywords
Muscle cell differentiation, Dermatomyositis, Usp18, Myogenesis, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK
LUMC

### Submitter
Cyriel Olie

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M. Kessler
TDI Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK


