### Accession
PXD002858

### Title
Mouse purified hepatocyte secretome iTRAQ LC/MS

### Description
This study tests whether hepatic steatosis, independent of inflammation, alters the hepatocyte protein secretory profile, and examines whether changes in the secretory products contribute to the development of metabolic dysfunction in other cell types. Mouse hepatocytes were isolated by flow cytometry and cultured in serum-free conditions. Conditioned media was used for LC/MS analysis to compare hepatocytes from chow fed animals to high-fat diet animals with liver steatosis.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media was buffer exchanged into 0.5M TEAB, 0.02% SDS, reduced and alkylated with MMTS and digested with trypsin. Peptides were labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents, combined and fractionated by SCX. Dried fractions were desalted and analysed by nanoLC ESI MS/MS using a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. Channel 114 – 117 high fat died (4 biological replicates), channel 118 – 121 controls (4 biological replicates).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot v4.0 was used for data processing. The SwissProt 2010 Mus musculus database containing 32614 entries (fwd + rev) was searched. In the ProteinPilot parameter settings, the thorough search mode was used, the precursor ion mass tolerance was 0.05 Da, the product ion mass tolerance was 0.1 Da, Unused Prot Score was >1.3 (95% confidence, corresponding to 0.3% protein FDR) and bias correction was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Liver steatosis is associated with the development of insulin resistance and the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. We tested the hypothesis that protein signals originating from steatotic hepatocytes communicate with other cells to modulate metabolic phenotypes. We show that the secreted factors from steatotic hepatocytes induce pro-inflammatory signaling and insulin resistance in cultured cells. Next, we identified 168 hepatokines, of which 32 were differentially secreted in steatotic versus non-steatotic hepatocytes. Targeted analysis showed that fetuin B was increased in humans with liver steatosis and patients with type 2 diabetes. Fetuin B impaired insulin action in myotubes and hepatocytes and caused glucose intolerance in mice. Silencing of fetuin B in obese mice improved glucose tolerance. We conclude that the protein secretory profile of hepatocytes is altered with steatosis and is linked to inflammation and insulin resistance. Therefore, preventing steatosis may limit the development of dysregulated glucose metabolism in settings of overnutrition.

### Keywords
Secreted, Mouse, Liver, High-fat diet

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology Monash University VIC, 3800, Australia
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF)

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Watt
Department of Physiology Monash University VIC, 3800, Australia


