### Accession
PXD009089

### Title
A multiomics approach in refractory DLBCL

### Description
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most frequent entity among non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is a clinically and biologically heterogeneous disease regarding treatment response and long-term outcome. The anthracycline-based regimen R-CHOP is still considered as the standard of care for first-line treatment allowing achieving a complete response for approximately 60% of the patients. The prognosis of patients with primary refractory or relapsed (R/R) disease is particularly poor with a median overall survival below one year. Only a fraction of R/R patients can be cured with salvage therapies due to the acquisition of chemoresistance. We conducted a large-scale and deep proteomic investigation of the proteome profiles of R/R DLBCL patients compared to chemosensitive patients in order to identify new potential biomarkers related to resistance to treatment and to better understand the biological mechanisms underlying chemoresistance.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on 20 fresh-frozen tumour tissues obtained at diagnosis before the onset of any treatment (8 chemorefractory and 12 chemosensitive DLBCL patients). After protein extraction and trypsin digestion, peptides were analysed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) and statistical analysis was performed with the peptide-level Robust Ridge Regression model (MSqRob).

### Publication Abstract
The prognosis of patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) remains unsatisfactory and, despite major advances in genomic studies, the biological mechanisms underlying chemoresistance are still poorly understood. We conducted for the first time a large-scale differential multi-omics investigation on DLBCL patient's samples in order to identify new biomarkers that could early identify patients at risk of R/R disease and to identify new targets that could determine chemorefractoriness. We compared a well-characterized cohort of R/R versus chemosensitive DLBCL patients by combining label-free quantitative proteomics and targeted RNA sequencing performed on the same tissues samples. The cross-section of both data levels allowed extracting a sub-list of 22 transcripts/proteins pairs whose expression levels significantly differed between the two groups of patients. In particular, we identified significant targets related to tumor metabolism (Hexokinase 3), microenvironment (IDO1, CXCL13), cancer cells proliferation, migration and invasion (S100 proteins) or BCR signaling pathway (CD79B). Overall, this study revealed several extremely promising biomarker candidates related to DLBCL chemorefractoriness and highlighted some new potential therapeutic drug targets. The complete datasets have been made publically available and should constitute a valuable resource for the future research.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Lymph nodes

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7178, Strasbourg, France
IPHC LSMBO Strasbourg

### Submitter
Luc FORNECKER

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


