### Accession
PXD039512

### Title
Proteome of Agave angustifolia Haw.: insights about metabolism of amino acids in albino plantlets

### Description
Amino acids (AA) are essential molecules for life because they are precursors for the synthesis of proteins and other organic compounds. Their metabolism in plants involves more than one cellular compartment, among which the chloroplast plays a key role. From the 20 essential AA, ten (Arg, Lys, Thr, Leu, Ile, Val, Trp, Phe, Tyr and His) are only synthesized in the plastids and seven (Asp, Cys, Gln, Glu, Gly, Ser and Met) can be synthesized in both chloroplast and other parts of the cell. Despite knowing the roles of AA in plant physiology, little has been assessed in plants with albino phenotypes, lacking chloroplasts. To assess the effect of chloroplast biogenesis disturbances on AA metabolism in albino and variegated somaclonal variations of Agave angustifolia Haw., a comparative proteomic based TMT- synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 strategy was used to determine the status of AA biosynthetic pathways. Besides the 20 essential AA was quantified to underpin proteomics finding. A total of 2,442 different proteins were identified in the proteome of the somaclonal variants, from which 82 correspond to enzymes participating in AA biosynthesis. From these 82, 32 proteins were differentially accumulated. On the other hand, the concentration of 16 and 12 of the AA synthesized by the chloroplast were over-accumulated in the variegated and albino somaclonal variant, respectively. In plantlets devoid of functional chloroplasts, there is a surprising increase of AA and key enzymes of the AA biosyntethic pathways, compared to green plantlets. This could suggest que la activation of AA biosynthesis is key to sustaining albino and variegated plantlets survival that lack chloroplasts.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials  Three somaclonal lines that differed phenotypically, with same genetic background [19, 20], were used. Plantlets with green (G), variegated (V), and albino (A) phenotypes (Fig. 1A), were micropropagated in Magenta boxes containing 50 ml of Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium [21] modified in its nitrogen content with 18 mM KNO3 and 5 mM NH4NO3. MS medium was supplemented with 2,4-D (0.11 µM) and 6 BA (22.2 µM) and solidified with agar (0.175 %) and gel-rite (0.175 %) [22]. The plantlets were incubated in a growth chamber at 27 ± 2 °C under a 12-h photoperiod (40 µmol/m−2/s−1). Plantlets of the three phenotypes (G, V and A) of ~2.5 cm tall were used in this study. The plantlets were collected, frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 ºC until further analysis.  Total protein extraction and quality evaluation Two-and-a half grams of each phenotype (G, V and A) were homogenized with liquid nitrogen until obtaining a fine powder with the help of a mortar and pistil. Each phenotype had three biological replicates. To prevent the formation of polyphenols, polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (PVPP) was added in a 1:10 ratio (w/w). The sample was resuspended in 5 ml of extraction buffer (w/v) [150 mM Trisma® base pH 8.0, 100 mM KCl, 1.4 M sucrose, 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.05% (v/v) β -mercaptoethanol, 100 mM PMSF], and 50 μl of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The samples were homogenized in vortex and kept on ice. An equal volume of phenol solution (equilibrated with 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 1 mM EDTA) (Sigma) was added to each tube. The mixture was shaken for 30 min at 150 rpm and then centrifugated at 10,000 x g for 30 min at 4 ºC. The upper phenolic phase was carefully collected and transferred to a 15 ml clean tube. The proteins were precipitated with four volumes of cold acetone with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol overnight at -20 ºC and centrifugated at 3,000 x g for 30 min at 4ºC. The protein pellets were washed with cold acetone and centrifugated again. The protein pellet was dried at room temperature to eliminate acetone residues. After air-drying, the pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.4) with 1% of SDS and sonicated for 20 min. The resuspended sample was transferred to a new tube and centrifugated at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 24 ºC. The supernatant containing the total proteins was recovered. Finally, the sample was cleaned with Protein Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) in order to remove salts and small molecules. The crude protein extracts were stored at -80 ºC until analysis. Total protein was quantified using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. One hundred micrograms of total protein from each phenotype were used to visualize the protein profiles by 1D-SDS-PAGE (with 10% SDS), and stained with SYPRO™ Ruby (Invitrogen™). As protein molecular weight marker was used SDS-PAGE Molecular Weight Standards, Broad Range (BIO-RAD).

### Data Protocol
Protein digestion and TMT labeling One hundred micrograms of total protein from each sample were treated with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 45 min at 60 ◦C and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 60 min at room temperature in darkness. The excess of IAM was quenched with 30 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 10 min. The proteins were precipitated overnight with five volumes of cold acetone and centrifugated at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4 ◦C. The protein pellet was vacuum dried. The dried pellet was suspended in 100 μl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 0.1% SDS. Proteins were digested with freshly prepared trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) at a 1:30 w/w ratio of trypsin:protein at 37 ◦C overnight. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used as isobaric labels for the comparative quantification of proteins between samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labels used were as follows: 128N, 128C, and 129N for plantlets with A phenotype; 130C, 129C y 130N for plantlets with V phenotype; and 126, 127C, and 127N for samples with G phenotype. Samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography spin columns (RPLC, Pierce). All fractions were then desalted using C18 cartridges (Thermo Scientific) and dried using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco).   Nano LC-MS/MS analysis The labeled peptides were suspended in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water), and 20 μl of the solution was injected into a nanoviper C18 trap column (3 μm, 75 μm × 2 cm, Dionex) at 3 μl min-1 flow rate in an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale), and then separated on an EASY spray C18 RSLC column (2 μm, 75 μm × 25 cm), using a 100 min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. The gradient was set as follows: 10 min solvent A, 7–20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) within 25 min, 20% solvent B for 15 min, 20–25% solvent B for 15 min, 25–95% solvent B for 20 min, and eight min solvent A. The nanoLC platform was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with an “EASY Spray” nano ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a nanospray voltage set at 3.5 kV and source temperature at 280 ºC. External calibrants included caffeine, Met-Arg-Phe-Ala (MRFA), and Ultramark 1621 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Amino acids (AA) are essential molecules for plant physiology, acting as precursor molecules for proteins and other organic compounds. Chloroplasts play a vital role in AA metabolism, yet little is known about the impact on AA metabolism of albino plants' lack of chloroplasts. In this study, we conducted a quantitative proteome analysis on albino and variegated somaclonal variants of Agave angustifolia Haw. to investigate metabolic alterations in chloroplast-deficient plants, with a focus on AA metabolic pathways. We identified 82 enzymes involved in AA metabolism, with 32 showing differential accumulation between the somaclonal variants. AaCM, AaALS, AaBCAT, AaIPMS1, AaSHMT, AaAST, AaCGS, and AaMS enzymes were particularly relevant in chloroplast-deficient Agave plantlets. Both variegated and albino phenotypes exhibited excessive synthesis of AA typically associated with chloroplasts (aromatic AAs, BCAAs, Asp, Lys, Pro and Met). Consistent trends were observed for AaBCAT and AaCM at mRNA and protein levels in albino plantlets. These findings highlight the critical activation and reprogramming of AA metabolic pathways in plants lacking chloroplasts. This study contributes to unraveling the intricate relationship between AA metabolism and chloroplast absence, offering insights into survival mechanisms of albino plants.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Albinism, Amino acids, Proteome, Tmt, Chloroplast, Agave

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ecolog'ia A.C.
Instituto de Ecología A.C.

### Submitter
Miguel Elizalde

### Lab Head
Dr Eliel Ruiz
Instituto de Ecología A.C.


