### Accession
PXD023437

### Title
Neuronal Nsun2 deficiency is associated with codon-specific epitranscriptomic dysregulation of Gly-tRNAs and corresponding proteomic shift impacting synaptic signaling and behavior

### Description
The role of transfer (t)RNA cytosine methyl-transferases as epitranscriptomic regulators of brain proteomes remains unexplored. We report that fear memory and antidepressant-like behaviors are highly sensitive to bi-directional changes in Nsun2 tRNA methyltransferase activity in prefrontal cortex (PFC) neurons. Nsun2-deficient mutant cortex showed a selective deficit in multiple glycine tRNAs, resulting in codon-specific shifts in translational efficiencies and a distorted proteomic landscape with deficits in glycine-rich neuronal proteins impacting synaptic signaling and behavior.

### Sample Protocol
Adult Nsun2 KO and WT mice were sacrificed and fresh-frozen PFC tissue was homogenized using a vibrating pestle in buffer containing SDS, HEPES, sucrose, and protease inhibitors and quantified using a BCA assay. Proteins were extracted with Chloroform/Water/Methanol extraction. Proteins were denatured in 8M urea, and reduction and alkylation was carried out with DTT and IAA.  and digested with LysC + trypsin. Peptides were purified through Oasis HLB (Waters) cartridges, speedvac'ed to dryness, dissolved in TEAB and labeled with  TMT 11-plex. Following a label-check samples were pooled and fractionated by high-pH RP-chromatography HPLC. Fractions were concatenated to yield 21 fractions. HpH fractions were separated on a low-pH RP-nanoflow system and injected on a Q-Exactive HF for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using MaxQuant v. 1.6.6.0 using standard settings. Spectra were queried against the Mus musculus proteome (obtained from uniprot.org on February 2019, 54185 sequences) with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% applied on PSM, peptide and protein level. Ratio-compression from co-fragmention was minimized by requiring a minimum peptide interference factor (PIF) of 0.75. Further data analysis was performed within the Perseus framework [3]. An FDR-corrected student’s t-test (FDR=1%) was used to test for significant changes between the two conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsun2, Neurons, Tmt

### Affiliations
Departments of Neuroscience and Psychiatry, The Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Schahram Akbarian
Departments of Neuroscience and Psychiatry, The Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.


