### Accession
PXD028832

### Title
The METTL5-TRMT112 N6-methyladenosine methyltransferase complex regulates metabolism and development via translation (Identification of m1A mRNA methyltransferase in nucleus by TMT11-LC-MS/MS)

### Description
m1A has long been known to be important in tRNA and rRNA, but we recently mapped many m1A sites in mRNA as well.  m1A is found on the 5’ ends of genes, usually around the first splice site, but we have yet to understand how it effects transcript fate.  Identifying the methyltransferase would be a major first step towards understanding m1A function.

### Sample Protocol
Based on multiple lines of experiments, we believe that this methyltransferase resides in the nucleus.  In an effort to identify this methyltransferase, we fractionated HeLa nuclear extract with multiple columns into 11 fractions and identified a few active fractions. Each fraction was loaded on 10% SDS-PAGE gel and run a short time. The proteins were then in-gel digested and then labeled with 11 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled and separated into 6 fractions by an Ultra-micro spin C18 column. Every fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (30 cm X 75 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a 4h gradient of 12-36% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile) and analyzed by Qexactive HF (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt human database.  Searches were performed using 15 ppm mass tolerance and allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
M1a mrna methyltransferase, Trmt112, Proteomics, Mettl5, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyan Tan
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


