### Accession
PXD008503

### Title
Conidial rodlets of Aspergillus fumigatus

### Description
Aerial conidia of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes are coated with an amphipathic hydrophobin layer commonly called rodlet layer, that renders their surface hydrophobic  and resist wetting, thus facilitating effective dispersal in the air. Fungal hydrophobins  are small secreted proteins with specific hydropathy patterns and eight cysteine residues ordered in a particular manner which define the two well characterized classes I and II of hydrophobins and a third intermediate class (Kershaw and Talbot, 1998. Littlejohn et al, 2012; Jensen et al, 2010). Wessels 1994). Class I assemblies are generally water insoluble, have an amyloid structure and form the patterned rodlet layer. Class II are smaller proteins than class I and are soluble in aqueous ethanol mixtures of SDS. The intermediate class is a rather heterogenous tote class which would gather non-class I and non-class II hydrophobins without a defined structure.  In addition to the role of the rodlet in the fungal life during conidiogenesis and conidial dispersal in the air, it was shown that rodlets can have a role in fungal – host interactions and favour the pathogenic behavior of the fungal pathogens in humans, plant and insect hosts (Talbot et al., 1996, Aimanianda et al, 2009; Zhang et al, 2011). In Aspergillusfumigatus rodlets immunosilence the conidium and their loss from the conidial surface initiates the host immune response (Aimanianda et al., 2009). Our study is focused on the Rod A protein which forms the rodlet structure on the surface of the conidium of A. fumigatus. In spite of their prominent morphological and biological role, the molecular basis for rodlet self-assembly and desagregation in this fungal species has not been understood yet. Point mutations in the rodA gene have helped understanding the mechanism which drives  hydrophobin proteins to assemble into highly ordered structures anchored to the conidium surface. Moreover, the biochemical events responsible for the lysis of the rodlets have been  investigated.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion Conidia were incubated in formic acid as described above. Preliminary experiments showed that the same proteins were present in the 10 min or 2-hour extracts. Consequently the extraction time selected for the incubation with formic acid was 2 hours. Dried samples were re-suspended in 100 µL 8 M urea/ 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Briefly, samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Protein samples were then  incubated with 250 ng rLys-C Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 5 hours at 37°C for the first digestion. Then samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCL pH 8.5 and 500 ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added for the second digestion overnight at 37°C. A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 hours at 37°C) was performed to ensure a complete digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid -and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to manufactures instructions.   Mass spectrometry analysis Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 2 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were first eluted using a 2 to 18 % gradient of solvent B during 112 min, then a 18 to 30 % gradient of solvent B during 35 min, a 30 to 45 % gradient of solvent B during 15 min and finally  a 45 to 60 % gradient of solvent B during 5 min all at 250 nL.min-1 flow rate. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70 000), the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 27. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing for protein identification and quantification All data were searched using Andromeda [1] with MaxQuant software [2, 3] version 1.5.3.8 against a Neosartorya fumigata (strain CEA10 CBS 144.89 FGSC A1163) (Aspergillus fumigatus) Uniprot database (Proteome ID UP000001699, 9942 entries) concatenated with mutated RodA protein, usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide lengt2112 h. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 minutes. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. Reverse proteins and usual MS contaminants were removed before the analysis of the data.  Quantification of each identified protein was performed by summing the intensities of its associated peptides.  Data Analysis of protein intensities  For the quantification of the proteins and comparison of conditions, proteins with at least two quantified values intensities among the replicates of the condition were selected for further analysis.  Selection of “condition-specific proteins” was made by the selection of protein with peptides identified in a unique condition. For ranking these condition-specific proteins from the most abundant ones to the least in the condition where they are observed, we used the average of their observed iBAQ values among the replicates of the condition. The iBAQ algorithm consists to normalize the summed peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides for each protein and is a relevant method to rank the absolute abundance of different proteins within a single sample [4]. Since we are particularly interested in secretory proteins among all these condition-specific proteins, we used the SignalP algorithm to predict proteins with secretory signal peptides [5]. This algorithm was used with the default cutoff value which optimizes the performance measured as Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC).

### Publication Abstract
The rodlet structure present on the <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> conidial surface hides conidia from immune recognition. In spite of the essential biological role of the rodlets, the molecular basis for their self-assembly and disaggregation is not known. Analysis of the soluble forms of conidia-extracted and recombinant RodA by NMR spectroscopy has indicated the importance of disulfide bonds and identified two dynamic regions as likely candidates for conformational change and intermolecular interactions during conversion of RodA into the amyloid rodlet structure. Point mutations introduced into the <i>RODA</i> sequence confirmed that (1) mutation of a single cysteine was sufficient to block rodlet formation on the conidial surface and (2) both presumed amyloidogenic regions were needed for proper rodlet assembly. Mutations in the two putative amyloidogenic regions retarded and disturbed, but did not completely inhibit, the formation of the rodlets <i>in vitro</i> and on the conidial surface. Even in a disturbed form, the presence of rodlets on the surface of the conidia was sufficient to immunosilence the conidium. However, in contrast to the parental conidia, long exposure of mutant conidia lacking disulfide bridges within RodA or expressing RodA carrying the double (I115S/I146G) mutation activated dendritic cells with the subsequent secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. The immune reactivity of the RodA mutant conidia was not due to a modification in the RodA structure, but to the exposure of different pathogen-associated molecular patterns on the surface as a result of the modification of the rodlet surface layer. The full degradation of the rodlet layer, which occurs during early germination, is due to a complex array of cell wall bound proteases. As reported earlier, this loss of the rodlet layer lead to a strong anti-<i>fumigatus</i> host immune response in mouse lungs.

### Keywords
Aspergillus, Label-free proteomic

### Affiliations
Unité des Aspergillus 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Paul Latgé
Unité des Aspergillus 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris


