### Accession
PXD028963

### Title
Identification of long-lived proteins in the mitochondria reveals increased stability of the electron transport chain

### Description
In order to combat molecular damage, most cellular proteins undergo rapid turnover. We have previously identified large nuclear protein assemblies that can persist for years in post-mitotic tissues and are subject to age-related decline. Here we report that mitochondria can be long-lived in the mouse brain and reveal that specific mitochondrial proteins have half-lives longer than the average proteome. These mitochondrial long-lived proteins (mitoLLPs) are core components of the electron transport chain (ETC) and display increased longevity in respiratory supercomplexes. We find that COX7C, a mitoLLP that forms a stable contact site between Complexes I and IV, is required for Complex IV and supercomplex assembly. Remarkably, even upon depletion of COX7C transcripts, ETC function is maintained for days, effectively uncoupling mitochondrial function from ongoing transcription of its mitoLLPs. Our results suggest that modulating protein longevity within the ETC is critical for mitochondrial proteome maintenance and the robustness of mitochondrial function.

### Sample Protocol
For H9 ES cells SILAC, light media was regular DMEM:F12 supplemented with GlutaMAX, B27, N2,0.5mM dbcAMP, 20ng/ml GDNF and 20ng/ml BDNF, 10ug/ml laminin and 2ug/ml Doxycyline,and heavy media was DMEM:F12 for SILAC (Fisher Scientific,88370) with heavy amino acids L-Lysine-13C6 hydrochloride (Sigma,643459) and L-Arginine-13C6,15N4 hydrochloride(Sigma,608033), also supplemented with above mentioned factors. For the SILAC timecourse,H9 cells were differentiated into neurons for 11 days as mentioned before, and this day was treated as the beginning of the timecourse (Day 0). Neurons were switched to heavy media for the Day 8 timepoint and light media for the other timepoints on this day. The media was switched to heavy for the other timepoints on respective days and the neurons for all timepoints were harvested 8 days after the beginning of the timecourse. Media was refreshed every other day. For the C2C12 SILAC, light media was regular DMEM with 2% Dialyzed FBS (Gibco,26400044) with Pen-Strep, and heavy media was DMEM for SILAC (Fisher Scientific,A33822) with 2% Dialyzed FBS with Pen-Strep and heavy amino acids L-Lysine-13C6 hydrochloride and L-Arginine-13C6,15N4 hydrochloride. For the SILAC timecourse, C2C12 cells were differentiated for 5 days in differentiation media, and this day was treated as the beginning of the timecourse (Day 0). The rest of the timecourse was conducted exactly like the neuronal SILAC mentioned before. Fractionation and LC/MS Analysis Neurons were harvested at the end of the SILAC timecourse by washing the plate with 1xPBS and spinning down the pellet at 1200rpm for 5min. They were then fractionated into crude nuclear, mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions.  The different fractions were precipitated by methanol/ chloroform and redissolved in 8M urea/ 100mM TEAB. Proteins were reduced and alkylated and digested with trypsin overnight. Samples were run on a Thermo Fusion Lumos Tribrid with Easy nLc 1200 with DDA analysis and CID with cycle time of 3 seconds

### Data Protocol
Post-mass spectrometry, the identification, quantification and preliminary analysis of the peptides and proteins was performed on the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline Version 6.0.5 IP2 (http://www.integratedproteomics.com/ ). The tandem mass spectra were extracted using RawConverter from raw files (He et al., 2015) and searched against a nonredundant mouse UniProt database using ProLUCID (Xu et al., 2015). The search space included all fully -tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates, and cysteine-specific static modification of 57 was allowed for carbamidomethylation. SILAC labeling at K (6.0201) and R (10.0083) were searched as heavy metabolic labeling. A high-resolution precursor/peptide mass tolerance of 50ppm was used with the precursor mass range from 600 to 6000ppm. DTASelect software (Tabb et al., 2002) was used to filter the identified proteins which were searched against a target -decoy database to keep the false discovery rate to 1% at the protein level (Peng et al., 2003). A minimum of 1 peptide peprotein and 1 tryptic end per peptide was required. A false positive rate of 0.01 and precursor delta mass cutoff of 10ppm was used to filter the data. Quantification of SILAC-labeled peptides was performed using the software Census2 (Park et al., 2014). The peptides were further filtered based on rigorous quality control criteria of a minimum profile score of 0.8, and peptides with area ratios from 0.111-9 wererequired to have a minimum regression score of 0.8. Peptides with extreme area ratios <0.111 or >9 were only retained if the regression score was >0. The percent heavy label (percent new protein) was then calculated by transforming the area ratio values. The mean, median, standard deviation and interquartile range was calculated for each peptide and outlier peptides were removed if they fell outside 20 times the interquartile range

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria; protein homeostasis; long-lived proteins; electron transport chain

### Affiliations
Salk Institute of Biological Studies
Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA USA

### Submitter
Shefali Krishna

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hetzer
Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA USA


