### Accession
PXD023786

### Title
SNAPIN regulates β cell cycle progression to promote pancreatic β cell growth

### Description
SNAPIN for β cell growth is poorly understood, and our findings reveal that SNAPIN overexpression in Min6 cells can promote cell proliferation and are promising in achieving the goals of regenerative medicine for diabetes treatment.we want to find snapin interact proteins to illustrate snapin function.

### Sample Protocol
The elutes after IP were firstly reduced in 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) at 95  C for 5 mins, and subsequently alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma) for 30 mins in the dark at room temperature (RT). After alkylation, the samples were transferred to a 10 kD centrifugal spin filter (Millipore) and sequentially washed with 200 mL of 8 M urea for three times and 200 mL of 50 mM ammo- nium bicarbonate for two times by centrifugation at 14,000 g. Next, tryptic digestion was performed by adding trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 (enzyme/substrate, m/m) in 200 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37  C for 16 hrs. Peptides were recovered by transfer- ring the filter to a new collection tube and spinning at 14,000 g. To increase the yield of peptides, the filter was washed twice with 100 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were desalted by StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.2), and MS/MS spectra were searched against the reviewed SwissProt mouse proteome database. All searches were carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, oxidation (Met) (+15.9949 Da),  and acetylation (protein N-terminus) (+42.0106 Da) as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (Cys) (+57.0215 Da) as fixed modification and three trypsin missed cleavages allowed. Only peptides with at least six amino acids in length were considered. The peptide and protein identifications were filtered by PD to control the false discovery rate (FDR) <1%. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Snapin, Mouse, Β cell

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology, Xiang’an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of Medicine, Xiamen University

### Submitter
Jiang mengxue

### Lab Head
Dr Mengxue Jiang
Department of Endocrinology, Xiang’an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of Medicine, Xiamen University


