### Accession
PXD020822

### Title
CPEB1 or CPEB1 (T171A, S177A) interacting proteome analysis on C2C12 cells

### Description
CPEB1 regulates cellular function by post-transcriptionally controlling its targeted transcripts' translation. After bound to CPEs, CPEB1 recruits cytoplasmic poly (A) polymerase GLD2 to elongate the poly (A) tail for the maintenance of mRNA stability. The stability of mRNA is positively correlated with translational output. It is unexamined whether CPEB1 interacts with translation machinery to regulation translation. Previous reports demonstrate that phosphorylation is required for its regulation on translation. However, it is not well understood whether phosphorylation is essential for CPEB1 interaction with translation machinery or not. Here, we performed mass spectrometry on C2 cells transfected with CPEB1-mVenus or CPEB1 (T171A, S177A)-mVenus after IgG or mVenus antibody immunoprecipitation. After analysis, we identify CPEB1 interacting proteins and the phosphorylation dependent interacting proteins such as ribosomal proteins. Thus, our data suggest that CPEB1 regulate translation by interacting with translation machinery in a phosphorylation dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 cells were seed on 10 cm tissue culture plates and transfected with 20ug CPEB1-mVenus or CPEB1 (T171A, S177A)-mVenus plasmid. After 48 hours of culture, C2 cells were harvested by polysome lysis buffer (PLB) for mVenus antibody immunoprecipitation. The lysate was precleared by Protein A Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific). Antibody for mVenus (10ug) (Invitrogen) was added to the precleared lysate and incubated with rotation at 4째C overnight. The Protein A Dynabeads was resuspended using PLB and added to the SC lysate and rotated at 4째C for 4 hours. The lysate was put on a magnetic stand and the supernatant was discarded. Beads were washed with PLB for 4 times, rotated at 4째C for 5 minutes per wash. Protein was eluted by adding 100ul RIPA buffer to the beads for 10 minutes at 95째C. The protein was precipitated by acetone from the supernatant then was used for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument are transferred to the PEAKS software. Then search the raw data by PEAKS with Unitprot database. Afterwards, the PEAKS provide all the information including peptides, peaks, proteins, and spectral counting of proteins. Then, we identify the proteins that specifically interacted with CPEB1 or CPEB1 (T171A, S177A).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibody immunoprecipitation, C2c12, Timstof

### Affiliations
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Tom Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Tom H. Cheung
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


