### Accession
PXD033550

### Title
Hepatocyte thorns, a novel drug-induced stress response in human and mouse liver spheroids

### Description
The in vivo-relevant phenotype of 3D liver spheroids allows for long-term studies of e.g. novel mechanisms of chronic drug-induced liver toxicity. Using this system, we present a novel drug-induced stress response in human and murine hepatocyte spheroids wherein long slender filaments form after chronic treatment with four different drugs, of which, three are PPARα an-tagonists. The morphology of the thorns varies between donors and compounds used. They are mainly composed of diverse protein fibres, which are glycosylated. Their formation is inhibited by treatment with fatty acids or antioxidants. Treatment of mice with GW6471, revealed changes in gene and protein expression like those in the spheroids. In addition, similar changes in kera-tin expression were seen following treatment of hepatotoxic drugs including aflatoxin B1, para-cetamol, chlorpromazine, cyclosporine and ketoconazole. We suggest that thorn formation may be indicative of hepatocyte metaplasia in response to toxicity and that more focus should be placed on alterations of ECM derived protein expression as biomarkers of liver disease and chronic drug-induced hepatotoxicity, changes that can be studied in stable in vivo-like hepatic cell systems like the spheroids.

### Sample Protocol
Qualitative and quantitative proteomics: Two spheroid samples (50 µM GW6471 72h and vehicle control) were washed in PBS (-) and lysed in 15% (v/v) 8M urea, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 buffer (AmBic). Next, 15% (v/v) 1% ProteaseMax, 10% acetonitrile in AmBic was added, and pH was ad-justed to 8.5 with AmBic. Samples were sonicated using a bath and probe then freeze-thawed in liquid nitrogen three times before centrifugation (18,000 x g, 10 minutes, 4 °C). Protein content of the supernatant was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) as-say, 10 µg protein was reduced with 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in AmBic to a final con-centration of 7 mM (45 minutes, 37 °C). Samples were alkylated with 500 mM iodoa-cetamide (IAA) in AmBic to a final concentration of 18 mM (room temperature, 30 minutes) followed by digestion with 0.5 µg trypsin (overnight, 37 °C). Samples were acidi-fied with a final concentration of 5% formic acid and HyperSep C-18 plates were used for clean-up (5-7 µL bed volume) before drying in a SpeedVac. LC-MS/MS was performed by 4/12 µL injection of 3 µg protein, 90-minute gradient acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following identification of proteins in Mascot Server v2.5.1 using human database, applying 5% FDR cut-off, approximately 20% of the identified proteins were unique for each sample.  Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) Analysis: PISA analysis exploits the drug-dependent changes in protein solubility as assessed by quantitative proteomic analyses of the soluble fraction after treatment of the spheroids with drugs or vehicle and incubation of equal portions of each sample at different temper-atures. Protein interactions of these drugs can then increase or decrease the soluble amount of the protein in the whole range of temperature tested which is confidently measured by proteomics using a statistically robust number (>3) of biological replicates. The Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) assay was carried out in a 16-plex format, using the PISA assay method as published [9] and adapted to the TMTpro 16‐plex technology [10]. Briefly, PISA thermal treatment was performed with 16 temperatures (44-60 °C), extraction was performed as in PISA with the addition of a 0.4% NP40 incuba-tion step for 30 minutes at 4°C after five freeze/thaw cycles, then the soluble part was sep-arated by ultracentrifugation and collected separately from the pellet. Total protein content of the sample was determined by micro‐BCA assay. Fifty μg of each sample was processed as follows: reduction with 8 mM dithiothreitol (55 °C, 45 minutes), alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide (30 minutes, 25 °C, in darkness), protein precipitation overnight at -20 °C using sample:cold acetone in a ratio of 1:5. After precipi-tation, the supernatant was discarded and protein pellets were resuspended in 20 mM EPPS containing 8 M urea, then samples were progressively diluted in 20 mM EPPS to lower urea concentration and digested using LysC enzyme at 30°C for 6h at the sub-strate:enzyme ratio of 1:75 followed by trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C (enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50). The digested proteins were labelled using TMTpro 6‐plex for two hours and pooled in the final 16-plex sample according to manufacturer`s protocol. The 16-plex sample was cleaned and desalted using on C18 SepPack column (Waters) and fractionated into 48 fractions using reverse phase C18 at capillary flow and high pH. Each fraction was dried by speedvac, resolubilized and injected into a nanoLC‐ESI‐MS, eluted at 300 nl/min over a 90-minute linear gradient on a heated 50 cm long C18 column, and data were acquired by a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer with HCD fragmentation and MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative proteomics: Protein identification was performed using the human database, detected proteins were filtered by applying 1% FDR cut-off using Percolator. Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine relative protein abundances in the sam-ple groups using a TMT quantification method. Quantification was provided based on reporter ion intensities and protein abundance ratios were calculated using median val-ues for each treatment group. Student’s t-test was applied as hypothesis test.  Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) Analysis: Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins from RAW data of all fractions was obtained by MaxQuant database search engine against the complete Uniprot human database using of 1% FDR cut-off. Quantification was based on reporter ion intensities af-ter normalization of each total TMT label intensity across the whole dataset, with only 2 or more unique peptides per proteins included in the final PISA analysis. Ratios of soluble protein abundance in PISA and student’s t-test were measured on normalized values over untreated controls.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatocytes; spheroids; thorns; hepatotoxicity; keratins; 3d culture

### Affiliations
Chemical Proteomics, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, MBB Department, Biomedicum, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Massimiliano Gaetani

### Lab Head
Dr Massimiliano Gaetani
Chemical Proteomics, Division of Physiological Chemistry I, MBB Department, Biomedicum, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm


