### Accession
PXD015565

### Title
SUMOylation regulates the metaphase-anaphase transition by stabilizing sister kinetochore biorientation

### Description
The accurate segregation of chromosomes during mitosis relies on the attachment of sister chromatids to microtubules from opposite poles, called biorientation. Sister chromatid cohesion resists microtubule forces, generating tension which provides the signal that biorientation has occurred. How tension silences the surveillance pathways that prevent cell cycle progression and correct erroneous kinetochore-microtubule remains unclear. Here we identify SUMOylation as a mechanism that promotes anaphase onset upon biorientation. SUMO ligases modify the tension-sensing pericentromere-localized chromatin protein, shugoshin, to stabilize bioriented sister kinetochore-microtubule attachments and allow entry into anaphase. SUMOylation of shugoshin prevents binding to protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), while enhancing chromosome passenger complex (CPC) interaction and removal from centromeres. Dissociation of the shugoshin-PP2A interaction is important for stabilizing sister kinetochore biorientation. Therefore, SUMOylation modulates protein interactions within pericentromeres to allow a signalling switch in response to biorientation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation A pGAL-SGO1 strain with 7HIS-SMT3 was inoculated to 0.2 OD in 2% raffinose media. After 3 h growth at room temperature, cells were diluted back to 0.2 OD and 2% galactose was added to induce SGO1 overexpression. Cells were harvested after 3 h and SUMOylated proteins were purified as described above. Proteins eluted from the Ni-NTA column were separated on a 4-12% NuPage Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and the gel slice encompassing SUMOylated Sgo1 (between ~100 kDa and 135 kDa, based on immunoblotting of a parallel gel) was excised for mass spectrometry analysis. In gel digestion  Proteins in gel were treated with 10 mM DTT, 100 mM NH5CO3 for 30 min at 56°C, followed by a 45 min treatment with 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH5CO3 at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were then digested for 18 hours either at 37°C with Trypsin (10 ng/μl in 100 mM NH5CO3), or at 25°C with Glu-C (10 ng/μl in 25 mM NH5CO3). Peptides were extracted from the gel with a 5% (vol/vol) formic acid in a 1-to-2 solution with acetonitrile, vacuum-concentrated at 45°C and dissolved in 0.1% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid.    Liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MSMS) Prior to MS-based analyses, all peptide samples were desalted on self-made Empore C18 (Agilent Technologies, cat. no. 12145004) Stop and Go Extraction Tips (StageTips) according to a protocol by (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Desalted peptide samples were analysed using EASY-nLC 1000 nano-flow UHPLC system, EASY-Spray ion source and Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nanoViper pre-column (75 μm ID; 3 μm particles; 100 Å pore size) at a constant pressure of 800 bar and separated using 50 cm EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm ID; 2 μm particles; 100 Å pore size) maintained at 45°C.  Peptides were separated with 120-minute linear gradient of 5−22 % (vol/vol) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (vol/vol) formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minute linear increase of acetonitrile to 40 % (vol/vol). Total length of the gradient including column washout and re-equilibration was 150 minutes.  Full MS scan covered a mass range of mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300−1800, target value was set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms, and the scan was acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Data dependent MS/MS scan was initiated if the intensity of a mass peak reached a minimum of 21,000 ions. Up to 10 most abundant ions (Top 10) were selected using 2 Th mass isolation range when centered at the parent ion of interest. Selection of molecules with peptide-like isotopic distribution was preferred. Target value for MS/MS scan was set to 500,000 ions with a maximum IT of 60 ms and resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), using normalised collision energy of 30 and fixed first mass was set to m/z 100. Precursor ions with either undetermined, single, or high (>8) charge state were rejected. Ions triggering a data-dependent MS/MS scan were placed on the dynamic exclusion list for 40 s and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peak lists were searched with an integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against an entire yeast UniprotKB proteome containing canonical and isoform sequences (The UniProt Consortium, 2015) downloaded in April 2013. Raw files were divided into parameter groups based on the specificity of the proteolysis applied during sample preparation. Hydrolysis of peptide bonds C-terminal to Lys and Arg with a maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed for peptides processed with Trypsin, whereas samples acquired after an Glu-C digestion were analyzed with an enzyme specificity set to C-terminal to Glu and Asp with a maximum of five missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N-termini and where applicable, EQIGG or QIGG adduct on internal lysine residues (with and without the conversion of N-terminal Glu and Gln to pyroglutamate), were selected as variable modifications. Maximum peptide mass of 10,000 Da was allowed, and spectrum matching between runs was enabled. Default values were chosen for the rest of the parameters. All datasets were filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of 1% at protein, peptide and modified site level. Peptides identified using reverse decoy database search and potential contaminants of non-yeast origin were excluded. The list of SUMO modification sites (Supplementary table 2) is based on peptides, which modification site localization probability is greater than 75%, mass error is less than 2 ppm, and the Andromeda quality score is above 45.

### Publication Abstract
During mitosis, sister chromatids attach to microtubules from opposite poles, called biorientation. Sister chromatid cohesion resists microtubule forces, generating tension, which provides the signal that biorientation has occurred. How tension silences the surveillance pathways that prevent cell cycle progression and correct erroneous kinetochore-microtubule attachments remains unclear. Here we show that SUMOylation dampens error correction to allow stable sister kinetochore biorientation and timely anaphase onset. The Siz1/Siz2 SUMO ligases modify the pericentromere-localized shugoshin (Sgo1) protein before its tension-dependent release from chromatin. Sgo1 SUMOylation reduces its binding to protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), and weakening of this interaction is important for stable biorientation. Unstable biorientation in SUMO-deficient cells is associated with persistence of the chromosome passenger complex (CPC) at centromeres, and SUMOylation of CPC subunit Bir1 also contributes to timely anaphase onset. We propose that SUMOylation acts in a combinatorial manner to facilitate dismantling of the error correction machinery within pericentromeres and thereby sharpen the metaphase-anaphase transition.

### Keywords
Yeast sumo smt3 sgo1

### Affiliations
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
University of Dundee


