### Accession
PXD034649

### Title
Eps8, Arp2/3 and IRSp53 in TNT formation

### Description
Tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) connect distant cells and mediate cargo transfer for intercellular communication in physiological and pathological contexts. How the cell controls a common pool of proteins to generate these protrusions spanning length scales beyond those attainable by canonical filopodia remains unknown. Through a combination of surface micropatterning and optical tweezer-based approaches, we found that Arp2/3-dependent pathways attenuate the extent with which actin polymerizes in nanotubes, limiting the formation and attainable lengths of TNTs. Proteomic analysis using Epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (Eps8) as a positive effector of TNTs showed that upon Arp2/3 inhibition, proteins enhancing filament turnover and depolymerization were reduced and instead Eps8 exhibited heightened interactions with the inverted Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (I-BAR) domain protein IRSp53 that provides a direct connection with linear actin polymerases. Our data reveals how common players in protrusions (Eps8 and IRSp53) facilitate the formation of TNTs, and that this Eps-IRSp53 interaction is enhanced when competing pathways overutilizing actin in branched Arp2/3 networks are inhibited to drive outward actin extension.

### Sample Protocol
On beads digestion following Nanotrap IP. On bead digestion was performed strictly as described by Chromotek. Briefly, beads were resuspended in digestion buffer (Tris 50 mM pH 7.5, urea 2 M, 1 mM DTT and 5 µg.µl of trypsin (Promega)) for 3 min at 30°C. Supernatants were transfer to new vials and beads were washed twice using (Tris 50 mM pH 7.5, urea 2 M and iodoacetamide 5 mM). All washes were pulled and incubated at 32°C for overnight digestion in the dark. Peptides were purified using a C18 based clean up standard protocol done using Bravo AssayMap device.  LC-MS/SM analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 30 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 300 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 2% to 35% in 55 min, 35% to 60% in 10 min, 60% to 90% in 5 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 80 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 400 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 s.  Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using the Andromeda search engine REF against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (55470 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 1st of June 2021). The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. At least 2 peptides (including 1 unique peptides) were asked to report a protein identification. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. iBAQ value was calculated. The match between runs features was allowed for biological replicate only.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis was based on pairwise comparison of protein intensities. Values were log-transformed (log2). Reverse hits and potential contaminant were removed from the analysis. Proteins with at least 2 peptides were kept for further statistics. Intensity values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR). Remaining proteins without any iBAQ value in one of both conditions have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in the other. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the impute.MLE function of the R package imp4p. Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test  thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p using the robust method described in (REF) to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins

### Publication Abstract
Tunnelling nanotubes (TNTs) connect distant cells and mediate cargo transfer for intercellular communication in physiological and pathological contexts. How cells generate these actin-mediated protrusions to span lengths beyond those attainable by canonical filopodia remains unknown. Through a combination of micropatterning, microscopy, and optical tweezer-based approaches, we demonstrate that TNTs formed through the outward extension of actin achieve distances greater than the mean length of filopodia and that branched Arp2/3-dependent pathways attenuate the extent to which actin polymerizes in nanotubes, thus limiting their occurrence. Proteomic analysis using epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (Eps8) as a positive effector of TNTs showed that, upon Arp2/3 inhibition, proteins enhancing filament turnover and depolymerization were reduced and Eps8 instead exhibited heightened interactions with the inverted Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (I-BAR) domain protein IRSp53 that provides a direct connection with linear actin polymerases. Our data reveals how common protrusion players (Eps8 and IRSp53) form tunnelling nanotubes, and that when competing pathways overutilizing such proteins and monomeric actin in Arp2/3 networks are inhibited, processes promoting linear actin growth dominate to favour tunnelling nanotube formation.

### Keywords
Gfp-trap, Tnt

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Unite de Trafic membranaire et Pathogenese, Chiara Zurzolo Lab, Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Henderson
Unite de Trafic membranaire et Pathogenese, Chiara Zurzolo Lab, Institut Pasteur


