### Accession
PXD019287

### Title
A Siz1/Siz2-mediated SUMOylation programme inactivates the shugoshin-associated phosphatase-kinase network to stabilize sister kinetochore biorientation

### Description
The accurate segregation of chromosomes during mitosis relies on the attachment of sister chromatids to microtubules from opposite poles, called biorientation. Sister chromatid cohesion resists microtubule forces, generating tension which provides the signal that biorientation has occurred. How tension silences the surveillance pathways that prevent cell cycle progression and correct erroneous kinetochore-microtubule attachments remains unclear. Here we identify SUMOylation as a mechanism that promotes anaphase onset upon biorientation. SUMO ligases modify the tension-sensing pericentromere-localized chromatin protein, shugoshin, to stabilize bioriented sister kinetochore-microtubule attachments. In the absence of SUMOylation, Aurora B kinase removal from kinetochores is delayed. Shugoshin SUMOylation prevents its binding to protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and release of this interaction is important for stabilizing sister kinetochore biorientation. We propose that SUMOylation modulates the kinase-phosphatase network within pericentromeres to inactivate the error correction machinery, thereby allowing anaphase entry in response to biorientation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin as described by Schevchenko et al (1996). Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 13 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK). Following trypsin digestion, the samples were acidified to pH1-2 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and processed using the stage-tip method (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were eluted from StageTips in 40μL of 80% ACN in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1μL by vacuum. All samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3μL/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25μL/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 150 min, then to 95% in 11 min. Survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0E5. The RF lens was set to 30% and the maximum injection time to 50ms. The cycle time was set to 3 sec and dynamic exclusion to 60 sec.  MS2 was performed in the ion trap at rapid scan mode with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 (Olsen et al, 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson and the maximum injection time was set to 35 ms. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform version 1.6.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used to process raw files and search was conducted against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain S288C) complete/reference proteome set of Saccharomyces Genome Database (Uniprot, released in June, 2019), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5ppm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2ppm and maximum charge of 7. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine.Label-free quantitation (LFQ) analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox Et al 2014). FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitosis, Shugoshin, Chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Adele Marston

### Lab Head
Dr Adele Marston
WCCB, University of Edinburgh


