### Accession
PXD005404

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of hemolymph from uninfected and Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus-infected Diaphorina citri

### Description
Hemolymph was characterized from Diaphorina citri adults infected with the phytopathogen, Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) and compared with that from uninfected psyllids. This study identified 5531 and 3220 peptides within infected and uninfected hemolymph using nano LC-MS/MS. A reduced number of proteins were detected for D. citri and all known endosymbionts within infected hemolymph as compared to uninfected hemolymph. A large number of immune defense proteins were absent from D. citri hemolymph; however,  a single recognition protein (PGRP), two serine protease inhibitors, three prophenoloxidase (proPO) enzymes, and a single serine protease in an uninfected D. citri were detected. The hemolymph is nearly devoid of nutrient storage proteins. This is the first proteomic analysis of D. citri hemolymph that also analyzes the components contributed by all of the endosymbionts. By comparing the contribution of each endosymbiont (CCR, CPA,WB) in the presence and absence of CLas infection, this study provides initial insights regarding the hemolymph response to microbial community shifts associated with D. citri infection status.  Our data also present potential protein targets for analysis and disruption of CLas transmission that may facilitate management of huanglongbing (HLB) caused by CLas in citrus.

### Sample Protocol
Hemolymph was collected from CLas-infected and uninfected adult D. citri using borosilicate glass capillary micropipettes fabricated with a KOPF Needle/Pipette Puller (Model 730; David Kopf instruments, Tujunga, California). The glass micropipette was inserted into a cut plastic pipette tip coupled with a 2.5 μL micropipetter (Eppendorf Inc., Fremont, CA). D. citri were aspirated into collection tubes, treated with CO2, and placed in a Petri dish on ice. The hemolymphwas collected from D. citri by inserting the glass micropipette between the prescutum and the head. Upon puncturing the prescutum, approximately 0.01-0.04 L of hemolymph filled directly into the needle and was directly transferred to an Eppendorf tube containing 62 mM NaCl, 100 mM glucose, 10 mM EDTA, 30 mM sodium citrate and 26 mM citric acid (pH 4.6) and stored at -80 oC. Batches of hemolymph from 20 psyllids were collected in a single aliquot, consisting of 1-5 L of hemolymph per aliquot. Hemocytes were not separated from the hemolymph during the isolation procedures to minimize the potential for melanization, and proteolytic and chemical alterations of samples prior to analysis (Handke et al. 2013).  Batches of hemolymph were collected from independent batches of psyllids on five different dates and pooled for LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Hemolymph proteins were prepared and identified as described in (Forde et al. 2013) performed by Applied Biomics (www.appliedbiomics.com).  Proteins were exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Samples were incubated at 60oC for 30 min with 10 mM dithiothreitol to reduce disulfide bonds, and then incubated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The proteins were then digested overnight in 20 μg Trypsin (Promega) at 37oC.  nano LC-MS/MS was carried out using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Milford, MA). Mobile phase solvents A and B were 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) in water and 0.1% TFA (v/v) in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. Tryptic peptides were loaded into a μ-Precolumn Cartridge and separated on an acetonitrile gradient (ranging from 5% to 60%) on a nano LC column. Fractions were collected at 20-second intervals followed by MS analysis on AB SCIEX TOF/TOF™ 5800 System (AB SCIEX). Mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each ion, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). The resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to the GPS Explorer workstation equipped with MASCOT version 2.1 database search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search against the Swiss-Prot database. Searches were performed without constraining protein molecular weight or isoelectric point, with variable carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues, and with one missed cleavage. Quantification of relative protein abundance was performed using the Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) method (http://www.matrixscience.com/help/quant_empai_help.html) (Ishihama et al. 2005). The emPAI values are label-free relative quantifications of proteins based on protein coverage by peptide match results in a database. EmPAI values are identified in brackets unless otherwise noted in the text.

### Publication Abstract
Hemolymph was characterized from Diaphorina citri adults infected with the phytopathogen, Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas), and compared with that from uninfected psyllids. This study identified 5531 and 3220 peptides within infected and uninfected hemolymph using nano-LC-MS/MS. A reduced number of proteins were detected for D. citri and all known endosymbionts within infected hemolymph as compared to uninfected hemolymph. A large number of immune defense proteins were absent from D. citri hemolymph; however, a single recognition protein (PGRP), two serine protease inhibitors, three prophenoloxidase (proPO) enzymes, and a single serine protease in an uninfected D. citri were detected. The hemolymph is nearly devoid of nutrient storage proteins. This is the first proteomic analysis of D. citri hemolymph that also analyses the components contributed by all the endosymbionts. By comparing the contribution of each endosymbiont (CCR, CPA, and WB) in the presence and absence of CLas infection, this study offers initial insights regarding the hemolymph response to microbial community shifts associated with D. citri infection status. Our data also present potential protein targets for analysis and disruption of CLas transmission that may facilitate management of huanglongbing (HLB) caused by CLas in citrus.

### Keywords
Asian citrus psyllid, Endosymbionts, Hemolymph, Diaphorina citri, Hemiptera

### Affiliations
University of Florida Department of Entomology Citrus Research and Education Center Lake Alfred, Florida
University of Florida

### Submitter
Torrence Gill

### Lab Head
Dr Kirsten Pelz-Stelinski
University of Florida Department of Entomology Citrus Research and Education Center Lake Alfred, Florida


