### Accession
PXD002649

### Title
Protrusion vs Cell-body pulsed-SILAC proteomics

### Description
In mesenchymal-like cell migration, cells need to polarise into a protrusive front and a retracting cell body. Apart from proteins, several mRNAs are known to be localised to cell protrusions but to what extent RNA localisation and local translation contributes toward front-back assymetry is unknown. We set out to quantify the relative translation rates of cellular proteins between protrusions and cell-body by Pulsed-SILAC proteomics, using MDA-MB-231 cells, a highly invasive breast cancer cell-line. We utilised a transwell filter based fractionation method in conjugation with pulsed-SILAC. In this method, cells are seeded on top of 3μm transwell filters to enable protrusions to form through the pores of the filters but to prevent the cell-bodies passing through due to the small size of the pores, thus resulting in separation of protrusions and cell-bodies on opposite sides of the filter, which can then be lysed and prepared separately. Prepration of protrusion and cell-body fractions from SILAC heavy vs. medium label pulsed cells then allows for reciprocal mixing and quantification of nascent proteins between protrusions and cell-body. We determined the relative local translation rates of 1150 proteins between protrusions and cell-body from two pulsed-SILAC mixes.

### Sample Protocol
Light SILAC labelled MDA-MB231 cells were seeded on 3μm pore polycarbonate transwell filters (75mm membrane Inserts) as below: 12 million cells were seeded in 8ml serum free DMEM on top of collagen coated transwell filters, with 12ml 10% serum containing DMEM in the bottom of the transwell and cells. This was done in duplicate with one set being seeded in medium labelled SILAC DMEM and the other in heavy labelled SILAC DMEM, for pulsing. 2 transwells were used per condition (heavy or medium). After 2 hrs, transwells were washed in PBS, fixed with -20°C methanol for 20 minutes, washed again with PBS, and the protrusions from the bottom of the filter were then shaved off using a glass cover slip, with the cover slip being dipped in 2% SDS, Tris pH 6.8, 10% Glycerol during the shaving. The cell-bodies on the top were then lysed by direct addition of the buffer to the top. The Protrusion and Cell-body fractions were then quantified by BCA assay, balanced, and fractions from opposite labels then mixed (heavy pulsed protrusions with medium pulsed cell-body and vice versa), generating two reciprocal pulsed SILAC mixes. DTT(100 mM) and Blomophenol-blue (0.1%) was then added to the lysates and 50μg of each mix was resolved on SDS-PAGE, stained with Gel-code blue coomassie dye (Pierce/Thermo), and cut into 24 sections. Excised gel sections were diced and reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and trypsin digested with modified porcine Trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and triethylammonium bicarbonate washes. The solution was dried in a speedvac, and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS runs were performed by ICR's proteomics core facility. Briefly, 40% of each fraction was analysed as 4μL injections using HP1200 reversed phase chromatography platform (Agilent). Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. C18 Pepmap column with 3 μm particle size (LC Packings/Dionex) over 90 min using a linear gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 300nL/min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization using 1.9 kV applied directly to the post-column LC eluent via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was infused into an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 20 μm I.D., 10 μm tapered tip non-coated SilicaTip emitter (New Objectives). The ion transfer tube was heated to 200°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition to sequence the top 20 most intense ions using standard ion trap scans. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT-MS maximum inject time was 500ms and normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10ppm mass window for 15s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were searched and quantified using Maxquant software (version 1.4.1.2). The search was performed against the Human IPI database (version 3.68), with a false detection rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide and protein identifications, calculated using reverse database search. Met oxidisation, and N-terminal acetylation were allowed asvariable modifications while Cys carbamidomethylation was considered as a fix modification. Match between runs (2 minutes window) was enabled but re-quantify option was disabled. For pulsed-SILAC quantifications, an overall minimum ratio count of 1 per protein was used. Only razor or unique unmodified peptides as well as Methionine oxidized and N-terminally acetylated peptides were used for protein quantifications.

### Publication Abstract
Polarization of cells into a protrusive front and a retracting cell body is the hallmark of mesenchymal-like cell migration. Many mRNAs are localized to protrusions, but it is unclear to what degree mRNA localization contributes toward protrusion formation. We performed global quantitative analysis of the distributions of mRNAs, proteins, and translation rates between protrusions and the cell body by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and quantitative proteomics. Our results reveal local translation as a key determinant of protein localization to protrusions. Accordingly, inhibition of local translation destabilizes protrusions and inhibits mesenchymal-like morphology. Interestingly, many mRNAs localized to protrusions are translationally repressed. Specific cis-regulatory elements within mRNA UTRs define whether mRNAs are locally translated or repressed. Finally, RNAi screening of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) enriched in protrusions revealed trans-regulators of localized translation that are functionally important for protrusions. We propose that by deciphering the localized mRNA UTR code, these proteins regulate protrusion stability and mesenchymal-like morphology.

### Keywords
Pulsed-silac; local translation; protrusion;

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J Marshall
Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cancer Biology, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.


