### Accession
PXD042604

### Title
Proteomic changes between primary tumors and matched distant metastases of lung adenocarcinomas

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide and lung adenocarcinoma is the most common form of lung cancer. Genomic studies of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) have advanced our understanding of the disease's biology and accelerated targeted therapy. However, the proteomic characteristics of LUAD are still insufficiently understood. Prognosis for lung cancer patients remains poor and is strongly related to the stage of disease at the time of diagnosis. Therefore, our study focuses on metastasis formation in LUAD. We performed high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) on a total of 40 FFPE samples and compared proteomic profiles of primary tumors to those of matched distant metastases. Using differential expression analysis and unsupervised clustering we identified candidate proteins playing a role in metastatic spread. Selected proteins were validated by immunoblotting. Our findings give a better understanding of tumor progression and metastasis formation in LUAD and might help to develop biomarker specific therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction For each primary tumor or metastasis tissue areas with preferably high tumor cell content were selected for proteomic analysis and 45 µm sections were cut off and stored at room temperature. To solubilize the proteins 1 ml Heptane was added to each sample, vortexed for 10s. After 1.5 hours at room temperature, 50 µl Methanol were added and the samples were vortexed again. The samples were centrifuged for 2 Minutes at 9 000xg at room temperature, the supernatant was removed, and the samples dried out for 5 Minutes at room temperature. For each sample 94 µl EXB Plus and 6 µl of beta-mercaptoethanol were vortexed together, added to the precipitation, vortexed again and incubated on ice for 5 Minutes. The probes were left for 20 Minutes at 100°C on a heating block with sealing cups, followed by 2 hours at 80°C on a thermoshaker at 750 rpm. The samples were put on ice for 1 Minute and centrifuged for 15 Minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C over night. Total protein concentration was determined using the Typhoon FLA 9000 (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Sweden). 1µl of each sample was diluted with 9µl DIGE-Buffer. 1µl was added on a filter paper next to a quality control and a dilution series. After letting the filter paper dry off, the paper was covered with 40ml Methanol and left on a shaker for 5 minutes. The Methanol was poured off and the filter paper left to dry. The filter paper was covered with 40µl EZQ protein quantitation reagent, protected from any light, and left 30 minutes on a shaker. After pouring the EZQ off, the paper was rinsed off 3 times, 2 minutes each rinse, using a rinse-buffer consisting out of 10% Methanol and 7% acetic acid. The filter paper was dried out for 1 hour at 37°C. The filter paper was scanned following the instruction manual of GE Healthcare Bio- Sciences AB using the blue 473nm laser and the voltage of the photo-multiplier tube around 350V. The high value of the intensity graph was aimed to be between 60 000 and 65 000. Protein concentrations were determined using the known concentrations of the dilution series and the resulting trend line.  For each sample 100µl volume containing 25 µg protein was pipetted. 400µl Methanol and 100µl Chloroform were added to the protein lysate followed by a 10s vortex and 10s centrifugation at 9000xg at room temperature in between each volume addition. 300µl of water was added to each sample, vortexed for 10s and centrifuged for 1 minute at 9000xg at room temperature. The aqueous supernatant was removed. 300 µl Methanol was added, the sample vortexed for 10 s and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 9000xg at room temperature. The supernatant was carefully removed. The protein pellet was washed with 1ml Ethanol and centrifuged at 9000xg at room temperature and the supernatant removed. The pellet was desolved in 10µl RapiGest (1%, in 25mM Ammonium bicarbonat). Proteins were reduced with 50 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 37°C at 950rpm on a thermoshaker for 1 hour. Afterwards 100mM iodoacetamide was used to alkylate the proteins leaving the samples at 37°C at 950rpm on a thermoshaker for 1 hour, vortexing every 10 minutes. After adding 90µl 25mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 20µl Trypsin solution (25ng/µl) was used to digest the proteins over night at 37°C. 20µl of trifluoroacetic acid (5%) was added and incubated at 950rpm at 37°C on a thermoshaker. The samples were centrifuged for 13 000rpm at room temperature for 30 minutes and the supernatant transferred into a new tube, dried out in a SpeedVac for 3 days and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  Proteomic analysis The samples were solubilized with a final concentration of 1 µg/ml in 2% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid and loaded into a HPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific, USA). The samples were first loaded onto a trap column (Luna, 5 μm C18 (2), 20 x 0.3 cm; Phenomenex, USA) and desalted with loading solution at 10 μL/min for 5 min.  Peptides were subsequently separated using an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μm C18 (2), 150mm x 0.3mm, Phenomenex, USA) and eluted with a multi-step gradient of solvent B in solvent A for 86 min (A: 0.1% formic acid in milliq; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5µL/min. Purified peptides were analyzed with TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB ScieX, USA). For data acquisition, one 0.049965sec MS scan (m/z 350–1,250) was performed, followed by 100 variable Q1 windows with the size range 5-91.3 Da, each at 0.030sec accumulation time with CES at 5eV. The precursor isolation windows were defined using the SWATH Variable Window Calculator V2.0 (AB Sciex) based on precursor m/z frequencies obtained from DDA spectra. For DDA acquisition, identical instrument working parameters were used.  MS scans were performed for 350-1250 Da with an accumulation time of 0.25 sec, MS/MS scans were performed for 100-1500 Da with an accumulation time of 0.05 sec at high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
The software tool Spectronaut v13.2 (Biognosys, Switzerland) was used for the SWATH data processing. First a hybrid spectral library was established from all 38 SWATH runs and five pooled DDA runs using Spectronaut with default settings. The hybrid spectral library was subsequently searched with Spectronauts pulsar search engine using the default settings. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide precursor level and protein level, respectively. The human UniprotKB/swiss-pro database [9] was used for protein inference from identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide with lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) being the most common type. Genomic studies of LUAD have advanced our understanding of its tumor biology and accelerated targeted therapy. However, the proteomic characteristics of LUAD are still insufficiently explored. The prognosis for lung cancer patients is still mostly determined by the stage of disease at the time of diagnosis. Focusing on late-stage metastatic LUAD with poor prognosis, we compared the proteomic profiles of primary tumors and matched distant metastases to identify relevant and potentially druggable differences. We performed high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) on a total of 38 FFPE (formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded) samples. Using differential expression analysis and unsupervised clustering we identified several proteins that were differentially regulated in metastases compared to matched primary tumors. Selected proteins (HK1, ATP5A, SRI and ARHGDIB) were subjected to validation by immunoblotting. Thereby, significant differential expression could be confirmed for HK1 and ATP5A, both upregulated in metastases compared to matched primary tumors. Our findings give a better understanding of tumor progression and metastatic spreads in LUAD but also demonstrate considerable inter-individual heterogeneity on the proteomic level.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Lung adenocarcinoma, Clinical proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany

### Submitter
Thorben Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Timo Gemoll
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany


