### Accession
PXD025237

### Title
E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD2 mediates melanoma progression and immune evasion

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system maintains protein homeostasis, underpins the cell cycle and is dysregulated in cancer. However, the role of individual E3 ubiquitin ligases, which mediate the final step in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, remains incompletely understood. Identified through screening for cancer-specific endogenous retroviral transcripts, we show that the little studied E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD2 exerts dominant control of tumour progression in melanoma. HECTD2 cell-autonomously drives the proliferation of human and murine melanoma cells by accelerating the cell cycle. HECTD2 additionally regulates cancer cell production of immune mediators, initiating multiple immune suppressive pathways, which include the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) pathway. Accordingly, higher HECTD2 expression is associated with weaker anti-tumour immunity and unfavourable outcome of PD-1 blockade in human melanoma, and counteracts immunity against a model tumour antigen in murine melanoma. This central, multifaceted role of HECTD2 in cancer cell-autonomous proliferation and in immune evasion may provide a single target for a multipronged therapy of melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (1 million cells) resuspended in 50 uL ice cold PBS, then a 2x lysis buffer added (also 50uL).  Final lysis buffer conc = 4%SDS/HEPES pH8 100mM/TCEP 20mM. Cells lysed using Ultrasonic probe (30s) on ice. 10x CAA added to final concentration of 40mM Protein lysates reduced and alkylated simultaneously (70 C/10min) Cell debris spun down (20000 xg/5min/RT).  50 uL (expected 50 ug) removed into fresh tube.Precipitated overnight with 8x vol acetone (at -20 C). Pellets washed twice with 80% acetone (ice cold) and resuspended in digest buffer (1M GuaHCl/100mM HEPES, pH8). LysC enzyme added (0.5ug). 3h digestion at 37 C with 1400rpm shaking. Dilution 1:1 with water, trypsin added (1ug). Digestion overnight at 37 C/700rpm). Samples acidified (pH 2, with formic acid, 2uL).  Approx 1ug of each sample loaded onto pre-prepared Evotips following manufacturer's protocol and washed before submitting for DIA/44min analyses on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system with the 44min pre-programmed Evosep gradient and 15cm column. Pools of each condition were run in duplicate DDA to build a library.

### Data Protocol
Data searched using Pulsar search engine in Spectronaut software (Biognosys AG) to make a combined library.  Data searched against the Uniprot Proteome Database for Mus Musculus (uniprot-proteome_UP000000589.fasta) and a database of common contaminants. DIA data then searched against this library.  Library contained 24977 precursors that correspond to 18854 peptides from 2982 Protein Groups.  Differential protein expression carried out inside Spectronaut software to compare the clone vs parental cell differences.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome system maintains protein homoeostasis, underpins the cell cycle, and is dysregulated in cancer. However, the role of individual E3 ubiquitin ligases, which mediate the final step in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, remains incompletely understood. Identified through screening for cancer-specific endogenous retroviral transcripts, we show that the little-studied E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD2 exerts dominant control of tumour progression in melanoma. HECTD2 cell autonomously drives the proliferation of human and murine melanoma cells by accelerating the cell cycle. HECTD2 additionally regulates cancer cell production of immune mediators, initiating multiple immune suppressive pathways, which include the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) pathway. Accordingly, higher HECTD2 expression is associated with weaker anti-tumour immunity and unfavourable outcome of PD-1 blockade in human melanoma and counteracts immunity against a model tumour antigen in murine melanoma. This central, multifaceted role of HECTD2 in cancer cell-autonomous proliferation and in immune evasion may provide a single target for a multipronged therapy of melanoma.

### Keywords
Melanoma, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Immune evasion

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr George Kassiotis
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT UK


