### Accession
PXD035585

### Title
IP-MS detected the interation protein with PKM2

### Description
Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) senescence correlates with the increase of cardiovascular diseases in ageing population. Although ECs rely glycolysis for energy production, little is known about the role of glycolysis in ECs senescence. Here, we report a critical role for glycolysis-derived serine biosynthesis in preventing ECs senescence. During senescence, the expression of serine biosynthetic enzyme PHGDH is significantly reduced due to decreased transcription of the activating transcription factor ATF4, which leads to decreased intracellular serine. PHGDH prevents premature senescence primarily by enhancing the stability and activity of pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2). Mechanistically, PHGDH interacts with PKM2, which prevents PCAF-catalyzed PKM2 K305 acetylation and subsequent degradation by autophagy. In addition, PHGDH facilitates p300-catalyzed PKM2 K433 acetylation, which promotes PKM2 nuclear translocation and stimulates its activity to phosphorylate H3T11 and regulate the transcription of senescence-associated genes. Vascular endothelium-targeted expression of PHGDH and PKM2 ameliorates the mice ageing phenotype. Our findings reveal that enhancing serine biosynthesis could become a novel therapy to promote healthy ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in buffer A (50 mM Tris pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 6 mM sodium deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF, 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail) at 4 ℃ for 30 min. The supernatant was incubated overnight with indicated antibody conjugated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) at 4 ℃, then washed with buffer A and were disulphide-reduced by 25 mM DTT at 37 ℃ for 40 min. Cysteines were alkylated by 50 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ overnight and the supernatant was desalted using C18 solid-phase cartridges and lyophilized. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer(Thermo Fisher). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z, with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 10^6. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 10^5.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) senescence correlates with the increase of cardiovascular diseases in ageing population. Although ECs rely on glycolysis for energy production, little is known about the role of glycolysis in ECs senescence. Here, we report a critical role for glycolysis-derived serine biosynthesis in preventing ECs senescence. During senescence, the expression of serine biosynthetic enzyme PHGDH is significantly reduced due to decreased transcription of the activating transcription factor ATF4, which leads to reduction of intracellular serine. PHGDH prevents premature senescence primarily by enhancing the stability and activity of pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2). Mechanistically, PHGDH interacts with PKM2, which prevents PCAF-catalyzed PKM2 K305 acetylation and subsequent degradation by autophagy. In addition, PHGDH facilitates p300-catalyzed PKM2 K433 acetylation, which promotes PKM2 nuclear translocation and stimulates its activity to phosphorylate H3T11 and regulate the transcription of senescence-associated genes. Vascular endothelium-targeted expression of PHGDH and PKM2 ameliorates ageing in mice. Our findings reveal that enhancing serine biosynthesis could become a therapy to promote healthy ageing.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Pkm2

### Affiliations
Hubei University
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei,China

### Submitter
Yinsheng Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Shanshan Li
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei,China


