### Accession
PXD014920

### Title
Network analyses and data integration of proteomics and metabolomics from leaves of two contrasting varieties of sugarcane in response to drought

### Description
Uncovering the molecular mechanisms involved in the responses of crops to drought is crucial to understand and enhance drought tolerance mechanisms. Sugarcane (Saccharum spp.) is an important commercial crop cultivated mainly in tropical and subtropical areas for sucrose and ethanol production. Usually, drought tolerance has been investigated by single omics analysis (e.g. global transcripts identification). Here we combine label-free quantitative proteomics and metabolomics data (GC-TOF-MS), using a network-based approach, to understand how two contrasting commercial varieties of sugarcane, CTC15 (tolerant) and SP90-3414 (susceptible), adjust their leaf metabolism in response to drought. To this aim, we propose the utilization of regularized canonical correlation analysis (rCCA), which is a modification of classical CCA, and explores the linear relationships between two datasets of quantitative variables from the same experimental units, with a threshold set to 0.99. Light curves revealed that after four days of drought, the susceptible variety had its photosynthetic rate already significantly reduced, while the tolerant cultivar did not show major reduction. Upon twelve days of drought, the susceptible plants had the photosynthetic rate completely reduced, while the tolerant cultivar was at a third of its maximum. Our results provide a reference data set and demonstrate that rCCA can be a powerful tool to infer experimentally metabolite-protein or protein-metabolite associations to understand plant biology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed according to Hurkman & Tanaka (1986). Protein extracts were prepared in biological triplicate and were desalinized using Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL 3K-NMWL filter devices (Millipore Corporation). Total proteins were quantified using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976). Fifty micrograms of protein was denatured with 25 μL of 0.2% RapiGest (Waters, USA), reduced with 2.5 μL of 100 mM DTT and alkylated with 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was performed with sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme: protein ratio and proteins were incubated at 37°C overnight. After, 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the digested mixture to hydrolyze the RapiGest (Waters, USA). The peptide mixture was then desalted using ZipTip C 18-columns (Millipore Corporation). The final volume of 40 μL was obtained by the addition of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) solution containing 20 fmol/µL of rabbit phosphorylase (internal standard to data normalization and label free protein quantification- P00489) to the lyophilized, desalted peptide sample. The peptides mixture was analyzed by reverse-phase ultra-performance liquid chromatography (ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System with 2D Technology – Waters, USA) using a Synapt G2 HDMS (Waters, Manchester, UK). First dimension chromatographic separation was achieved using an AQUITY UPLC M-Class peptide BECH C18 columns (5μm, 300 μm x 50 mm). Elution was performed using 5 different binary gradients with 20 mM pH 10 ammonium formate in acetonitrile, at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. Eluted peptides from the first-dimension column were trapped in a Symmetry 2D C18 column (5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and diluted, online, with acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Second dimension separation was performed in an AQUITY UPLC M-Class CSH C18 column (1.7 μm, 75 μm x 150 mm), using a binary gradient from 7 to 85% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, during 75 min, at a flow rate of 500 μL/min. Mass spectrometry acquisition was achieved in a Synapt G2 HDMS (multiplexed DIA – data-independent acquisition) (Waters, Manchester, UK) mass spectrometer equipped with an ion mobility cell and a nanolockspray source in the positive ion and ‘V’ mode. The doubly-charged ion ([M + 2H]2+) was used for initial single-point calibration and MS/MS fragment ions of GFP [Glu 1]-Fibrinopeptide B m/z 785,84,206 ([M + 2H]2+) (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA) were used as lock masses and instrument calibration. Data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed by switching between low (3 eV) and elevated collision energies HDMSE (19–45 eV), applied to the trap ‘T-wave’ CID (collision-induced dissociation) cell filled with argon gas. Scan time of 0.8 s were used for low and high energy scans from m/z 50 to 2000 (Silva et al. 2006).

### Data Protocol
The raw data processing, protein identification and relative quantitative analyses were all performed using the ProteinLynx Global Server v2.5.1 (PLGS, Waters). Protein identification were performed with the PLGS searching into the SUCEST translated EST database (http://sucest-fun.org/), containing specific annotation of sugarcane ESTs (237.954 sequences) (Vetore et al. 2003). The processing parameters included: automatic tolerance for precursor and product ions, minimum of three fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum of seven fragment ions matched per protein, minimum of 2 peptides matched per protein, 1 possible trypsin missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification, and a maximum false positive discovery rate (FDR) of 4% that was determined based on the search of a reversed database, which was generated automatically using PLGS by reversing the sequence of each entry. To identify and quantify the proteins, the intensities of the spectra were calculated by the stoichiometric method, according to the internal standard, the sequence of rabbit phosphorylase (Uniprot entry: P00489), by MSE analysis (Silva et al. 2006) and normalized using the PLGS auto normalization function. The amount and sequence of the matched peptide and protein fmols were obtained, based on the ratio of its three most abundant peptides (“High Top 3” method) determined in each individual experiment (Silva et al. 2006), considering the data from 3 biological replicates for each sample. All protein hits were identified with a confidence of > 95%. Only those proteins identified in at least two out of 3 replicates performed for each biological sample, were regarded as having undergone a significant change. Proteins identified but not quantified were removed from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Uncovering the molecular mechanisms involved in the responses of crops to drought is crucial to understand and enhance drought tolerance mechanisms. Sugarcane (<i>Saccharum</i> spp.) is an important commercial crop cultivated mainly in tropical and subtropical areas for sucrose and ethanol production. Usually, drought tolerance has been investigated by single omics analysis (e.g. global transcripts identification). Here we combine label-free quantitative proteomics and metabolomics data (GC-TOF-MS), using a network-based approach, to understand how two contrasting commercial varieties of sugarcane, CTC15 (tolerant) and SP90-3414 (susceptible), adjust their leaf metabolism in response to drought. To this aim, we propose the utilization of regularized canonical correlation analysis (rCCA), which is a modification of classical CCA, and explores the linear relationships between two datasets of quantitative variables from the same experimental units, with a threshold set to 0.99. Light curves revealed that after 4 days of drought, the susceptible variety had its photosynthetic capacity already significantly reduced, while the tolerant variety did not show major reduction. Upon 12 days of drought, photosynthesis in the susceptible plants was completely reduced, while the tolerant variety was at a third of its rate under control conditions. Network analysis of proteins and metabolites revealed that different biological process had a stronger impact in each variety (e.g. translation in CTC15, generation of precursor metabolites, response to stress and energy in SP90-3414). Our results provide a reference data set and demonstrate that rCCA can be a powerful tool to infer experimentally metabolite-protein or protein-metabolite associations to understand plant biology.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Drought, Canonical correlation analysis

### Affiliations
ESALQ USP
ESALQ

### Submitter
Thais Cataldi

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate
ESALQ


