### Accession
PXD031573

### Title
A universal and cost-effective method for general and specific RNA-protein complex isolation_18S rRNP capture

### Description
the establishment of a protocol isolating specific RNPs by combining a total RNP isolation with an antisense probe-mediated specific RNP isolation

### Sample Protocol
After UV cross-linking, RNA and RNPs were purified by a silica-based purification. Afterwards the complete RBPome was separated by an AGPC separation. Finally, the 18S rRNA interactome was isolated by a specific antisense probe-mediated capture. From materials and methods: The remaining beads were resolved in 150 µl trypsin digestion buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2) and incubated for 4 hours with 1 µg trypsin at 37˚C. Beads were removed, another 1 µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips and dried completely in a rotary evaporator. Peptides of the 18S rRNA interactome were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter kept at a constant temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 63 min, 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 87 min, 99% MS solvent B in 90 min followed by a 10-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
from materials and methods: LC-MS/MS runs of all samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein sequences in the Uniprot database containing 6,049 sequences. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. To compare protein intensities in the 18S probes and scrambled probes samples, statistical testing for differences between the two group means was performed, using the R-package Limma (moderated t test). Missing protein intensity values were imputed by randomly sampling from a normal distribution centered around each sample’s noise level. Statistical significance for differential regulation was set at FDR < 0.01 and |log2FC| = 2. Since our to compare datasets have a large difference in protein intensities (scrambled group should be theoretically lacking proteins) iBAQ intensities were chosen over MaxLFQ intensities for quantification. To appoint proteins to be part of the interactome both a semi-quantitative as a quantitative method, was used. If proteins were not detected in any of the non-cross-linked samples but present in 4 of the 5 replicates of the condition this protein was appointed to be an interaction partner of 18S rRNA in a semi-quantitative manner.

### Publication Abstract
Although methodological advances have been made over the past years, a widely applicable, easily scalable and cost-effective procedure that can be routinely used to isolate specific ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs) remains elusive. We describe the "Silica-based Acidic Phase Separation (SAPS)-capture" workflow. This versatile method combines previously described techniques in a cost-effective, optimal and widely applicable protocol. The specific RNP isolation procedure is performed on a pre-purified RNP sample instead of cell lysate. This combination of protocols results in an increased RNP/bead ratio and by consequence a reduced experimental cost. To validate the method, the 18S rRNP of S. cerevisiae was captured and to illustrate its applicability we isolated the complete repertoire of RNPs in A. thaliana. The procedure we describe can provide the community with a powerful tool to advance the study of the ribonome of a specific RNA molecule in any organism or tissue type.

### Keywords
18s rrnp capture, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saps-capture

### Affiliations
Kuleuven; Department: Biologie; unit: Moleculaire Biotechnologie van Planten en Micro-organismen
KULeuven

### Submitter
Roosje Van Ende

### Lab Head
Dr Koen Geuten
Kuleuven; Department: Biologie; unit: Moleculaire Biotechnologie van Planten en Micro-organismen


