### Accession
PXD027747

### Title
Plasmin activity promotes amyloid deposition in a new transgenic model of human transthyretin amyloidosis.

### Description
We have developed a new mouse model of transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis using transgenic mice expressing the most fibrillogenic variant of TTR (S52P).   Following seeding with amyloid fibrils, TTR amyloid is deposited mainly in the heart and tongue. The fibrils contain both full length and truncated (49-127) TTR. The presence of S52P TTR was confirmed by proteomics. Knockout of alpha2-antiplasmin enhanced amyloid deposition.

### Sample Protocol
Sample: Tissues from amyloidotic mice (and controls) were formalin fixed and embedded in paraffin. Six micron slices were cut and stained with Congo red: positive areas excised using laser capture dissection. Each sample was treated with Zwitergent/EDTA in tris buffer, followed by trypsin digestion and reduction with DTT (Kidney Int Rep, 2019;4: 977–986). They were analysed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system.  Samples are trapped on a Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18 cartridge and then chromatographed on a Thermo Scientific Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap C18 column eluting with acetonitrile:water:formic acid).  A full MS scan (m/z 350-1400) is acquired with a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and the 10 most intense ions with an intensity threshold 2.0e4 are selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD).  The lock mass is set at m/z 445.12003.  The normalised collision energy is 28, with an isolation width of 2 Da and dynamic exclusion of 20 s; singly charged ions are excluded.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Raw MS data (Thermo Q-Exactive plus) were analyzed with MASCOT using the default search settings and the mouse protein database from Uniprot to which S52P and wild type human TTR were added. Trypsin was used as the default in silico enzyme except for samples LCD_20170424_S16 and S17 where semi-trypsin was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiac ATTR amyloidosis, a serious but much under-diagnosed form of cardiomyopathy, is caused by deposition of amyloid fibrils derived from the plasma protein transthyretin (TTR), but its pathogenesis is poorly understood and informative in vivo models have proved elusive. Here we report the generation of a mouse model of cardiac ATTR amyloidosis with transgenic expression of human TTR<sup>S52P</sup>. The model is characterised by substantial ATTR amyloid deposits in the heart and tongue. The amyloid fibrils contain both full-length human TTR protomers and the residue 49-127 cleavage fragment which are present in ATTR amyloidosis patients. Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and plasmin are abundant within the cardiac and lingual amyloid deposits, which contain marked serine protease activity; knockout of &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-antiplasmin, the physiological inhibitor of plasmin, enhances amyloid formation. Together, these findings indicate that cardiac ATTR amyloid deposition involves local uPA-mediated generation of plasmin and cleavage of TTR, consistent with the previously described mechano-enzymatic hypothesis for cardiac ATTR amyloid formation. This experimental model of ATTR cardiomyopathy has potential to allow further investigations of the factors that influence human ATTR amyloid deposition and the development of new treatments.

### Keywords
Heart, Tongue, Mouse, Transthyretin, Amyloidosis

### Affiliations
Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit Centre for Amyloidosis & Acute Phase Proteins Division of Medicine, Royal Free Campus University College London
University College London

### Submitter
Graham Taylor

### Lab Head
Dr Graham W Taylor
Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit Centre for Amyloidosis & Acute Phase Proteins Division of Medicine, Royal Free Campus University College London


