### Accession
PXD009280

### Title
Comparative secretome analysis of primary murine white and brown adipocytes

### Description
The adipose organ, including white and brown adipose tissues, is an important player in systemic energy homeostasis, storing excess energy in form of lipids while releasing energy upon various energy demands. Recent studies have demonstrated that white and brown adipocytes also function as endocrine cells and regulate systemic metabolism by secreting factors that act locally and systemically. However, a comparative proteomic analysis of secreted factors from white and brown adipocytes and their responsiveness to adrenergic stimulation has not been reported yet. Therefore, we studied and compared the secretome of white and brown adipocytes, with and without norepinephrine (NE) stimulation. Our results reveal that in the absence of NE, carbohydrate metabolism-regulating proteins are preferably secreted from white adipocytes, while brown adipocytes predominantly secrete integrin signaling proteins. Upon NE stimulation, white adipocytes secrete more proteins involved in lipid metabolism, while brown adipocytes secrete more proteins with specific anti-inflammatory properties. In conclusion, our study provides a comprehensive catalogue of novel adipokine candidates secreted from white and brown adipocytes with many of them responsive to NE.

### Sample Protocol
Stroma-vascular fraction (SVF)-derived murine white and brown adipocytes were incubated for 30 min in depletion medium (DMEM non-GMP formulation without methionine, arginine and lysine; GIBCO) with 10% FBS (GIBCO) before incubation in the same medium supplemented with 0.1 mM l-AHA (AnaSpec, Inc) and either 84 μg/ml [13C6,15N4] l-arginine and 146 μg/ml [13C6,15N2]l-lysine or 84 μg/ml [13C6]l-arginine and 146 μg/ml [4,4,5,5-D4]l-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc). The cells were either stimulated or not, with 0.5 µM norepinephrine (Sigma), along with the labeled amino acid media for 24 hours. All assays were performed as independent biological duplicates with reversed SILAC labels. The supernatants were collected from a row of 4 wells and pooled together as one replicate. Collected supernatant samples were centrifuged (5 min at 1,000 g), cOmplete™ EDTAfree protease inhibitor (Roche) was added and the mixture was frozen at -80°C. DNA was extracted from the cells left behind on the plate and used to normalize the mixing of the collected media before the enrichment. Newly synthesized proteins from concentrated media (Amicon Ultra® Centrifugal Filters, 3-kDa cutoff, Millipore) (250 μl) were enriched using the Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen), applying the vendor's protocol with slight modifications, as described previously (Eichelbaum, Winter et. Al, 2012). One-hundred microliters of agarose resin slurry was used, and the volumes of all reagents were divided by two. After washing the resin with 900 μL water, the concentrated media, diluted in 250 μL urea buffer, and catalyst solution were added and incubated for 16–20 h at room temperature. After washing the resin with 900 μL water, 0.5 mL SDS buffer and 0.5 μL 1M dithiothreitol (DTT) (Bio-Rad) were added and vortexed at 70 °C for 15 min. The supernatant was aspirated, and 3.7 mg iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad) was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark. The resin was transferred to a spin column (supplied with the kit) and washed with 20 mL of SDS buffer, 20 mL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8, 20 mL of 20% isopropanol and 20 mL of 20% acetonitrile. After dissolving the resin in digestion buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 8, 2 mM CaCl2 and 10% acetonitrile), 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega) was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The peptide solution was collected, and the resin was washed with 500 μL water. Both solutions were combined and acidified with 20 μL 10% CF3COOH. The acidified samples were desalted using Sep-Pak® cartridges (Vac 1 cc (50 mg) tC18, Waters) and fractionated using isoelectric focusing on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator in combination with ImmobilineTM DryStrips (ph 3–10 NL, 13 cm, GE Healthcare). Focusing was performed at a constant current of 50 mA with a maximum voltage of 4000 V. After reaching 20 kVh, the samples were collected, acidified with CF3COOH, and desalted using StageTips. The peptide samples were dried and dissolved in 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated using a nanoAcquity ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 200 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Proxeon nanospray source (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B, acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 15 μL per min onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted through the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL per min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 25% in 110 min, which was followed by an increase to 40% in 10 min and an increase to 85% in 1 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer by a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD × 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective). Full scan mass spectrometry spectra with mass range 300–1,700 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) were acquired in profile mode in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The filling time was set at maximum of 500 ms with a limitation of 106 ions. The most intense ions (up to 15) from the full-scan mass spectrometry were selected for fragmentation in the LTQ. A normalized collision energy of 40% was used, and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3 × 104 ions or after a filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ or 3+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries, with a maximum retention period of 30 s and a relative mass window of 10 p.p.m. Lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against mouse (75,721 entries, downloaded 20.02.2013) proteins in UniProt, concatenated to the bovine-specific portion of UniProt (26,526 entries, downloaded 21.06. 2011), to which 247 frequently observed contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries had been added. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as the fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and replacement of methionine by AHA were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 p.p.m. for peptide masses and then was set to 6 p.p.m. in the main search and to 0.5 Da for fragment ion masses. FDRs for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable 'protein group' if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the 'requantify' and 'match between runs' functions were enabled. A protein group was kept for further analysis if it contained at least one mouse sequence and the number of identified peptide species carrying an intermediate or heavy label divided by the total number of peptide species detected in the complete experimental setup was higher than 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Murine svf cells, Adrenergic stimulation, Brown adipocytes, Secretome, White adipocytes

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center DKFZ
DKFZ

### Submitter
Sophia Foehr

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center DKFZ


