### Accession
PXD027488

### Title
Cell type-specific in vivo proximity labeling of the neuronal proteome reveals regional differences in mouse brain.

### Description
Isolation and proteomic profiling of brain cell types, particularly neurons, pose several technical challenges which limit our ability to resolve distinct cellular phenotypes in neurological diseases. Therefore, we generated a novel mouse line that enables cell type-specific expression of a biotin ligase, TurboID, via Cre-lox strategy for in vivo proximity-dependent biotinylation of proteins. Using adenoviral-based and transgenic approaches, we show striking protein biotinylation in neuronal cell bodies and axons throughout the mouse brain. We quantified more than 2,000 neuron-derived proteins following enrichment that mapped to numerous subcellular compartments. Synaptic, transmembrane transporters, ion channel subunits, and disease-relevant druggable targets were among the most significantly enriched proteins. Remarkably, we resolved brain region-specific proteomic profiles of Camk2a neurons with distinct functional molecular signatures and disease associations that may underlie regional neuronal vulnerability. Leveraging the neuronal specificity of this in vivo biotinylation strategy, we used an antibody-based approach to uncover regionally unique patterns of neuron-derived signaling phospho-proteins and cytokines, particularly in the cortex and cerebellum. Our work provides a proteomic framework to investigate cell type-specific mechanisms driving physiological and pathological states of the brain as well as complex tissues beyond the brain.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare enriched samples for mass spectrometry analysis, the remaining 90% of streptavidin beads were washed three times with PBS and then resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Beads were then reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min with rotation. Proteins were digested overnight with 0.5 µg of lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at RT on shaker followed by further overnight digestion with 1 µg trypsin (Thermo, 90058) at RT on shaker. The resulting peptide solutions were acidified to a final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA) and 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA), desalted with a HLB columns (Waters, 186003908) and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator). Similarly, 50 µg of protein from pooled total brain lysates from the AAV cohort were digested and desalted. Dried peptides were resuspended in 15 μL of loading buffer (0.1% FA and 0.03% TFA in water), and 7-8 μL was loaded onto a self-packed 25 cm (100 μm internal diameter packed with 1.7 μm Water’s CSH beads) using an Easy-nLC 1200 or Dionex 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system. The liquid chromatography gradient started at 1% buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) and ramps to 5% in 10 seconds. This was followed by a 55 min linear gradient to 35% B and finally a 4 minute 50 second 99% B flush. For the AAV cohort (IP and total brain samples), an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro) interface was used to acquire all mass spectra at a compensation voltage of -45V. The spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Survey scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a 60,000 resolution, 400 to 1600 m/z range, 400,000 automatic gain control (AGC), 50 ms max injection time and rf lens at 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra were collected in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35%, an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 10000, and a max injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass tolerance window.  For the transgenic brain region IP samples, an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro) interface was used to acquire all mass spectra at a compensation voltage of -45V. The spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Survey scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a 120,000 resolution, 400 to 1600 m/z range, 400,000 automatic gain control (AGC), 50 ms max injection time and rf lens at 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra were collected in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35%, an isolation width of 0.7 m/z, AGC target of 10000, and a max injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass tolerance window.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched using the search engine Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant, against 2020 mouse Uniprot database (91,441 target sequences including sequences for V5 peptide and TurboID protein). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned as a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for orbitrap and 0.6 Da tolerance for ion trap MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match MS1 peaks between runs; a 0.7 min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20-minute RT search space. Quantitation of proteins was performed using summed peptide intensities given by MaxQuant. The quantitation method only considered razor plus unique peptides for protein level quantitation. The MaxQuant output data were uploaded onto Perseus (Version 1.6.15) for analyses. The categorical variables were removed, and intensity values were log (base 2) transformed. The data were filtered to contain at least 3 valid values across 9 samples to accommodate 6 missing values in the negative controls for the AAV cohort and missing values were further imputed from normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) (Supp Table 1). The MaxQuant output data from the transgenic cohort brain regions were first filtered to contain at least 9 valid intensity values in the transgenic IP samples and then processed as described above with Perseus. Afterwards, the abundance values in the transgenic IP samples were normalized to TurboID abundance across all brain regions (Supp Table 10).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Mass spectrometry, Turboid

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology Associate Professor
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Srikant Rangaraju
Department of Neurology Associate Professor


