### Accession
PXD028899

### Title
The Effects of 5-Fluorouracil/Leucovorin Chemotherapy on Cognitive Function in Mice

### Description
5-Fluorouracil (5-Fu) and leucovorin (LV) are often given in combination to treat colorectal cancer. 5-Fu/LV prevents cell proliferation by inhibiting thymidylate synthase, which catalyzes the conversion of deoxyuridine monophosphate to deoxythymidine monophosphate. While 5-Fu has been shown to cause cognitive impairment, the synergistic effect of 5-Fu with LV has not been fully explored. The present investigation was designed to assess how the combination of 5-Fu and LV affect cognition in a murine model. Six-month-old male mice were used in this study; 15 mice received saline injections and 15 mice received 5-Fu/LV injections. One month after treatment, the elevated plus maze, Y-maze, and Morris water maze behavioral tasks were performed. Brains were then extracted, cryosectioned, and stained for CD68 to assay microglial activation and with tomato lectin to assay the vasculature. All animals were able to locate the visible and hidden platform locations in the water maze. However, a significant impairment in spatial memory retention was observed in the probe trial after the first day of hidden-platform training (first probe trial) in animals that received 5-Fu/LV, but these animals showed spatial memory retention by day 5.  There were no significant increases in inflammation as measured by CD68, but 5-Fu/LV treatment did modulate blood vessel morphology. Tandem mass tag proteomics analysis identified 6,049 proteins, 7 of which were differentially expressed with a P-value of < 0.05 and a fold change of >1.5. The present data demonstrate that 5-Fu/LV increases anxiety and significantly impairs spatial memory retention.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and study design Six-month-old male C57Bl6/J wild-type mice (n = 30) purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) were used for the experiments. The mice were housed and aged under a constant 12 h light: 12 h dark cycle. Food and water were provided ad libitum. All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UAMS. Protein isolation The hippocampal and prefrontal cortex were homogenized in RIPA buffer on ice. Homogenates were centrifuged and supernatants collected. Protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford assay kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Tandem mass tag proteomics analysis Tandem mass tag (TMT) technology is a powerful tool for precise and accurate quantitative proteomics. This method has been widely used to characterize protein expression profiles and investigate and compare functional changes at the protein level. The protocol involves extraction of proteins from cells or tissues followed by reduction, alkylation, and digestion. Samples from each biological condition were labeled with 1 of the 6 isobaric tags of the TMT reagent. Resulting peptides were pooled at equal concentrations before fractionation and data acquisition. The TMT-labeled samples were analyzed by LC–MS/MS. In an MS1 scan, same-sequence peptides from the different samples appear as a single unresolved additive precursor ion. Fragmentation of the precursor ion during MS/MS (MS2) yields sequence-informative b- and y-ions, and further fragmentation by MS3 (SPS) provides quantitative information as distinct masses between m/z 126 and 131 representing the “different” reporter ions. The reporter ion intensity indicates the relative amount of peptide in the mixture that was labeled with the corresponding reagent.

### Data Protocol
Protein TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values are assessed for quality using our in-house ProteiNorm app, a user-friendly tool for a systematic evaluation of normalization methods, imputation of missing values and comparisons of different differential abundance methods. The data was normalized using cyclic loess and was used to perform statistical analysis using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors. Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered to be significant.   Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to investigate affected signaling pathways based on the deregulated protein.  The ROAST method was performed to investigate unidirectional and bidirectional regulation of significant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
5-Fluorouracil (5-Fu) and leucovorin (LV) are often given in combination to treat colorectal cancer. 5-Fu/LV prevents cell proliferation by inhibiting thymidylate synthase, which catalyzes the conversion of deoxyuridine monophosphate to deoxythymidine monophosphate. While 5-Fu has been shown to cause cognitive impairment, the synergistic effect of 5-Fu with LV has not been fully explored. The present investigation was designed to assess how the combination of 5-Fu and LV affect cognition in a murine model. Six-month-old male mice were used in this study; 15 mice received saline injections and 15 mice received 5-Fu/LV injections. One month after treatment, the elevated plus maze, Y-maze, and Morris water maze behavioral tasks were performed. Brains were then extracted, cryosectioned, and stained for CD68 to assay microglial activation and with tomato lectin to assay the vasculature. All animals were able to locate the visible and hidden platform locations in the water maze. However, a significant impairment in spatial memory retention was observed in the probe trial after the first day of hidden-platform training (first probe trial) in animals that received 5-Fu/LV, but these animals showed spatial memory retention by day 5. There were no significant increases in inflammation as measured by CD68, but 5-Fu/LV treatment did modulate blood vessel morphology. Tandem mass tag proteomics analysis identified 6,049 proteins, 7 of which were differentially expressed with a <i>p</i>-value of &lt;0.05 and a fold change of &gt;1.5. The present data demonstrate that 5-Fu/LV increases anxiety and significantly impairs spatial memory retention.

### Keywords
5-fluorouracil, Neurovasculature, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
UAMS
1Division of Radiation Health, 2Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3Neurobiology & Developmental Sciences,

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Antino R Allen
1Division of Radiation Health, 2Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3Neurobiology & Developmental Sciences,


