### Accession
PXD031164

### Title
Identification of novel rhoptry secretion factors in Toxoplasma gondii _ ND12

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites, together with ciliates and dinoflagellates, belong to the Alveolata superphylum. Apicomplexa possess secretory organelles called rhoptries that undergo regulated exocytosis during invasion. Upon injection into the host cell, rhoptry proteins support invasion, vacuole formation, and subversion of host immune function. Rhoptry exocytosis involves a “rosette” of 8 particles embedded in the plasma membrane; such peculiar structure is also conserved in Ciliata and its formation requires Alveolata-restricted “Nd” proteins. These findings point to the existence of an Alveolata-conserved mechanism for the discharge of secretory organelles, and provide proof of concept that we can decipher rhoptry exocytosis machinery using a PAN-Alveolata approach. Thus, to uncover new rhoptry secretion factors, we used the transcriptional profiles of Nd genes of the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila to select genes that are co-regulated, and also conserved in Apicomplexa. In this way we identified two uncharacterized Tetrahymena proteins that contribute to the exocytosis of secretory organelles. They have similar architecture and show homology with Plasmodium Cysteine Repeat Modular Proteins (CRMPs), a family of proteins essential for Plasmodium transmission from the mosquito to the host. We functionally characterized the two Toxoplasma CRMPs, including their dynamic location during invasion. They are not required for rosette formation, but they are essential for rhoptry secretion, suggesting a function distinct from that of previously characterized exocytic “Nd” factors. To characterize interacting proteins we performed pull-down experiments and analyzed the eluates by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of TgCrmpA-HA3 and TgCrmpB-HA3 was performed from 500x106 tachyzoites, resuspended in 1ml cold lysis buffer (1% NP40, 50mM Tris pH7.4, 150mM NaCl, 4mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche) and gently mixed for 4h at 4°C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13500g for 30 min at 4°C, and supernatants were incubated overnight with 50µl anti-HA beads. The beads were then washed five times with lysis buffer and resuspended in 100°C Laemmli SDS sample buffer, supplemented with dithiothreitol. Untagged parasites were treated in parallel. Proteins were digested in gel (2 bands per sample) as previously described (Skorupa et al., 2013). Samples were loaded onto a 25 cm reversed phase column (75 mm inner diameter, Acclaim Pepmap 100® C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS analyses were performed in a data-dependent mode. Full scans (375 – 1,500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. For the full scans, 3e6 ions were accumulated within a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The twelve most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated (1e5) with a maximum injection time of 45 ms and fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) in the collision cell (normalized collision energy of 28) and detected in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using the MaxQuant using standard parameters with match between runs. MS/MS spectra were matched against the UniProt Reference proteomes of Toxoplasma gondii and Human (respectively Proteome ID UP000001529, v2019_11 and UP000005640, v2020_01) and 250 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries (MaxQuant contaminant database). Statistical analysis were done using Perseus on intensity data.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites possess secretory organelles called rhoptries that undergo regulated exocytosis upon contact with the host. This process is essential for the parasitic lifestyle of these pathogens and relies on an exocytic machinery sharing structural features and molecular components with free-living ciliates. However, how the parasites coordinate exocytosis with host interaction is unknown. Here, we performed a Tetrahymena-based transcriptomic screen to uncover novel exocytic factors in Ciliata and&#xa0;conserved in Apicomplexa. We identified membrane-bound proteins, named CRMPs, forming part of a large complex essential for rhoptry secretion and invasion in Toxoplasma. Using cutting-edge imaging tools, including expansion microscopy and cryo-electron tomography, we show that, unlike previously described rhoptry exocytic factors, TgCRMPs are not required for the assembly of the rhoptry secretion machinery and only transiently associate with the exocytic site-prior to the invasion. CRMPs and their partners contain putative host cell-binding domains, and CRMPa shares similarities with GPCR proteins. Collectively our data imply that the CRMP complex acts as a host-molecular sensor to ensure that rhoptry exocytosis occurs when the parasite contacts the host&#xa0;cell.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Crmp, Rhoptry, Secretion, Host invasion

### Affiliations
Universite de Montpellier LPHI UMR5235, France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Maryse Lebrun
Universite de Montpellier LPHI UMR5235, France


