### Accession
PXD021285

### Title
Molecular profiling of tumor-derived exosomes in plasma of patients with melanoma

### Description
By isolation of exosomes from body fluids such as serum or plasma with the use of a gel filtration method developed for this purpose, we showed that the level of exosomes in patients with melanoma is higher and may be associated with progression of the tumor and treatment response. By applying the techniques of mass spectrometry we would like to assess the protein profile of exosomes released by melanoma cells and determine whether these changes correlate with selected clinical parameters. The model tests are exosomes released in vivo from melanoma cells (MMTEX). Proteins of exosomes were subjected to qualitative and quantitative analysis by LC-MS/MS. Proteins were digested by trypsin and were subsequently purified on C18 StageTips which significantly improves the chromatographic separation and allows identification of a higher number of proteins. In addition, after digestion the obtained peptides were fractionated and separated using ion chromatography and reversed-phase chromatography (C18 column), and then analysed by tandem mass spectrometry analysis. To evaluate protein content and verify the presence of exosomes we were used the Western blot technique or flow cytometry.

### Sample Protocol
sEV samples (MTEX and NMTEX fractions or total plasma sEV from patients or HDs) were mixed with a lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0, 0.1M DTT (buffer to sample volumetric ratio of 1:9), then boiled for 10min and subsequently subjected to Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure [1]. Sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) was used at the enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w); 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was employed as a digestion buffer then incubation in a wet chamber was performed for 18h at 370C. The collected tryptic peptides were subsequently purified on C18 StageTips, each prepared by stacking 6 layers of Empore™ Octadecyl C18 extraction disk (3M, Maplewood, MN, USA) in a 0.2mL pipette tip. Peptide purification was performed by three consecutive washes with 5% methanol, 0.1% TFA (centrifugation at 4000 RCF, 5 min) followed by an additional two washes with 0.1% TFA. Elution was done using 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Eluates with purified peptides were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge, peptides were reconstituted in 20 µL of LC-MS grade water and subjected to peptide assay using tryptophan fluorescence method described by Wiśniewski and Gaugaz [2] (fluorescence measurement was conducted for the whole volume of each sample, i.e. 20µL). After the measurement samples were acidified with TFA to achieve the final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. [1]. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, and Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009;6(5):359-62. [2]. Wisniewski JR, and Gaugaz FZ. Fast and sensitive total protein and Peptide assays for proteomic analysis. Anal Chem. 2015;87(8):4110-6.

### Data Protocol
The analysis was performed with the use of the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC System connected to the Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides from each fraction (0.5μg) were separated on a reverse-phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (75μm × 25cm, 2μm granulation) using acetonitrile gradient (from 4 to 60%, in 0.1% formic acid) at 30°C and a flow rate of 300nL/min (total run time: 180min). The spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in MS mode, and 17,500 at m/z 200 in MS2 mode. Spectra were recorded in the scanning range of 300–2000 m/z in the positive ion mode. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) ion fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies set to 25. Protein identification was performed using a reviewed Swiss-Prot human database (release 2018_11_30 containing 11 378 269 sequence entries) with a precision tolerance 10 ppm for peptide masses and 0.02 Da for the fragment ion masses. All raw data obtained for each dataset were imported into Protein Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) <Thermo raw files> for protein identification and quantification (Mascot and Sequest engines were used for database searches). Protein was considered as positively identified if at least two peptides per protein were found by both search engines, and a peptide score reached the significance threshold FDR = 0.01 (assessed by the Percolator algorithm); a protein was further considered as “present” if detected in at least one sample of a given type. The abundance of identified proteins was estimated in Proteome Discoverer using Precursor Ions Area detector node, which calculates the abundance of a given protein based on the average intensity of the three most intensive distinct peptides for this protein, with further normalization to the total ion current (TIC).

### Publication Abstract
Molecular profiling of small extracellular vesicles (sEV) isolated from plasma of cancer patients emerges as promising strategy for biomarkers discovery. We investigated the proteomic profiles of sEV immunoselected using anti-CSPG4 antibodies from 15 melanoma patients' plasma. The proteomes of sEV separated into melanoma cell-derived (MTEX) and non-malignant cell-derived (NMTEX) were compared using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Paired analysis identified the MTEX-associated profile of 16 proteins that discriminated MTEX from NMETEX. We also identified the MTEX profile that discriminated between seven patients with no evidence of melanoma (NED) after therapy and eight with progressive disease (PD). Among 75 MTEX proteins overexpressed in PD patients, PDCD6IP (ALIX) had the highest discriminating value, while CNTN1 (contactin-1) was upregulated only in MTEX of NED patients. This is the first report documenting that proteomes of tumour-derived sEV in patients' plasma discriminate cancer from non-cancer and identify proteins with potential to serve as prognostic biomarkers in melanoma.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, High-resolution mass spectrometry (hrms), Tumor-derived exosomes (tex), Proteomics, Small extracellular vesicles (sev), Melanoma cell-derived exosomes (mtex)

### Affiliations
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch

### Submitter
Monika Pietrowska

### Lab Head
Dr Piotr Widłak
Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch


