### Accession
PXD043275

### Title
Activity-Based Protein Profiling in Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Reveals Broad Reactivity of a Carmofur-Derived Probe

### Description
Activity-based protein profiling is a powerful chemoproteomic technique to detect active enzymes and identify targets and off-targets of drugs. Here, we report on the use of a carmofur-based activity-based probe to identify biologically relevant enzymes in the bacterial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Carmofur is an anti-neoplastic prodrug with antimicrobial activity that is related to 5-fluorouracil. The carmofur-probe was originally designed to target human acid ceramidase, a member of the Ntn hydrolase family with an active-site cysteine nucleophile. Here, we first profiled the targets of a fluorescent carmofur-probe in live S. aureus under biofilm-promoting conditions and in liquid culture, before proceeding to target identification by liquid chromatograpy/mass spectrometry. Treatment with a carmofur-biotin probe led to enrichment of 21 enzymes from diverse families awaiting further characterization, including the Ntn hydrolase-related IMP cyclohydrolase PurH. However, the probe preferentially labelled serine hydrolases, thus displaying a reactivity profile similar to carbamates. Our results suggest that the electrophilic N-carbamoyl-5-fluorouracil scaffold could potentially be optimized to achieve selectivity towards diverse enzyme families. The observed promiscuous reactivity profile suggests that the clinical use of carmofur presumably leads to inactivation of a number human and microbial enzymes that could lead to side-effects or even contribute to therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus was treated with either carmofur-derived ABP, biotin-tagged ABP (2) or vehicle control. After a 60-minute incubation at 37 °C and 700 rpm, the samples were centrifuged at 4,500×g for 5 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatant was discarded. The cell pellets were lysed by bead-beating in 1.2 mL RIPA lysis buffer ((50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100). Following centrifugation, the protein concentration in the supernatant was adjusted to 1.0 mg/mL and stored at -20 ºC.For sample preparation, streptavidin magnetic beads (50 μL) were washed twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer and then incubated with 1 mg of protein from each sample along with an additional 500 μL of RIPA lysis buffer at 4 °C overnight on an 18 RPM rotator. The enriched beads were subsequently pelleted using a magnetic rack and washed sequentially with RIPA lysis buffer, 1 M KCl, 0.1 M Na2CO3, and 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The final wash involved RIPA lysis buffer. The beads were transferred to fresh protein Lo-Bind tubes and subjected to three washes with 500 µL 4M Urea 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) to remove nonspecific enrichments. Following this, the beads were washed thrice with 500 µL of 50 mM Ambic while shaking for 7 minutes, with the tube position changed between washes. For on-bead digestion, 150 μL of 50 mM Ambic, along with CaCl2, DTT, IAA, and trypsin solution, was added to the protein Lo-Bind tubes, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight with a shaker set at 800 rpm. Tryptic peptide digests were separated, and the beads were washed with 70 µL of 50 mM Ambic. To each sample, 20 μL of formic acid was added, and the samples were kept at -20 °C until further analysis via LC-MS/MS. Sample cleanup and concentration were performed using Varian's OMIX C18 tips. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1200 system with a C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 50 µm, 50 cm) and subjected to fractionation using a 5-80% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 60 minutes. The separated peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software in data-dependent mode,  and the S. aureus UniProt protein database. Peptide ions were filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 5% for peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling is a powerful chemoproteomic technique to detect active enzymes and identify targets and off-targets of drugs. Here, we report the use of carmofur- and activity-based probes to identify biologically relevant enzymes in the bacterial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Carmofur is an anti-neoplastic prodrug of 5-fluorouracil and also has antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activity. Carmofur probes were originally designed to target human acid ceramidase, a member of the NTN hydrolase family with an active-site cysteine nucleophile. Here, we first profiled the targets of a fluorescent carmofur probe in live S. aureus under biofilm-promoting conditions and in liquid culture, before proceeding to target identification by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Treatment with a carmofur-biotin probe led to enrichment of 20 enzymes from diverse families awaiting further characterization, including the NTN hydrolase-related IMP cyclohydrolase PurH. However, the probe preferentially labeled serine hydrolases, thus displaying a reactivity profile similar to that of carbamates. Our results suggest that the electrophilic N-carbamoyl-5-fluorouracil scaffold could potentially be optimized to achieve selectivity towards diverse enzyme families. The observed promiscuous reactivity profile suggests that the clinical use of carmofur presumably leads to inactivation of a number human and microbial enzymes, which could lead to side effects and/or contribute to therapeutic efficacy.

### Keywords
S. aureus, Biofilm, Activity-based protein profiling, Carmofur

### Affiliations
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Christian S. Lentz  Associate Professor, Department of Medical Biology, UiT- The Arctic University of Norway, 9019 Tromsø, Norway

### Submitter
Md Jalal  Uddin

### Lab Head
Dr Christian S. Lentz
Assoc. Prof. Dr. Christian S. Lentz  Associate Professor, Department of Medical Biology, UiT- The Arctic University of Norway, 9019 Tromsø, Norway


