### Accession
PXD028238

### Title
Wild-type and Pgrmc1 KO mouse liver membrane LC-MSMS with isobaric tagging

### Description
Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) is a heme binding protein implicated in a wide range of cellular functions. Our previous studies showed that PGRMC1 binds to cytochromes P450 in yeast and mammalian cells and promotes activity of these enzymes. Recently, the paralog PGRMC2 was shown to function as an intracellular heme chaperone. Here, we examined the function of Pgrmc1 in mouse liver by measuring levels of membrane proteins in livers from wild-type and Pgrmc1 knockout mice. These experiments revealed that Pgrmc1 knockout mouse livers contained reduced levels of cytochrome P450 enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Male mice aged 8-12 weeks were used for this study. All animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Liver membrane fractions were prepared as described previously (Raucy & Lasker, 1991, Methods Enzymol.) with some minor modifications. Frozen tissue (~1 g) was thawed on ice in 5 tissue volumes of Homogenization Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 100 mM EDTA) and homogenized with an immersion blender (Bamix, Switzerland) until homogenization was completed based on visual inspection of the sample. The homogenate was cleared by spinning at 10,000 x g for 30 min at 4ºC. The supernatant was spun at 100,000 x g for 90 min at 4ºC. The pellet was washed with Resuspension Buffer (100 mM sodium pyrophosphate, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) and spun at 100,000 x g for 60 min at 4ºC. The pellet was defined as the enriched membrane fraction. It was resuspended in Storage Buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol) with 0.1 mM DTT to 10-20 mg protein/mL. All buffers contained 1X protease inhibitors (Protease Complete, Roche).   Equal masses of liver membrane protein from 4 WT and 4 KO mice (Replicate #1) or 5 WT and 5 KO mice (Replicate #2) were pooled by genotype to produce two biological replicates per genotype. In each MS run, a WT and a KO pool were labeled with three different isobaric tags, resulting in three technical replicates per genotype per experiment. The samples were digested with trypsin and labeled with unique Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The combined labeled sample was cleaned up from excess TMT tag with a detergent removal spin column (Pierce). The labeled sample was fractionated with five or four basic, reversed phase fractions of 5%, 15%, 20%, 30%, and 75% (v/v) or 5%, 15%, 25%, and 75% acetonitrile in 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Each fraction was analyzed by liquid chromatography interfaced with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a Nano-Acquity HPLC system interfaced with a QExactive HF (Thermo Fisher). A stepped collision energy 32 s/30 s was used for fragmentation. Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at resolutions 60,000 and 120,000, respectively, and automatic gain control target values at 1e5 with 200 ms maximum injection time and 3e5 with 50 ms maximum injection, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against Mus musculus RefSeq v.69 (released January 7, 2015) using the Mascot (Matrix Science) search engine v.2.5 running through Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (DBVersion: 79) (Thermo Fisher) with one or two missed cleavages allowed, respectively; fixed modifications: methylthio (C), TMT6plex (N-term); variable modifications: oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), and TMT6plex (K); and a tolerance of 10 ppm MS and 0.018 or 0.03 Da MS2, respectively.   For statistical analysis, only spectra with an FDR less than 1% (based on a concatenated decoy database) in which all reporter ions were detected were included for downstream analyses. Spectra with isolation interference greater than 30% were excluded as well. Within each TMT experiment, relative protein abundances were quantified by a robust median sweep algorithm (Kammers et al., 2015, EuPA Open Proteom.). Briefly, reporter ion intensities were log2-transformed, spectrum medians of the log2 transformed reporter ion intensities were subtracted (median-polishing), and all reporter ion intensities that belong to the same protein were used as the measure (median) of that protein abundance in the sample. In a final step, the channel medians across all proteins were subtracted to correct for potential loading differences. Statistical inference between two groups of interest was assessed by moderated t-test statistics (Smyth, 2004, Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol.). For multiple comparison correction, q-values were calculated from the observed p-values to control the FDR. That is, if a protein has a qvalue of 0.05, we expect to see 5% among the proteins that show smaller p-values to be false positives. Proteins with calculated q-values smaller than 0.05 between different groups can be declared statistically significant. Only proteins quantified by reporter ion spectra in both biological replicates were included for statistical downstream analyses. Normalized protein abundance values for technical replicates were averaged prior to statistical testing.

### Publication Abstract
Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) is a heme-binding protein implicated in a wide range of cellular functions. We previously showed that PGRMC1 binds to cytochromes P450 in yeast and mammalian cells and supports their activity. Recently, the paralog PGRMC2 was shown to function as a heme chaperone. The extent of PGRMC1 function in cytochrome P450 biology and whether PGRMC1 is also a heme chaperone are unknown. Here, we examined the function of Pgrmc1 in mouse liver using a knockout model and found that Pgrmc1 binds and stabilizes a broad range of cytochromes P450 in a heme-independent manner. Proteomic and transcriptomic studies demonstrated that Pgrmc1 binds more than 13 cytochromes P450 and supports maintenance of cytochrome P450 protein levels posttranscriptionally. In&#xa0;vitro assays confirmed that Pgrmc1 KO livers exhibit reduced cytochrome P450 activity consistent with reduced enzyme levels. Mechanistic studies in cultured cells demonstrated that PGRMC1 stabilizes cytochromes P450 and that binding and stabilization do not require PGRMC1 binding to heme. Importantly, Pgrmc1-dependent stabilization of cytochromes P450 is physiologically relevant, as Pgrmc1 deletion protected mice from acetaminophen-induced liver injury. Finally, evaluation of Y113F mutant Pgrmc1, which lacks the axial heme iron-coordinating hydroxyl group, revealed that proper iron coordination is not required for heme binding, but is required for binding to ferrochelatase, the final enzyme in heme biosynthesis. PGRMC1 was recently identified as the causative mutation in X-linked isolated pediatric cataract formation. Together, these results demonstrate a heme-independent function for PGRMC1 in cytochrome P450 stability that may underlie clinical phenotypes.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Pgrmc1, Isobaric tag, Liver, Membrane, Tmt

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

### Submitter
Peter Espenshade

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J. Espenshade
Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA


