### Accession
PXD008435

### Title
Proteomic identification of Galectin-11 and 14 ligands from Haemonchus contortus

### Description
Haemonchus contortus is the most pathogenic nematode of small ruminants. Infection in sheep and goats results in anaemia that decreases animal productivity and can ultimately cause death. The involvement of ruminant-specific galectin-11 (LGALS-11) and galectin-14 (LGALS-14) has been postulated to play important roles in protective immune responses against parasitic infection; however, their ligands are unknown. In the current study, LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 ligands in H. contortus were identified from larval (L4) and adult parasitic stages extracts using immobilised LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 affinity column chromatography and mass spectrometry. Both LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 bound more putative protein targets in the adult stage of H. contortus (43 proteins) when compared to the larval stage (2 proteins). Of the 43 proteins identified in the adult stage, 34 and 35 proteins were bound by LGALS-11 and LGALS-14, respectively, with 26 proteins binding to both galectins. Interestingly, hematophagous stage-specific sperm-coating protein and zinc metalloprotease (M13), which are known vaccine candidates, were identified as putative ligands of both LGALS-11 and LGALS-14. The identification of glycoproteins of H. contortus by LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 provide new insights into host-parasite interactions and the potential for developing new interventions.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted protein samples were dissolved in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM dithiothreitol) and incubated at 25 °C for 5 h. Following incubation, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to final concentration of 55 mM to alkylate thiol groups and incubated for 35 min at 20 °C in the dark. The alkylated protein preparation was diluted with 1M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) and sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added to a final concentration of 5 µM. The reaction was incubated for 16 h at 37 °C in the dark. The digests were acidified with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides desalted on poly(styrene-divinylbebzebe) copolymer (SDB) (Empore) StageTips as described previously (Rappsilber et al. 2007).  Trypsin-digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and then loaded onto a guard column (C18 PepMap 100 µm ID × 2 cm trapping column, Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at 5 µl/min and washed for 6 min before switching the guard column, in line with the analytical column (Vydac MS C18, 3 µm, 300 Å and 75 µm ID × 25 cm). The separation of peptides was performed at 300 nl/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2 % (v/v) ACN) and buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80 % (v/v) ACN), starting at 5% (v/v) buffer B to 55% for 120 min. Data were collected on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) in a Data-Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300–1500 as MS scan range, CID MS/MS spectra and were collected for the 20 most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as described previously (Nguyen et al. 2016). The Orbitrap Elite was operated in dual analyser mode, with the Orbitrap analyser being used for MS and the linear trap being used for MS/MS. Pull-down and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed three times on different days.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra obtained from the Orbitrap analyser was used to search against the Swiss-Prot Haemonchus contortus FASTA database (downloaded on 07.31.2016, 21,201 protein entries) together with common contaminants were used for this analysis using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) as described previously (Perkins et al. 1999). Briefly, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of protein N-termini, methionine oxidation was included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, product ions were searched at 0.5 Da tolerances, minimum peptide length defined at 6, maximum peptide length 144, and Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Percolator based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Both peptide and protein identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Haemonchus contortus</i> is the most pathogenic nematode of small ruminants. Infection in sheep and goats results in anaemia that decreases animal productivity and can ultimately cause death. The involvement of ruminant-specific galectin-11 (LGALS-11) and galectin-14 (LGALS-14) has been postulated to play important roles in protective immune responses against parasitic infection; however, their ligands are unknown. In the current study, LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 ligands in <i>H. contortus</i> were identified from larval (L4) and adult parasitic stages extracts using immobilised LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 affinity column chromatography and mass spectrometry. Both LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 bound more putative protein targets in the adult stage of <i>H. contortus</i> (43 proteins) when compared to the larval stage (two proteins). Of the 43 proteins identified in the adult stage, 34 and 35 proteins were bound by LGALS-11 and LGALS-14, respectively, with 26 proteins binding to both galectins. Interestingly, hematophagous stage-specific sperm-coating protein and zinc metalloprotease (M13), which are known vaccine candidates, were identified as putative ligands of both LGALS-11 and LGALS-14. The identification of glycoproteins of <i>H. contortus</i> by LGALS-11 and LGALS-14 provide new insights into host-parasite interactions and the potential for developing new interventions.

### Keywords
Proteomics

### Affiliations
La Trobe university
La Trobe University

### Submitter
Pierre Faou

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Faou
La Trobe university


