### Accession
PXD041377

### Title
Proteome analysis of pathogen-induced regulated cell death in maize

### Description
Regulated cell death (RCD) is crucial for plant development, as well as in decision-making in plant-pathogen interactions. Previous studies revealed components of the molecular network controlling RCD, including different proteases. However, the identity, the proteolytic network as well as molecular components involved in the initiation and execution of distinct plant RCD processes, still remain largely elusive. We analyzed the proteome of Z. mays leaves treated with the effector avrRxo1, the mycotoxin Fumonisin B1 (FB1), or the phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) to dissect plant cellular processes related to cell death and plant immunity. We found highly distinct and time-dependent biological processes being activated on proteome level in response to avrRxo1, FB1 and SA. This study characterizes distinct RCD responses in Z. mays and provides a framework for the mechanistic exploration of components involved in the initiation and execution of cell death.

### Sample Protocol
The second leaf of 8-9 day old plants was used for each experiment. Leaves were excised and vacuum infiltrated with a control solution (1% Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in H2O), 2mM salicylic acid, 50µM Fumonisin B1, or Xanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae PXO99A carrying pHMI, pHMI-avrRxo1 or pHMI-avrRxo1 D193T. Samples were taken at 24, 48, 60 and 72 hpi. Per sample, treatment and time point four whole leaves were pooled for each of four biological replicates. Approximately 1 mL of powder was transferred to a 2 mL reaction tube, dissolved in 1.5 mL of a denaturing buffer (6 M Gua-HCl, 100 mM HEPES, adjusted to pH 7.4 and supplemented with 1x HALT protease inhibitor cocktail. Afterwards the sample was filtered with Miracloth and the flowthrough collected in a 2 mL reaction tube. The protein concentration was measured by using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. For proteome analysis, 20 µg proteome and treated with 0.5µL Benzonase (~26 U/μL). 10mM DTT was added to the samples and incubated shaking at 37°C for 30 min, cooled to RT, 50mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) were added and incubated in the dark for 30min. The reaction was quenched by adding additional 50 mM DTT and incubating for another 20min before protein purification using SP3-beads as described in Hughes et al., 2019. The samples were resuspended in trypsin digestion buffer (volume accordingly to a final protein concentration of 2µg/µL) containing 100 mM HEPES and 2.5 mM CaCl2 adjusted to pH 7.4 and digested with trypsin (1:100 trypsin: proteome) over night at 37°C. The next day the samples were desalted by using self-made STAGE tips packed with C18-material. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) coupled to an Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonik GmbH) operated with an ACN-saturated nitrogen gas stream. The peptides were loaded on an µPAC pillar array trap column (1 cm length, PharmaFluidics) and separated on a µPAC pillar array analytical column (50 cm flowpath, PharmaFluidics). Peptides were eluted using a 2 h elution protocol that included an 80 min separation gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (solvent A: H2O+0.1% FA, solvent B: ACN+0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 600 nl min–1, with columns temperated at 40°C. Proteome data were acquired using a Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) method with 400 to 1200 precursor mass windows for MS1, with 32 windows of 25 m/z size with 0.5 m/z overlap and 200 to 1750 for MS2 at 15 Hz. Due to technical factors, the first steps of the analysis were conducted independently for the two experiments avrRxo1/D193T/pHMI and FB1/SA/control.

### Data Protocol
For peptide to sequence matching of the mass spectrometry data, we generated a custom protein database file based by filtering the maizeGDB database (B73 reference genome version 5.0) with only proteins observed in the RNA-seq dataset, combined with a contaminant list. DIA identification of peptides was performed with the software DIA-NN (version 1.8) in double-pass mode with a precursor FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Regulated cell death (RCD) is crucial for plant development, as well as in decision-making in plant-microbe interactions. Previous studies revealed components of the molecular network controlling RCD, including different proteases. However, the identity, the proteolytic network as well as molecular components involved in the initiation and execution of distinct plant RCD processes, still remain largely elusive. In this study, we analyzed the transcriptome, proteome, and N-terminome of Zea mays leaves treated with the Xanthomonas effector avrRxo1, the mycotoxin Fumonisin B1 (FB1), or the phytohormone salicylic acid (SA) to dissect plant cellular processes related to cell death and plant immunity. We found highly distinct and time-dependent biological processes being activated on transcriptional and proteome levels in response to avrRxo1, FB1, and SA. Correlation analysis of the transcriptome and proteome identified general, as well as trigger-specific markers for cell death in Zea mays. We found that proteases, particularly papain-like cysteine proteases, are specifically regulated during RCD. Collectively, this study characterizes distinct RCD responses in Z. mays and provides a framework for the mechanistic exploration of components involved in the initiation and execution of cell death.

### Keywords
Salicylic acid, Fumonisin b1, Rcd, Zea mays, Fb1, Ms, Avrrxo1, Dia, Mass spectrometry, Sa

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
CECAD

### Submitter
Melissa Mantz

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Jülich


