### Accession
PXD016048

### Title
Quantitative thiol reactivity profiling

### Description
Cysteine is unique among all protein-coding amino acids owing to its intrinsically high nucleophilicity. The cysteinyl thiol group can be covalently modified by both a broad range of redox mechanisms and various electrophiles derived from exogenous or endogenous sources. Measuring proteomic cysteines response to redox perturbation or electrophiles is critical for understanding the underlying mechanisms involved. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) based on thiol-reactive probes has been the method of choice for such analyses. We therefore adapted this approach and developed a new chemoproteomic platform, termed as QTRP (Quantitative Thiol Reactivity Profiling), that relies on the ability of a commercially available thiol-reactive probe IPM to covalently label, enrich, and quantify the reactive cysteinome in cells and tissues. Here, we provide a detailed and updated workflow of QTRP that includes procedures for (i) labeling of the reactive cysteinome from cell or tissue samples (e.g. control vs treatment) with IPM, (ii) processing the protein samples into tryptic peptides and tagging the probe-modified peptides with isotopically labeled azido-biotin reagents containing a photo-cleavable linker via click chemistry reaction, (iii) capturing biotin-conjugated peptides with streptavidin beads, (iv) identifying and quantifying the photo-released peptides by mass spectrometry (MS)-based shotgun proteomics, (v) interpreting MS data by a streamlined informatic pipeline using a proteomics software, pFind 3, and an automatic post-processing algorithm. We also outline here how to use QTRP for measuring the changes on proteomic cysteines upon redox perturbation and for identifying targeted cysteine sites of thiol-reactive electrophiles. We anticipate that this protocol should find broad applications in both redox/chemical biology and drug discovery. The protocol for sample preparation takes 3 days, whereas MS measurements and data analyses require 75 min and <30 min, respectively, per sample.

### Sample Protocol
The updated QTRP protocol described herein is illustrated in Fig. 2 that includes procedures for (i) labeling of the reactive cysteinome from cell or tissue samples in vitro (e.g. control versus treatment, wild type versus knockout) with a commercially available thiol-reactive probe called IPM; (ii) processing the protein samples into tryptic peptides and tagging the probe-modified peptides with isotopically labeled azido-biotin reagents containing a photo-cleavable linker (Az-UV-biotin) via click chemistry, more specifically, copper-catalyzed alkyne azide cycloaddition reaction (CuAAC); (iii) capturing biotin-conjugated peptides with streptavidin beads; (iv) identifying and quantifying the photo-released peptides from beads by LC-MS/MS-based shotgun proteomics.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by a streamlined informatic pipeline using a proteomics software, pFind 3, that integrates an ultrafast search engine for peptide identification and a quantification algorithm resistant to irregular peaks, and an automatic post-processing algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine is unique among all protein-coding amino acids, owing to its intrinsically high nucleophilicity. The cysteinyl thiol group can be covalently modified by a broad range of redox mechanisms or by various electrophiles derived from exogenous or endogenous sources. Measuring the response of protein cysteines to redox perturbation or electrophiles is critical for understanding the underlying mechanisms involved. Activity-based protein profiling based on thiol-reactive probes has been the method of choice for such analyses. We therefore adapted this approach and developed a new chemoproteomic platform, termed 'QTRP' (quantitative thiol reactivity profiling), that relies on the ability of a commercially available thiol-reactive probe IPM (2-iodo-N-(prop-2-yn-1-yl)acetamide) to covalently label, enrich and quantify the reactive cysteinome in cells and tissues. Here, we provide a detailed and updated workflow of QTRP that includes procedures for (i) labeling of the reactive cysteinome from cell or tissue samples (e.g., control versus treatment) with IPM, (ii) processing the protein samples into tryptic peptides and tagging the probe-modified peptides with isotopically labeled azido-biotin reagents containing a photo-cleavable linker via click chemistry reaction, (iii) capturing biotin-conjugated peptides with streptavidin beads, (iv) identifying and quantifying the photo-released peptides by mass spectrometry (MS)-based shotgun proteomics and (v) interpreting MS data by a streamlined informatic pipeline using a proteomics software, pFind 3, and an automatic post-processing algorithm. We also exemplified here how to use QTRP for mining H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-sensitive cysteines and for determining the intrinsic reactivity of cysteines in a complex proteome. We anticipate that this protocol should find broad applications in redox biology, chemical biology and the pharmaceutical industry. The protocol for sample preparation takes 3 d, whereas MS measurements and data analyses require 75 min and &lt;30 min, respectively, per sample.

### Keywords
Thiol, Redox, Chemical proteomics, Electrophile

### Affiliations
BPRC
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, 102206 Beijing, China

### Submitter
Ke Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Yang
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, 102206 Beijing, China


