### Accession
PXD027405

### Title
iTRAQ-based Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of protein profile response to Pink1 deletion in breast cancer

### Description
ITRAQ technique was applied to compare the comprehensive protein expression profiles between MDA-MB-231con and MDA-MB-231Pink1-/- cells, and the original mass spectrum data were searched using Mascot engine against the UniProt database and the decoy database. Proteins were identified to be significantly according to the cut-off of a fold change ≥1.2 or ≤0.83 and a P-value ＜0.05. All of the pathways and GO enrichment analyses were performed to identify the critical proteins induced by Pink1 deletion.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction  MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-231Pink1-/- cell were collected with cell scrapers and homogenized in RIPA Lysis Buffer (Beyotime, containing 50mM Tris pH 7.4，150mM NaCl，1% Triton X-100，1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS) on ice for 30min, then centrifuged at 16,000×g at 4℃ for 10 min to harvest the protein samples. Protein content was measured with BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime) and stored at -80℃ until use. 2. Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling One hundred microgram of protein solution of each sample was digested with 2.5 μg Trypsin at 37℃ for 4 hours, and then another 2.5 μg Trypsin was added to the protein mixture to continue incubation for 8 hours at 37℃. The acquired peptide mixture was desalted on a strataX C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuumed-dried.  Some number of ITRAQ labeling reagents were recovered to ambient temperature and then each added 50μl isopropanol with vortexing. The vacuumed-dried peptides were dissolved in 30 μL 0.5 M TEAB and then added to different iTRAQ labeling tags. Peptide labeling was performed by iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit according to the manufacturer's protocol. The labeled peptides with different tags were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and dried with a rotary vacuum concentrator. 3. HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis The labeled peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH Gemini column. The peptides were reconstituted with 2 ml buffer A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) and loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 1 mL/min , then the peptides was eluted in order with a gradient of 5%, 5-35% and 35-95% buffer B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, pH = 9.8 ) for 10 min, 40 min and 1 min. Afterwards, the system was maintained in 95% buffer B for 3 min and then the gradient of elution was decreased to 5% within 1 min followed by equilibrating for 10 min. Eluting peptides were monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm during the separation process and fractions were collected every 1 min. At last, 20 fractions were obtained by combining chromatographic elution peaks with samples and vacuum-dried as above. The vacuum-dried fraction was resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1%FA) and separated by Shimadzu LC-20AD NASL liquid chromatograph system after centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded on a trap column for sample enrichment and desalination and then separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min on C18 column under the condition as follows. First, the gradient of 5% buffer B (98%ACN, 0.1%FA) for 8 min, then the gradient of buffer B was increased from 5% to 35% in 40 min followed by another 40 min for gradient of buffer B from 35% to 60%. Next, the samples were eluted in 50 min for gradient of buffer B from 60% to 80% followed by maintenance at 80% buffer B for 50 min. Finally, the fractions was equilibrated at 5% buffer B for 50 min followed by Mass Spectrometry.  The separated peptides from nanoHPLC were subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The parameters for MS analysis are listed as following: electrospray voltage: 1.6 kV; precursor scan range: 350-1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range: >100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting: 30%; dynamic Exclusion time: 15 s; Automatic gain control (AGC) for full MS target and MS2 target: 3E6 and 1E5, respectively; The number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan: 20 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000.

### Data Protocol
In this study, the original mass spectrum data were converted into MGF file and searched using Mascot engine against the UniProt database and the decoy database. For protein identification, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were determined using the significant B algorithm in MaxQuant32 with the protein bin size of 500. Proteins with a p value less than 0.05 were considered as DEPs. All of the pathway and GO enrichment analyses including biological process, cellular component, and molecular function were performed using DAVID33 (version 6.7)

### Publication Abstract
Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced kinase 1 (<i>Pink1</i>) is regarded as a tumor suppressor and plays an important role in cancer cell biology, while relatively few studies have examined <i>Pink1</i> in breast cancer, especially <i>in vivo</i>. The aims of this study were to investigate <i>Pink1</i> expression in different subtypes of breast cancer tissues and cell lines and explore the effect of <i>Pink1</i> protein on breast cancer. In these experiments, <i>Pink1</i> expression was investigated using the tissue microarray immunohistochemistry (TMA-IHC) method in 150 samples of breast cancer tissues with different subtypes, and strong staining of <i>Pink1</i> was significantly correlated with the histological grade of breast cancer (<i>p</i> = 0.015). In addition, <i>Pink1</i> messenger RNA (mRNA) displayed much higher expression levels in breast cancer cell lines than in MCF-10A breast epithelial cells. Moreover, proteomic data obtained by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) showed that <i>Pink1</i> deletion induced a distinct proteomic profile in MDA-MB-231 cells, and enrichment analysis showed that the differential proteins were concentrated mainly in energy metabolism-related pathways. Moreover, Seahorse XF analysis showed that <i>Pink1</i> knockout reduced the glycolytic ability of MDA-MB-231 cells. Our findings indicated that <i>Pink1</i> may be an indicator of malignancy in breast cancer and that it presents oncogenic properties in breast cancer, which raises another perspective for understanding the regulatory role of <i>Pink1</i> in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Pink1, Breast cancer, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Huzhou Key labratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central Hospital,Huzhou,China.
Huzhou Cent Hosp, Affiliated Cent Hosp HuZhou University 

### Submitter
Liqin Li

### Lab Head
Dr LiQin Li
Huzhou Key labratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central Hospital,Huzhou,China.


