### Accession
PXD019386

### Title
The OPTN interactome using BioID

### Description
We use a proximity labelling-based proteomics strategy (BioID) to map the interactome of OPTN. OPTN was tagged N and C-terminally with BirA* in RPE1 cells and then, after labelling with biotin, streptavidin pull downs were performed to identify OPTN-proximal proteins.

### Sample Protocol
RPE1 cells expressing BirA*, BirA*-OPTN or OPTN-BirA* were seeded onto 2× 150‐mm dishes. At 50% confluency, cells were fed with fresh complete growth medium supplemented with 50 μM biotin and incubated for 24 h to allow labelling. Biotinylated cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP‐40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS and complete protease inhibitor cocktail), homogenised using a 25G needle and, after sonification, clarified by centrifugation. Clarified lysates were mixed with high capacity streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific, #20357) for 3 h at 4°C. Beads were washed with RIPA buffer three times, TBS twice and ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (ABC, Sigma) before incubation for 30 min at 56°C in 10 mM DTT (Sigma, BioXtra). The solution was spiked with 10 μl 550 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, BioUltra) incubated for 20 min and washed before digestion overnight in 50 mM ABC containing 0.5 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega). An additional 0.5 μg of trypsin was added the following day and incubated for a further 2 h at 37°C. The supernatant was collected, and beads were washed twice with 150 μl of HPLC‐grade H2O (Sigma, CHROMASOLV®) and all supernatants combined. The pooled eluant was spiked with 1 μl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried to a pellet in a vacuum centrifuge.  Samples were resuspended in MS solvent (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) for analysis on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an RSLC3000nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 50 cm C18 PepMap EASYspray column with a gradient rising from 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid), 3% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% solvent B over 40 min. Data were acquired in a top 10 data‐dependent acquisition fashion with MS spectra acquired between m/z 400 and 1,400 at 70,000 fwhm. MS‐MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 fwhm and excluded from further fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed as a single batch using the MaxQuant proteomics software package version 1.5.0.0. Spectra were searched using the built‐in Andromeda search engine and the UniProt reference database for human proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N‐terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01, the minimum peptide length was set at seven amino acids, and up to two missed cleavages were tolerated.

### Publication Abstract
Optineurin (OPTN) is a multifunctional protein involved in autophagy and secretion, as well as nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B) and IRF3 signalling, and <i>OPTN</i> mutations are associated with several human diseases. Here, we show that, in response to viral RNA, OPTN translocates to foci in the perinuclear region, where it negatively regulates NF-&#x3ba;B and IRF3 signalling pathways and downstream pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. These OPTN foci consist of a tight cluster of small membrane vesicles, which are positive for ATG9A. Disease mutations in OPTN linked to primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) cause aberrant foci formation in the absence of stimuli, which correlates with the ability of OPTN to inhibit signalling. By using proximity labelling proteomics, we identify the linear ubiquitin assembly complex (LUBAC), CYLD and TBK1 as part of the OPTN interactome and show that these proteins are recruited to this OPTN-positive perinuclear compartment. Our work uncovers a crucial role for OPTN in dampening NF-&#x3ba;B and IRF3 signalling through the sequestration of LUBAC and other positive regulators in this viral RNA-induced compartment, leading to altered pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion.

### Keywords
Bioid, Optn

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Thomas O'Loughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Folma Buss
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK


