### Accession
PXD009086

### Title
Fasting differentially alters the hypothalamic proteome of chickens from lines selected for low or high body weight

### Description
The hypothalamic proteomes of low and high body weight selected chicks were compared at both a fed and fasted state.

### Sample Protocol
The hypothalamus was removed from 12 low body weight selected (6 fed and 6 fasted) and 12 high body weight selected (6 fed and 6 fasted) male chicks.  Hypothalamus tissue from each chick was homogenized using stainless steel beads and a bead mill in the presence of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 137 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 2 mM EDTA).  Two hundred fifty micrograms of protein was obtained from each tissue homogenate by methanol precipitation.  Protein pellets were resuspended in 250 L freshly-prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic). Proteins were denatured and disulfides reduced by incubation for 1 hour at 37ºC after the addition of 4.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM AmBic. Free sulfhydryls were then alkylated by incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark after the addition of freshly-prepared 10 mM iodoacetamide (IA) in 100 mM AmBic. Unreacted IA was then neutralized by the addition of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM AmBic and urea content diluted to 4 M by bringing the final volume to 500 L by the addition of 100 mM AmBic. Endoproteinase LysC (Wako, Richmond, VA) was added at 1:100 (w/w) and digestions incubated with shaking at 37ºC overnight. The following day urea content was further diluted to 1.4 M by bringing the final volume to 1.43 mL by the addition of 100 mM AmBic and trypsin was added at 1:50 (w/w) and the digestions incubated for four hours with shaking at 37ºC. Peptide digests were desalted using solid phase extraction (SPE) after acidification by the addition of 0.2% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 1% (v/v) formic acid. The SPE utilized Sep-Pak® Vac 1cc/50 mg C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Cartridges were conditioned and equilibrated using 1 mL LC/MS grade methanol followed by 1 mL solvent Y (98:2 LC/MS grade water: LC/MS grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA). The sample was then applied to the cartridge followed by 3 x 1 mL washes of solvent Y and desalted peptides were finally recovered using 1 mL solvent Z (50:50 LC/MS grade water: LC/MS grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA). Peptide samples were concentrated to dryness using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, resolubilized in 250 µL solvent Y by sonication and stored at -20°C. The resolubilized peptide samples (3 µg) were separated through an Acquity I-class UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) utilizing a randomized sample queue. The mobile phases were solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, St. Louis, MO) in LC/MS grade water (Spectrum Chemicals and Laboratory Products, New Brunswick, NJ)) and solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, St. Louis, MO) in LC/MS grade acetonitrile (Spectrum Chemicals and Laboratory Products, New Brunswick, NJ)). The separation was performed using a CSH130 C18 1.7 µm, 1.0 x 150 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) at 50 µL/min using a 110 minute gradient from 3-40% solvent B. The column temperature was maintained at 45˚C.  Column effluent was analyzed using a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) using an HDMSE (high-definition mass spectrometry with alternating scans utilizing low and elevated collision energies combined with ion mobility) acquisition method in continuum positive ion “resolution” MS mode. Source conditions were as follows: capillary voltage, 3.0 kV; source temperature, 120˚C; sampling cone, 60 V; desolvation temperature, 350˚C; cone gas flow, 50 L/hr; desolvation gas flow, 500 L/hr; nebulizer gas flow, 6 bar. Both low energy (4 V and 2 V in the trap and transfer region, respectively) and elevated energy (4 V in the trap and ramped from 20 to 50 V in the transfer region) scans were 1.2 seconds each for the m/z range of 50 to 1800. For ion mobility separation, the IMS and transfer wave velocities were 600 and 1200 m/sec, respectively. Wave height within the ion mobility cell was ramped from 10 to 40 V. For lock-mass correction, a 1.2 second low energy scan was acquired every 30 seconds of a 100 fmol/µL [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) solution (50:50 acetonitrile: water supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid) infused at 10 µL/min introduced into the mass spectrometer through a different source which was also maintained at a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV. The data for lock-mass correction were collected but not applied to sample data until data processing.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data from 1-101 minutes of each chromatographic run were processed and analyzed utilizing ProteinLynx Global Server v. 3.0.2 (PLGS, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Average chromatographic and mass spectrometric peak width resolutions were set to 0.3 min and 30,000 FWHM, respectively.  Mass values were lock-mass corrected based on the exact m/z value of the +2 charge state of [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (785.842). Peaks were defined based on the low energy, elevated energy and bin intensity thresholds of 250, 25 and 2000 counts, respectively. The final peak list for each sample was then searched against a protein database containing the complete G. gallus proteome including isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) on 9/2/2015 and 3 randomized decoy entries for each real entry appended using PLGS. Workflow parameters for the protein identification searches were 2 possible missed cleavages utilizing Lys-C and trypsin as the protease combination, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine, possible modifications of Gln to pyroGlu when Gln is present at the N-terminus of a peptide and oxidation of Met. The software automatically determined peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances. Protein identification searches using PLGS had a false discovery rate of no more than 3%.   Following analysis using PLGS, the results were imported into IsoQuant for further processing.  Only those proteins identified by two or more peptides were included in the final data analysis. The protein false discovery rate was limited to less than 1%.  Peptides containing variable modifications and those with missed cleavages were used for protein quantitation in addition to those that were unmodified and trypsin-specific. The same 3 peptides were used for quantitation of each protein across all replicates. The experimental unit was defined as a single bird and technical replicates of the same sample were averaged for each bird prior to further statistical analysis using either Excel or Perseus.  Proteins with fold change in a one to one direct comparison ＞1.1 or ＜0.91 and significance level of P < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed.  The sequence of all identified proteins was searched using RPS-BLAST against the euKaryotic Orthologous Groups (KOG) database in order to assign protein function. The differentially expressed proteins were checked for enrichment using both GO (Gene Ontology) and  KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) databases.  Terms were considered significantly enriched when P-values < 0.00001.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gallus, Chicken, Hypothalamus, Weight

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech
Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA, USA

### Submitter
Keith Ray

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Ruth Gilbert
Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Tech., Blacksburg, VA, USA


