### Accession
PXD024407

### Title
THEM6-mediated lipid remodelling sustains stress resistance in cancer (Part1 : AP-MS)

### Description
Despite the clinical benefit of androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT), the majority of patients with advanced prostate cancer (PCa) ultimately develop lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In this study, we identified thioesterase superfamily member 6 (THEM6) as a marker of ADT resistance in PCa. In patients, THEM6 expression correlates with progressive disease and is associated with poor survival. THEM6 deletion reduces in vivo tumour growth and restores castration sensitivity in orthograft models of CRPC. Mechanistically, THEM6 is located at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and controls lipid homeostasis by regulating intracellular levels of ether lipids. As a consequence, THEM6 loss in CRPC cells significantly alters ER function, preventing lipid-mediated induction of ATF4 and reducing de novo sterol biosynthesis. Finally, we show that THEM6 is required for the establishment of the MYC-induced stress response. Thus, similar to PCa, THEM6 loss significantly impairs tumorigenesis in the MYC-dependent subtype of triple negative breast cancer. Altogether our results highlight THEM6 as a novel component of the treatment-induced stress response and a promising target for the treatment of CRPC and MYC-driven cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down experiments were performed on Myc tagged THEM6 overexpressed in HEK293 cells. Agarose beads were resuspended in a 2M Urea and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and stored at -20°C. Triplicate biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin (Promega) on beads as previously described [Hubner, N.C. et al. Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions. The Journal of cell biology 189, 739-754 (2010)]. Prior mass spectrometry analysis, digested peptides were desalted using StageTip [Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.]. Peptides from all experiments were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded into fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitters were heated by means of a column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for data acquisition. The  Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry experiment (AP-MS) was carried out using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, using 20 cm fused silica emitter kept at 35°C to separate the peptides over a 60 minutes gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For the full scan a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z was used to scan the mass range from 350–1400 m/z. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions, for a maximum of 75 ms, at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] version 1.6.3.3 (TMT proteome experiments) or 1.5.5.1 (AP-MS experiment) and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying SwissProt [The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148] Homo sapiens (30/04/2019; 42,438 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. Database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %.  Proteins identified in the AP-MS experiment, were quantified according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant [Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. A., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N. and Mann, M. (2014). Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513-2526].  MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372]. From the ProteinGroups.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged proteins were removed, as well as protein groups identified with no unique peptides. Only proteins quantified in three out of three replicate experiments, were included in the analysis. To determine significant change in protein abundance, a Student t-test with a 5% FDR (permutation-based) was applied using label free quantitation intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Castration-resistant prostate cancer, Cancer metabolism, Endoplasmic reticulum, Cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


