### Accession
PXD000793

### Title
PIA - iPRG2008 Benchmark Dataset

### Description
This dataset is no actual new study but the iPRG2008 benchmark dataset used in the PIA manuscript.

### Sample Protocol
For the exact sample procesing, please refer to http://www.abrf.org/index.cfm/group.show/ProteomicsInformaticsResearchGroup.53.htm#786. Mouse samples were trypsin digested and the peptides labeled by four-plex iTRAQ and fractionated via strong cation exchange chromatography. The fractions were measured by LC-MS/MS on a 3200 QTrap, partially multiple times with exclusion lists, which resulted into 29 files. The resulting MGF files were combined into one file for peptide identification.

### Data Protocol
For the peptide identification a precursor and fragment tolerance of 0.45 Da and one missed cleavage were allowed. For the fixed modifications four-plex iTRAQ on K and N-termini as well as methylthio on C and for the variable modifications oxidation of M and protein N-terminal acetylation was used. as database, the mouse protein database provided for the iPRG2008 was used.

### Publication Abstract
Protein inference connects the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) obtained from database search engines back to proteins, which are typically at the heart of most proteomics studies. Different search engines yield different PSMs and thus different protein lists. Analysis of results from one or multiple search engines is often hampered by different data exchange formats and lack of convenient and intuitive user interfaces. We present PIA, a flexible software suite for combining PSMs from different search engine runs and turning these into consistent results. PIA can be integrated into proteomics data analysis workflows in several ways. A user-friendly graphical user interface can be run either locally or (e.g., for larger core facilities) from a central server. For automated data processing, stand-alone tools are available. PIA implements several established protein inference algorithms and can combine results from different search engines seamlessly. On several benchmark data sets, we show that PIA can identify a larger number of proteins at the same protein FDR when compared to that using inference based on a single search engine. PIA supports the majority of established search engines and data in the mzIdentML standard format. It is implemented in Java and freely available at https://github.com/mpc-bioinformatics/pia.

### Keywords
Mouse, Benchmark, Iprg2008

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Medical Faculty,
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Julian Uszkoreit

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center


### SDRF
- organism: Mus musculus
- organism part: not available
- cell type: not available
- disease: not available
- fractionation method: NT=Strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX);AC=PRIDE:0000561
- label: AC=MS:1002624;NT=iTRAQ reagent 114, AC=MS:1002625;NT=iTRAQ reagent 115, AC=MS:1002626;NT=iTRAQ reagent 116, AC=MS:1002627;NT=iTRAQ reagent 117
- instrument: NT=3200 QTRAP;AC=MS:1000651
- modification parameters: NT=Acetyl; MT=variable; PP=Protein N-Term; AC=Unimod:1; TA=.; MM=42.010567
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation; MT=variable; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:35; TA=M; MM=15.994915
- modification parameters.2: NT=iTRAQ4plex; MT=fixed; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:214; TA=K; MM=144.10207
- modification parameters.3: NT=iTRAQ4plex; MT=fixed; PP=Any N-Term; AC=Unimod:214; TA=.; MM=144.10207
- modification parameters.4: NT=Methylthio; MT=fixed; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:39; TA=.; MM=45.98772

