### Accession
PXD027901

### Title
Pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial soluble adenylyl cyclase in astrocytes causes activation of AMP-activated protein kinase and induces breakdown of glycogen

### Description
Astrocytes contain the majority of the brain’s supply of glycogen which has been suggested to play an important role in neuronal synaptic plasticity. This may be mediated by release of glycogen-derived lactate or glutamine supporting neuronal metabolism or via induction of neuronal signaling pathways. The second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) can induce glycogen breakdown and activation of cytosolic soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC) in astrocytes has been suggested to be the link between neuronal depolarization and glycogen breakdown. However, recent studies have revealed that sAC residing in the mitochondria rather than the cytosol is regulating mitochondrial bioenergetics, and that employing pharmacological inhibitors of sAC significantly alters cellular energy metabolism. This effect on energy metabolism could influence the interpretation of previous studies employing pharmacological inhibition of sAC. Here, we show that pharmacological inhibition of sAC lowers mitochondrial respiration, induces phosphorylation of the metabolic master switch AMPK, and decreases glycogen stores in cultured astrocytes. In light of this, we discuss the pharmacological challenges of investigating the functional and metabolic roles of sAC in astrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: NMRI mice (Envigo, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom) were housed in a pathogen-free, temperature and humidity-controlled environment at the Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen. Mice were handled according to standards given by the Danish Animal Experiments Inspectorate. All experiments were approved by the Danish National Ethics Committee and performed according to the European Convention (ETC 123 of 1986). Cultures of primary astrocytes: Primary cultures of cortical astrocytes were prepared from 7 day old pups as previously described [26] and seeded in Seahorse XFe96 well culture plates or 6-well culture plates. Astrocytes were used for experiments on days in vitro 21. Phospho-proteomics: The culture media of cultured astrocytes was changed to assay medium (defined in 2.4.1) and pre-incubated for one hour at 37 °C. 2-OHE (50 µM) or DMSO (vehicle) was added and incubated for 6 minutes at 37 °C. After incubation, samples were washed once with ice cold PBS, and then scraped in ice cold PBS with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor, centrifuged at 14.000g x 15 min x 4 °C and supernatant was aspirated. Cell pellets were lysed in 2% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC) and probe-sonicated two times for 15 sec using an amplitude of 40%. The protein concentration was measured using the N60 Nanodrop instrument (Implen, Germany) based on the 214 nm absorbance. A total of 100 µg protein from each replicate was digested with trypsin (5% w/w) for 4 hours. After digestion, the samples were labeled with TMT 6plex [30] according to the manufactures protocol, for quantitation of the phosphopeptides. For TMT labeling, the three controls were labeled with TMT 126, 127 and 128, respectively, and the three stimulated were labeled with TMT 129, 130 and 131, respectively. After TMT labeling, the 6 samples were pooled in a 1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio and acidified using 2% Formic acid (FA) for SDC precipitation. The pooled sample were centrifuged for 20 min at 14000 g to remove the precipitated SDC. The supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge until 150 µL. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), acetonitrile (ACN) and glycolic acid was added to the supernatant to make a solution consisting of 5% TFA, 80% ACN and 1M Glycolic acid for subsequent Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) enrichment of phosphopeptides [31, 32]. The enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed essentially as described in [32]. Enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated using High pH reversed phase separation into 12 concatenated fractions as described previously [33]. Each 12 High pH fractions were subsequently analyzed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS).  Reversed phase LC-ESI-MS/MS: All samples were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and analyzed by LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Dionex Cap-LC (UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific)) and a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The phosphopeptides were separated on a 150 µm inner diameter EASY SPRAY column using a Dionex Cap-LC HPLC system. Peptides were separated by a gradient starting from 99 % buffer A (0.1 % FA), 1 % buffer B (95 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) and increasing to 3 % buffer B in 3 min. The gradient continued with a step from 3 % to 28 % buffer B in 50 min and from 28 % to 45 % buffer B in 8 min until elevating the concentration of buffer B to 100 % in 3 min. The separation was performed with a flowrate of 1.2 µL/min connected online to the mass spectrometer working in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The acquisition in positive ion mode comprised full MS scans from 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM) using a maximum filling time of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3x106 ions. The 10 most intense ions were selected for Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 32. The MS2 spectrum was acquired from first mass of 110 m/z with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM using a maximum filling time of 200 ms and an AGC target value of 1x105 ions combined with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z as well as dynamic exclusion of 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Database searching  All raw files were searched combined against the Swissprot mus musculus database (downloaded 18.12.2017) in Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3.0.520 (Thermo Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.6) combined with the Percolator for peptide validation (1 % FDR for proteins and peptides). We used the mouse swissprot database (25131 entries). The database search was performed using the following parameters: static modifications: TMT6plex on lysine and the N-terminus as well as carbamidomethyl on cysteines; dynamic modifications: deamidation of asparagine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine; tryptic peptides with maximal two missed cleavage were allowed; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da; Mascot ion score ≥ 18.  Only rank one peptides were considered. Phosphosite localization was performed using IMP-ptmRS in PD and peptides were grouped with site probability of 75. After database searching the reporter ions from the TMT 6 plex was used for quantitation of the phosphopeptides. The build-in ANOVA test with Benjmini-Hockberg correction was performed in the PD software providing adjusted p-values usedfor assigning confidence in the quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Mobilization of astrocyte glycogen is key for processes such as synaptic plasticity and memory formation but the link between neuronal activity and glycogen breakdown is not fully known. Activation of cytosolic soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC) in astrocytes has been suggested to link neuronal depolarization and glycogen breakdown partly based on experiments employing pharmacological inhibition of sAC. However, several studies have revealed that sAC located within mitochondria is a central regulator of respiration and oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, pharmacological sAC inhibition is likely to affect both cytosolic and mitochondrial sAC and if bioenergetic readouts are studied, the observed effects are likely to stem from inhibition of mitochondrial rather than cytosolic sAC. Here, we report that a pharmacologically induced inhibition of sAC activity lowers mitochondrial respiration, induces phosphorylation of the metabolic master switch AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and decreases glycogen stores in cultured primary murine astrocytes. From these data and our discussion of the literature, mitochondrial sAC emerges as a key regulator of astrocyte bioenergetics. Lastly, we discuss the challenges of investigating the functional and metabolic roles of cytosolic versus mitochondrial sAC in astrocytes employing the currently available pharmacological tool compounds.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Phosphorylation, Adenylyl cyclase, Mouse astrocytes, Amp-activated protein kinase

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  University of Southern Denmark  Campusvej 55  DK-5230 Odense M  Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Martin R. Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  University of Southern Denmark  Campusvej 55  DK-5230 Odense M  Denmark


