### Accession
PXD033068

### Title
The chromatin-regulating CoREST complex is animal specific and essential for development in the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis

### Description
Using the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis as a model for early branching metazoans, we show that CoREST is an animal-specific protein that assembles a conserved histone-modifying complex including Lsd1 and HDAC1/2. We further show that the Nematostella complex is similar in composition to vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation. Embryos from either wildtype or NvLsd1GFP/GFP crosses were grown until planula stage. Approximately 50 μl of planula (volume of tissue without media) were used per IP. They were placed in lysis buffer (10 mM TricHCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 10% glycerol) with cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, 4693159001) and homogenized by passing through a 27G needle. Samples were then incubated on ice for 30 minutes and mixed approximately every five minutes by passing through the needle. Samples were then centrifuged at full speed for 15 minutes and 600ul of supernatant was used for IP. For each sample, 30 μl GFP-Trap Agarose or Binding Control Agarose Beads (Chromotek, gta-10 and bab-20) were washed once in dilution buffer (10mM tricHCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5mM EDTA) and then spun at 2500g for 2 minutes. The lysate was diluted with 900 μl dilution buffer and then added to the beads. This was incubated at 4°C for two hours rotating. Following this the beads were washed at least 6 times in 1 ml wash buffer (Dilution buffer + 0.5% NP40) for >10 minutes each at 4°C. In the final wash the beads were moved to a new tube. When protein was used for LC-MS analysis the wash buffer was removed and the beads were resuspended in 100 μl MilliQ H2O and frozen at -80°C until being processed further.  Sample preparation for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Beads were thawed to room temperature (RT) and centrifuged at 2500g for 2 minutes and the H2O was removed. The beads were then resuspended in 40 μl trypsin buffer (50 mM Tris, 1mM CaCl2, pH8), 4 μl of 0.1 M DTT was added, and the samples were heated to 95°C for five minutes. The samples were then cooled to RT and 5 μl of 200 mM iodoacetamide was added, and the samples were incubated, shaking at RT for one hour. 0.8 μl of 0.1 M DTT was added to quench the remaining iodoacetamide, and samples were incubated shaking for 10 minutes. The pH was adjusted to approximately pH8 with 0.5 M Tris, 2 μg of Trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added to each sample and they were incubated shaking at 37°C overnight (o/n). Following this 5 μl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid was added to each sample and the peptide solutions were cleaned up with an Oasis HLB µElution plate (2 mg sorbent; Waters). Following elution samples were frozen at -80 and freeze dried. LC-MS analysis. Preliminary studies with samples containing 0.8 µg tryptic peptides dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% formic acid (FA) were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The MS1 resolution was 120 000 and the scan range 375-1500 m/z, AGC target was set to 3e6 and maximum injection time was 100 ms The intensity threshold was set at 5.0e4 and dynamic exclusion lasted for 20s. The MS/MS scans consisted of HCD with normalized collision energy at 28, quadrupole isolation window at 1.6 m/z and Orbitrap resolution at 15 000.  For the final experiments Control and NvLsd1GFP samples containing the same amount of peptide were analyzed in an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-IC/ETD/PTCR ion source and FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The MS1 resolution and the scan range were set as above, AGC target was set to standard, maximum injection time was automatic and RF lens at 30%. The intensity threshold was also at 5.0e4 and dynamic exclusion lasted for 30s. The MS/MS scans consisted of HCD with collision energy at 30%, quadrupole isolation window at 4 m/z and Orbitrap resolution at 30 000. FAIMS was set up with the standard resolution mode and a total gas flow of 4.6 L/min. The CVs were set to -45 and -65 V.

### Data Protocol
Statistical and bioinformatic analyses. The LC-Q Exactive raw files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsread, Germany) (Cox and Mann 2008) and the spectra were searched against the nveGenes.vienna database version 2008_02 (https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Nematostella_vectensis_transcriptome_and_gene_models_v2_0/807696). The LC-Eclipse raw files were searched in Proteome Discoverer Software (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the SEQUEST HT database search engine with Percolator validation (FDR < 0.01), and against the uniprot-proteome UP000001593 database version 2021_02. Perseus (version 1.6.15.0, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry) (Tyanova et al. 2016) was used to process and normalize the data. Proteins with three valid values in each group were selected for statistical comparisons using t-test. Proteins with p-values < 0.05 were considered to have significantly different abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Co-rest nematostella vectensis

### Affiliations
University of Bergen, Norway
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Maria Hernandez-Valladares

### Lab Head
Dr Fabian Rentzsch
University of Bergen, Norway


