### Accession
PXD002206

### Title
Novel non-canonical role of STAT1 in Natural Killer cell cytotoxicity

### Description
STAT1 is an important regulator of NK cell maturation and cytotoxicity. Although the consequences of Stat1-deficiency have been described in detail the underlying molecular functions of STAT1 in NK cells are only partially understood. Here we describe a novel non-canonical role of STAT1 that was unmasked in NK cells expressing Stat1-Y701F. This mutation prevents JAK-dependent phosphorylation, subsequent nuclear translocation and cytokine-induced transcriptional activity. As expected Stat1-Y701F mice displayed impaired NK cell maturation comparable to Stat1-/- animals. In contrast Stat1-Y701F NK cells exerted a significantly enhanced cytotoxicity in vitro and in vivo suggesting a so-far unknown cytoplasmic function. Using immunofluorescence technology we uncovered the recruitment of STAT1 to the immunological synapse during NK cell killing. A Stat1ind mouse expressing FLAG-tagged STAT1α was used to study the STAT1α interactome in NK cells. Mass spectrometry revealed that STAT1 directly binds proteins involved in cell junction formation and proteins associated to membrane or membrane-bound vesicles. We propose a novel function for STAT1 in the immunological synapse of NK cells regulating tumor surveillance and cytotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Mice Gender- and age-matched 6-12 week old C57BL/6J wild-type (Stat1+/+), B6;129P2-Stat1tm1Dlv/J (Stat1-/-) (Durbin et al., 1996), B6;129S6Sv-Stat1tm1(Y701F) (Stat1-Y701F) (Majoros et al, accompanying manuscript submitted) and B6N;129P2-Stat1tm1Dlv, Gt(RO-SA)26Sortm1(rtTA*M2)Jae, Col1a1tm1(tetO-Stat1)Biat (referred to as Stat1ind mice) (Leitner et al., 2014) mice were used and housed under specific pathogen-free conditions according to FELASA guidelines. All experiments were approved by the Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee of the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna and conform to the guidelines of the national authority (the Austrian Federal Ministry for Science and Research). Stat1ind and control mice were fed with doxycycline hyclate (dox; Sigma) at concentrations of 0.2-0.5 mg/ml supplemented with 5-10 mg/ml sucrose via drinking water for 7-10 days. Cell culture NK cells were isolated from splenocytes using the MACS NK cell separation kit (anti-DX5 microbeads, Miltenyi Biotec). Murine primary NK cells, YAC-1, RMA-S, RMA-Rae1, Stat1-deficient v-abl+ leukemic and B16F10 melanoma cells were cultivated as previously described (Putz et al., 2013). Human Jurkat cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium containing L-glutamine (PAA), 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, PAA), 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies). Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells were maintained in 5,000 U/ml rhIL-2 (Proleukin, Novartis) for 5-7 days and treated with 250 U/ml rmIFN-β (PBL) for 4 hours prior to gene analysis. Immunoprecipitation  For immunoprecipitation experiments 3x106 NK cells were harvested and stimulated for 10 min with 100 U/ml rmIFN-β (Merck Millipore) or co-incubated for 30 min with 3x106 Jurkat cells before the lysis in 200 μl IP lysis buffer. The composition of the optimal buffer to precipitate STAT1 complexes was determined experimentally (Figure S5): 50mM HEPES pH7.5, 0.1% Tween-20, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 10mM β-glycerophosphate, 1μM PMSF, 1mM NaF, 500nM Na3O4V and cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Roche). STAT1αFLAG was precipitated with the use of the ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich). As controls served 5% of the input (whole cell lysate) and 5% of the beadsupernatant (not bound to the beads). The proteins bound to the αFLAG-beads were eluted by cooking for 10 min in 4x Laemmli-buffer freshly complemented with β-mercaptoethanol. Mass spectrometry In-solution digestion: If not stated otherwise, all reagents were obtained from Sigma. The total lot of beads obtained per IP experiment was used for proteolytic digestion. Beads were washed with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC buffer) on top of conditioned 3kD MWCO filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) by centrifugation at 14000g for 15min. After reduction with 200μl of dithiothreitol solution (5mg/ml dissolved in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in ABC buffer at pH 8) and alkylation with 200μl of iodacetamide solution (10mg/ml in 8M guanidinium hydrochloride in ABC buffer), proteins were digested 18h at 37°C using 10μl trypsin solution (0.1μg/μl). Clean up of peptide samples were performed using C- 18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Finally, the peptide samples were dried and stored at -20°C until MS analyses. For shotgun-analyses, dried samples were reconstituted in 5μl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40μl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Synthetic peptides [Glu1-Fribrinopeptide B – EGVNDNEEGFFSAR; M28 – TTPAVLDSDGSYFLYSK; HK0 – VLETKSLYVR; HK1 - VLETK(ε-AC)SLYVR] were obtained from Sigma and Peptide Specialty Laboratories GmbH and spiked in each sample as internal quality control for monitoring LC-MS-system stability. Shotgun LC-MS analysis: 10μl of the peptide samples were injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. For pre-concentration, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75μm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10μl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75μm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 95min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200) were performed. MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt/UniprotKB Database (version 052014 including only reviewed proteins with 20 263 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 5ppm for MS spectra and 20ppm for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as Nterminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. A list of lab-characteristic contaminants including various keratins was excluded manually. The FDR for peptide spectrum matches was set to <0.01, in addition the Mascot significance threshold was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
STAT1 is an important regulator of NK cell maturation and cytotoxicity. Although the consequences of <i>Stat1</i>-deficiency have been described in detail the underlying molecular functions of STAT1 in NK cells are only partially understood. Here, we describe a novel non-canonical role of STAT1 that was unmasked in NK cells expressing a <i>Stat1-Y701F</i> mutant. This mutation prevents JAK-dependent phosphorylation, subsequent nuclear translocation and cytokine-induced transcriptional activity as verified by RNA-seq analysis. As expected <i>Stat1-Y701F</i> mice displayed impaired NK cell maturation comparable to <i>Stat1</i><sup><i>-/-</i></sup> animals. In contrast <i>Stat1-Y701F</i> NK cells exerted a significantly enhanced cytotoxicity <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> compared to <i>Stat1</i><sup><i>-/-</i></sup> NK cells in the absence of detectable transcriptional activity. We thus investigated the STAT1 interactome using primary NK cells derived from <i>Stat1</i><sup><i>ind</i></sup> mice that inducibly express a FLAG-tagged STAT1. Mass spectrometry revealed that STAT1 directly binds proteins involved in cell junction formation and proteins associated to membrane or membrane-bound vesicles. In line, immunofluorescence studies uncovered the recruitment of STAT1 to the target-cell interphase during NK cell killing. This led us to propose a novel function for STAT1 at the immunological synapse in NK cells regulating tumor surveillance and cytotoxicity.

### Keywords
Vesicle, Immunological synapse, F-actin, Interactome, Proteome

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


