### Accession
PXD023734

### Title
Label-free proteomic analysis of neuroglobin-knockout breast cancer cells

### Description
Neuroglobin (NGB) is an oxygen-binding protein that takes part in several processes that safeguard redox homeostasis, gaining an important protective role in neuronal and extra-neuronal cells. NGB remarkably exerts its function upon up-regulation by NGB-inducible molecules such as 17β-estradiol (E2) and H2O2. Despite this, the essential mechanisms related to NGB function remain still undefined. Human MCF-7 breast cancer cells knocked out (KO) for NGB gene obtained using CRISPR/Cas9 technology were analyzed by shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics in comparison with control cells. Differential proteomics experiments were also performed using NGB-KO cells after treatment with E2, H2O2, and E2+H2O2 versus their corresponding non-treated controls.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 breast cancer cells were lysed and protein digestion was then performed using Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on S-Trap (ProtiFi, USA) micro spin columns. Digested peptides were eluted from the S-Trap columns, vacuum-dried and resuspended in 100 μL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. Each sample was analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q Exactive PLUS mass spectrometer coupled with a nano-RSLC Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Globally, 4 biological replicates per condition were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The LC- MS/MS runs were elaborated all together within MaxQuant software. Normalized LFQ data were log2-transformed and missing values were estimated within Perseus platform. The difference value between the log2-transformed means of the replicates of two groups for each experimental comparison was used as fold change. In order to detect quantitative variations in protein profiles of each condition versus its corresponding control, all the fold changes with values higher than 0.4 and lower than -0.4 were considered in the final analysis. Additionally, the statistically significant proteins were selected after t-test for values of FDR of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroglobin (NGB) is a myoglobin-like monomeric globin that is involved in several processes, displaying a pivotal redox-dependent protective role in neuronal and extra-neuronal cells. NGB remarkably exerts its function upon upregulation by NGB inducers, such as 17&#x3b2;-estradiol (E2) and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. However, the molecular bases of NGB's functions remain undefined, mainly in non-neuronal cancer cells. Human MCF-7 breast cancer cells with a knocked-out (KO) <i>NGB</i> gene obtained using CRISPR/Cas9 technology were analyzed using shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics in comparison with control cells. The differential proteomics experiments were also performed after treatment with E2, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and E2 + H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>. All the runs acquired using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry were elaborated within the same MaxQuant analysis, leading to the quantification of 1872 proteins in the global proteomic dataset. Then, a differentially regulated protein dataset was obtained for each specific treatment. After the proteomic study, multiple bioinformatics analyses were performed to highlight unbalanced pathways and processes. Here, we report the proteomic and bioinformatic investigations concerning the effects on cellular processes of NGB deficiency and cell treatments. Globally, the main processes that were affected were related to the response to stress, cytoskeleton dynamics, apoptosis, and mitochondria-driven pathways.

### Keywords
S-trap, Ngb, Neuroglobin, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
 Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology - University of Naples Federico II
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy

### Submitter
Michele  Costanzo

### Lab Head
Dr Michele Costanzo
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy


