### Accession
PXD040202

### Title
Norbergenin  prevents  LPS-induced  inflammatory responses in macrophages through inhibiting NFκB, MAPK and STAT3 activation, and blocking metabolic reprogramming

### Description
Inflammation is thought to be a key cause of many chronic diseases. However, current therapeutic agents to control inflammation have limited long-term use potential due to various side effects. This study aimed to determine the preventive effects of norbergenin on LPS-induced inflammation and elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
cells were washed and harvested in GdmCl buffer (6M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin-hydrochloride (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA)). Lysates were heated for 5 min at 95°C and sonicated with a tip–probe sonicator at 4 °C (3 × 30 s of 1 s on and 1 s off at 80% output power). The protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay and adjusted to a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. 50 µg of protein solution was diluted with 15% aqueous acetonitrile (ACN), and digested with 100:1 (protein:enzyme) LysC at 37°C for 2 h. Then, 10% aqueous ACN in 25 mM Tris (pH 8.5) was added to obtain a final concentration of 0.5 M GdmCl and a final volume of 1000 µL. Samples were incubated with trypsin 50:1 (protein:enzyme) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were then desalted with MonoSpin C18 columns (GL science) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The peptides were eluted with 2 × 60 µl ACN and concentrated in a SpeedVac for 1 h at 30°C. Finally, they were reconstituted in MS buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant version v2.0.3.1 using the default setting if not stated otherwise28. Oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications. Three missed cleavages for protein analysis were allowed. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) and “Match between runs” were enabled. Searches were performed against the mouse UniProt FASTA database. Bioinformatics analysis was performed using COVAIN toolbox. The proteinGroups output table was used for all proteomic analyses. Reverse proteins, proteins that were only identified by site, and potential contaminants were filtered out. The protein groups were filtered to have at least 70% valid values, reaching a list of 3337 protein groups, which were further used for all downstream analyses. Dataset integration was based on gene name. Missing values were imputed using a minimal value model within the COVAIN toolbox.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation is thought to be a key cause of many chronic diseases and cancer. However, current therapeutic agents to control inflammation have limited long-term use potential due to various side-effects. This study aimed to examine the preventive effects of norbergenin, a constituent of traditional anti-inflammatory recipes, on LPS-induced proinflammatory signaling in macrophages and elucidate the underlying mechanisms by integrative metabolomics and shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics platforms. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we identified and quantified nearly 3000 proteins across all samples in each dataset. To interpret these datasets, we exploited the differentially expressed proteins and conducted statistical analyses. Accordingly, we found that LPS-induced production of NO, IL1&#x3b2;, TNF&#x3b1;, IL6 and iNOS in macrophages was alleviated by norbergenin <i>via</i> suppressed activation of TLR2 mediated NF&#x3ba;B, MAPKs and STAT3 signaling pathways. In addition, norbergenin was capable of overcoming LPS-triggered metabolic reprogramming in macrophages and restrained the facilitated glycolysis, promoted OXPHOS, and restored the aberrant metabolites within the TCA cycle. This is linked to its modulation of metabolic enzymes to support its anti-inflammatory activity. Thus, our results uncover that norbergenin regulates inflammatory signaling cascades and metabolic reprogramming in LPS stimulated macrophages to exert its anti-inflammatory potential.

### Keywords
Inflammatory, Q-exactive plus, Norbergenin, Macrophages, Murine

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology (MOSYS), Department of Function and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Zhengnan Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Molecular Systems Biology (MOSYS), Department of Function and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna, Austria


