### Accession
PXD001285

### Title
Apteronotus leptorhynchus central nervous system proteome

### Description
The brown ghost knifefish (Apteronotus leptorhynchus) is a weakly electric teleost fish of particular interest as a model organism for a variety of research areas in neuroscience, including neurophysiology, neuroethology, and neurobiology. This versatile model system has been more recently used in the study of central nervous system development and regeneration during adulthood, as well as in the study of vertebrate aging and senescence. Despite substantial scientific interest in this species, no genomic resources are currently available. After evaluating several trimming and transcript reconstruction strategies, de novo assembly using Trinity uncovered at least 11,847 unique components (“genes”) containing full or near-full length protein sequences based on alignment to a reference set of known Actinopterygii protein sequences, with as many as 42,459 components containing at least a partial protein-coding sequence, providing broad coverage of the proteome. Shotgun proteomics confirmed translation of open reading frames from over 2,000 transcripts, including alternative splice variants. Assignment of tandem mass spectra obtained was shown to be greatly improved with the assembly compared with using databases of sequences from closely related organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Brain and spinal cord tissues were isolated rapidly on ice and stored at -80°C. To increase overall coverage of identified proteins, samples were prepared using both in-gel digestion and enhanced filter-aided sample preparation (eFASP). In-gel digestion was performed as previously described. Tissue samples were homogenized for 3 min on ice in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 120 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 10% glycerol (all from Fisher Scientific), pH 7.4, using a hand-held pestle homogenizer. The homogenate was placed in a rotating mixer for 40 min at 4°C, centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 g, and the supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce). Samples were loaded onto 12% acrylamide gels (Bio-Rad) at 50 µg total protein per lane, and run at 120V until the protein front was well focused at the beginning of the resolving gel, before band separation. The gels were transferred into fixative solution containing 10% acetic acid, 50% methanol (all from Fisher Scientific), and 40% water for 30 min, stained for a few seconds with Ponceau S (Boston Bioproducts, Inc.), then destained in fixative solution for 2-3 hours, until the protein band was clearly visible and the background minimal. The protein bands were excised, fragmented into 1-mm3-pieces, and stored in 1% acetic acid in water at 4°C overnight. The gel pieces were dried with 500 µl acetonitrile for 10 min, reduced with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56°C, dried with acetonitrile, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at room temperature, and dried again with acetonitrile. The dried gel pieces were saturated with a solution of 13 ng/µl trypsin (Princeton Separations, Inc.) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile, and incubated overnight in a thermo-mixer at 37°C and 400 rpm. Digests were extracted by adding a 1:2 solution of 5% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, followed by incubation at 37°C and 400 rpm for 15 min. Supernatant aliquots were collected and dried using a vacuum centrifuge.   eFASP was performed as previously described, with minor modifications. Tissue samples were fragmented and incubated in a thermo-mixer for 10 min at 95 °C and 600 rpm, in lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. The sample was further homogenized on ice using a sonicator, centrifuged at 14,000 g, sonicated and pelleted again, and the supernatant was collected and stored at -80°C. For sample processing, 25 µl of tissue lysate were mixed with 200 µl exchange buffer, containing 8 M urea, 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 and dispensed onto a Vivaspin 500 filter unit, 30 kDa MWCO (GE Healthcare), and centrifuged at 15,000 g. After two further washes with exchange buffer, the sample was alkylated by incubating for 1 hour at 37°C and 300 rpm with 100 µl buffer containing 8 M urea and 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. After centrifugation for 10 min at 15,000 g, and two further washes with 200 µl exchange buffer each, the sample was washed three times with digestion buffer containing 0.2% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. Trypsin was added in 100 µl digestion buffer at a ratio of 1:50 with the total protein in the sample, and the unit was incubated overnight at 37°C and 300 rpm. After centrifugation for 10 min at 15,000 g, the unit was washed twice with 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and all filtrate collected. To remove residual detergent, 1 ml of ethyl acetate was added to the sample, sonicated for 10 seconds and centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 g, and the upper organic layer removed. This process was repeated three times, then the aqueous samples were placed in a thermomixer at 60°C for 5 min, to remove residual ethyl acetate. The samples were then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 50% methanol several times to remove residual salts.  Protein extract digests were analyzed on an impact HD Qq-Time-Of-Flight (Qq-TOF, Bruker Corporation, Billerica, MA) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker-Michrom, California, USA). The mass spectrometer was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex, California, USA) fitted with an in-house packed C18 column (500 mm x 100 μm, 2.5 μm beads, XSelect, Waters Corp., Milford, MA). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The following gradient conditions were used: t = 0-5 min, 5% solvent B; t = 245 min, 40% solvent B; t = 248-262 min, 80% solvent B; t = 265 min, 5% solvent B. The flow rate was 1 μL/min. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at an intensity-dependent rate of 4-20Hz between precursor scans.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were initially analyzed in DataAnalysis 4.2 (Bruker). Compounds were detected based on an AutoMSn intensity threshold of 104 and exported to a Mascot generic file (MGF) using the Protein Analysis function. The MGFs from individual runs were imported into ProteinScape 3.1 (Bruker), combined, and proteins were identified from LC-MS/MS runs by search the MS/MS spectra using a local MASCOT (Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA) server. All MASCOT searches were performed using trypsin as the enzyme, up to two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidized methionine and deamidated asparagine/glutamine as variable modifications, 10-ppm tolerance on the precursor and 0.5-amu tolerance on the product ions, and charge states of +1, +2, and +3. Identifications were evaluated using MudPIT scoring, with a minimum peptide score of 20. A decoy database search was performed to allow correction of protein identifications by a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Spinal cord, Apteronotus leptorhynchus

### Affiliations
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Joseph Salisbury

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey N. Agar
Northeastern University


