### Accession
PXD007224

### Title
Human hair shaft LC-MS/MS -  Studies on the Proteome of Human Hair - Identification of Histones and Deamidated Keratins

### Description
The aim of this work was to define the hair proteome after extractions with both detergent and detergent-free buffers using highly sensitive proteomics technologies based on mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
An equal amount of hair samples from each individual (N=5) were pooled and hair proteins were extracted in detergent-free buffer by incubating 50 mg of hair with 8 M urea buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, 25% ethanol, and 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at pH 9.5 and 55⁰C for 72 h. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 15 min and used for further analysis. For extraction with detergents, 80 mg of hair were suspended in 50 mM Tris at pH 7.2 containing 2% SDS and 20 mM DTT, followed by bath sonication and further incubation overnight at 65 °C. The supernatant was collected (termed as SDSI), and the pellet fraction was further extracted (termed as SDSII).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into the mascot generic file format using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) with the MS2 spectrum processor for de-isotoping the MS/MS spectra. The concatenated target-decoy UniProt human database (sequence 90411, total residues 358, 86,945, downloaded on April 1, 2015) was used for the data search. The database search was performed using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) with MS tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da. Two missed trypsin cleavage sites per peptide were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and deamidation (N and Q) were variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Human hair is laminar-fibrous tissue and an evolutionarily old keratinization product of follicle trichocytes. Studies on the hair proteome can give new insights into hair function and lead to the development of novel biomarkers for hair in health and disease. Human hair proteins were extracted by detergent and detergent-free techniques. We adopted a shotgun proteomics approach, which demonstrated a large extractability and variety of hair proteins after detergent extraction. We found an enrichment of keratin, keratin-associated proteins (KAPs), and intermediate filament proteins, which were part of protein networks associated with response to stress, innate immunity, epidermis development, and the hair cycle. Our analysis also revealed a significant deamidation of keratin type I and II, and KAPs. The hair shafts were found to contain several types of histones, which are well known to exert antimicrobial activity. Analysis of the hair proteome, particularly its composition, protein abundances, deamidated hair proteins, and modification sites, may offer a novel approach to explore potential biomarkers of hair health quality, hair diseases, and aging.

### Keywords
Human scalp hair shaft

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sze S K
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


