### Accession
PXD004395

### Title
Global mapping of rat plasma proteins with a native proteomic approach using nondenaturing micro 2DE and label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS

### Description
Plasma samples from adult male rats were separated by nondenaturing micro 2DE and a representative gel was selected, on which a total of 136 CBB-stained spots were numbered and subjected to in-gel digestion and label-free quantitative LC-MSE (MS/MS in data-independent acquisition mode).  The analysis provided the assignment of 1-25 (average eight) nonredundant proteins in each spot and totally 199 proteins were assigned in the 136 spots.  The quantity data from the LC-MSE analysis were further analyzed to reconstruct the quantity distribution on the 2D gel for each of the assigned proteins (a native protein map).  This work provides not only a reference library containing 199 native protein maps for rat plasma proteome, but also useful information for subsequent analysis for protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Plasma preparation. Blood was taken from retro-orbital plexus of adult male Sprague Dawley rats (weight 245-285 grams) after 12-h fasting. The capillaries and tubes for blood taking were both pre-soaked in 0.1% w/v heparin sodium solution. The blood was centrifuged at 3000 g for 5 m at 4C and the plasma was collected. Added with sucrose to 40% w/v, the plasma samples were stored in small aliquots at -80C until use.  (2) Nondenaturing micro 2DE. The rat plasma was thawed at 4C and 1.0-uL aliquots were subjected to nondenaturing IEF employing agarose column gels (1.4 mm id * 36 mm long, containing 5% v/v Pharmalyte pH 3-10 and 1% w/v agarose). The electrolytes are 0.04 M NaOH and 0.01 M H3PO4, respectively. With the apparatus being cooled in ice water, 4-8 gels were run simultaneously at 0.12 mA/gel CC until the voltage rose to 300 V (~15 m) and continued at 300 V CV for 20 m. The IEF gels were transferred onto PAGE gels (4.2-17.85% T linear gradient, 5% C, 38 mm wide * 42 mm high * 1 mm thick), on each a 100-uL aliquot of 0.01 M Tris-0.076 M glycine buffer (pH 8.3) was pre-added. The solution was replaced with new aliquots immediately after the IEF gels were aligned. PAGE was run at 10 mA/gel CC in 0.05 M Tris-0.38 M glycine (pH 8.3) and stopped when the albumin spots, visualized by the BPB added in buffer, moved to ~15 mm from gel bottom (about 60 m). The gels were stained with CBB R-250, scanned at a 600 dpi resolution and stored in 7% v/v acetic acid at 4C until use. The different 2DE patterns showed high similarity in spot distribution, thus we selected a representative one as “reference gel” for protein spot numbering and analysis (“Gel -rat plasma nondenaturing 2DE -Ya Jin 160614.pdf”). Apparent pI and mass values were evaluated by running co-2DE of the rat plasma with a human plasma sample and referring to the known values of human plasma proteins. Totally 136 spots were numbered.   (3) In-gel digestion. The protein spots were cut with a razor approximately tracing the boundaries. Each gel spot, as it was or cut into ~1-mm3 cubes if the spot had a larger dimension, was destained by soaking in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for 10 m and then in 0.05 M NH4HCO3 in 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 m. The solution was discarded and the gel piece was washed with water for 10 m, and then dehydrated in ACN for 10 m. The liquid was discarded and the gel piece was dried by vacuum centrifuge. The gel was rehydrated with 10 mM DTT in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and was kept at 56C for 1 h for reduction. The solution was replaced with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 and kept in dark for 45 min for Cys alkylation. The gel was washed in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 for 10 m, dehydrated in ACN for 10 m and dried by vacuum centrifugation for 10 m. Then the gel was added with 20 uL 5 ng/uL trypsin in 0.05 M NH4HCO3 and digested at 37C for ~12 h. The solution was transferred to a new tube, the gel piece was further added with 20 uL 0.1% v/v TFA/50% v/v ACN and sonicate for 20 m, and the solution was also transferred to the tube. The combined solution was dried by vacuum centrifugation at 30C and the peptides were reconstituted with 24-uL 1% v/v formic acid/5% v/v ACN that contained 20 fmol/uL Enolase Digest Standard.   (4) Nano-UPLC-MS/MS analysis. The reconstituted tryptic peptides was separated with a nanoACQUITY system (Waters) equipped with a Symmetry 5 µm C18, 180 um * 20 mm trap column and a nanoACQUITY 1.7 um BEH130 C18 100 um * 100 mm analytical RP column (both from Waters). Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% v/v formic acid in ACN. Each sample, injected in 5-uL full-loop mode, was initially transferred with mobile phase A to the trap column at a flow rate of 5 uL/min for 3 m. The peptides were then eluted from the trap column to the analytical column and separated at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a gradient as follows: 2% B for 2 m, ramp to 0% B over 1 m, ramp from 0% to 50% B over 18 m, ramp to 85% B over 1 m and hold for 5 m, then ramp back to 2% B over 1 m. The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35C. The lock mass compound, 100 fmol/µL [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (m/z 785.8426), was delivered at 0.05 uL/min to the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source via the sample pump of the MS and was sampled via the lock mass channel each 60 sec for m/z calibration.    On-line mass spectrometric measurement of the nano-UPLC-separated tryptic peptides was performed using a Q-TOF MS equipped with a nano-ESI source (Synapt G2-S HDMS, Waters). The instrument was operated in positive ion, resolution and MSE. The settings were as follows; capillary voltage at 3 kV, sampling cone at 50 V, source temperature at 100C, quadrupole profile set as mass 1 as 400 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%), mass 2 as 500 (dwell time 25% and ramp time 25%) and mass 3 as 600. MSE data was acquired over 50-2000 m/z and by alternating 0.2-s scans at low energy (6 V) and elevated energy (linearly ramped from 20 to 45 V).

### Data Protocol
(1) The nano-UPLC-MSE data were processed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) ver. 3.0.2 (Waters). The database was retrieved from SwissProt (2016-02-17), containing the 7947 sequences of Rattus norvegicus that have been manually reviewed for minimal redundancy. The searching parameters were as follows, peptide and fragment tolerance, both automatic (typically <10 ppm and <20 ppm); maximum of missed trypsin cleavage, 1; maximum protein mass, 600 kDa; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation at Cys; variable modifications, oxidation at Met; false positive rate (FPR) at protein level, 4%. The criteria of protein identification were set as; at least one peptide matches per protein, at least 3 fragment ion matches per peptide, and at least 7 fragment ion matches per protein. Protein quantities were calculated by PLGS referring to the quantity of the internal standard (tryptic peptides of ENO1_YEAST, 100 fmol for each LC injection) employing the label-free Top-3 algorithm. The results were summarized in “Search result-sum -Ya Jin 160617.xlsx”. Further, keratins, hits with only one peptide matched, hits with no quantity values assigned (due to shared peptide matches) and hits with FPR higher than 4% were manually removed from the protein lists and not subjected for subsequent analysis.   (2) Reconstruction of native protein maps. Native maps, i.e. the quantity distribution of each assigned proteins on the nondenaturing 2D gel was reconstructed using the quantity information obtained from the LC-MS/MS analysis. The results obtained in (1), which were given by the spot numbers, were re-sorted by the protein entries with “protein entry name” as the first priority and “quantity in ng” as the second priority. Then Excel Visual Basic (VB) macros were made to conduct the map drawing work in batch mode. Briefly, (a) the data lines of each assigned protein was copied to a new Excel worksheet. (b) The values of “quantity in ng” in each worksheet were converted to “percentage quantity” by setting the highest quantity of the protein detected in the 136 spots to be 100%, and a new column of “transparency” was made with the values set as (100% -“percentage quantity”). (c) The oval shapes that were drawn simulating the shapes of the 136 spots on the 2D gel pattern, as well as the labels of the spot numbers, were copied and pasted into the new worksheet keeping their relative positions unchanged, and then each shape was filled with a blue color with the transparency set to be the value of “transparency”%. Using the above procedures, the protein quantities in the 136 spots on the 2D gels were reconstructed into a color density pattern for the protein (native protein map). (d) Further, the original CBB-stained 2DE pattern and also the pattern with spot numbering were also pasted into the worksheet adjacent to the protein map to facilitate the visualization of the protein distribution on the CBB-stained 2D gel pattern. The obtained native maps were combined into a 199-page PDF file (“Native maps of 199 rat plasma proteins -Ya Jin 160617.pdf” ).

### Publication Abstract
Plasma samples from adult male rats were separated by nondenaturing micro 2DE and a reference gel was selected, on which 136 CBB-stained spots were numbered and subjected to in-gel digestion and quantitative LC-MS/MS. The analysis provided the assignment of 1-25 (average eight) non-redundant proteins in each spot and totally 199 proteins were assigned in the 136 spots. About 40% of the proteins were detected in more than one spot and 15% in more than ten spots. We speculate this complexity arose from multiple causes, including protein heterogeneity, overlapping of protein locations and formation of protein complexes. Consequently, such results could not be appropriately presented as a conventional 2DE map, i.e. a list or a gel pattern with one or a few proteins annotated to each spot. Therefore, the LC-MS/MS quantity data was used to reconstruct the gel distribution of each protein and a library containing 199 native protein maps was established for rat plasma. Since proteins that formed a complex would migrate together during the nondenaturing 2DE and thus show similar gel distributions, correlation analysis was attempted for similarity comparison between the maps. The protein pairs showing high correlation coefficients included some well-known complexes, suggesting the promising application of native protein mapping for interaction analysis. With the importance of rat as the most commonly used laboratory animal in biomedical research, we expect this work would facilitate relevant studies by providing not only a reference library of rat plasma protein maps but a means for functional and interaction analysis.

### Keywords
Global mapping, Native proteomics, Label-free quantitative lc-mse, Nondenaturing micro 2de, Adult male rat plasma proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangdong University of Technology
School of Bioscience & Bioengineering, South China University of Technology

### Submitter
Ya Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Jin
School of Bioscience & Bioengineering, South China University of Technology


