### Accession
PXD005132

### Title
Electrospray ionization in concentrated acetonitrile vapor improves the performance of mass spectrometry for proteomic analyses

### Description
Suppressing the background interferences and enhancing the analyte signals are long-term goals in high performance electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) analyses. We observed that performing electrospray in the presence of a concentrated acetonitrile atmosphere suppresses background interferences and enhances peptide signals. An enclosed nanoESI source was utilized to provide a stable atmosphere of concentrated acetonitrile vapor for high performance ESI-MS analyses. The median MS signal intensity increased by 5 times for a set of 23 BSA tryptic peptides in direct nanoESI-MS analysis. Further, the number of reproducibly and precisely quantified peptides could be improved 67% in six replicate label-free quantitative proteome analyses by this strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and sample preparation  The BT-474 cells were grown in RPMI-1640, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2.5 g/L glucose and 0.11 g/L sodium pyruvate, 100 U/mL of streptomycin and penicillin. The cells were cultured in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C. The cells were collected and washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline, the cell pellets were then gently homogenized in an ice-cold lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 2% protease cocktail (v/v), and 1% Triton X-100 (v/v) using sonication at 400 W for 120 s. After that, the lysate was centrifuged at 25 000 g for 30 min and the proteins within the supernatant were precipitated and purified with ice-cold acetone overnight. Then, the proteins were re-dissolved in denaturing buffer containing 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.2) and 8 M urea, the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay.  The protein mixture was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 2 h and then alkylated by 20 mM IAA in darkness at room temperature for 40 min. After that, 100 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.2) was used to dilute the concentration of urea to 1 M. The trypsin digestion was performed at 37 °C overnight with an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1/25 (w/w), and the peptide mixture was desalted with OASIS HLB column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted by 80% ACN/0.1% FA, lyophilized and stored at -80 °C for further use. The standard protein BSA was digested by trypsin with the identical steps as described above. LC-MS/MS analysis  LTQ-Orbitrap XL coupled with LC Surveyor system (Thermo Fisher) was used for all proteomic analyses. The lyophilized protein tryptic digests of cell line samples were re-dissolved in aqueous solution with 0.1% FA, and 2 µg protein digest was loaded onto a 3 cm × 200 µm i.d. C18 trap column and separated by a 15 cm × 75 µm i.d C18 capillary column with a flow rate 300 nL/min. Aqueous solution with 0.1% FA (solvent A) and ACN with 0.1% FA (solvent B) were used for the reversed phase (RP) binary gradient separation, and the RP binary gradient was set as: from 1-10% solvent B in 5 min, from 10-35% solvent B in 90 min, from 35-90% solvent B in 5 min, after flush with 90% solvent B for 8 min the whole system was equilibrated by using solvent A for 12 min. The MS full scan was acquired from m/z 400 to 2000 in an LTQ-Orbitrap XL with a mass resolution of 60 000 at m/z 400, and the MS/MS scan was acquired in LTQ linear ion trap. All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the data dependent analysis (DDA) mode, in which the 6 most intense ions in the MS scan were selected for MS/MS scan by collision induced dissociation (CID) with the normalized collision energy at 35%. The dynamic exclusion function was: repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, and exclusion duration 180 s. 2 µg tryptic digest of BT474 protein sample was analyzed six times by the following three conditions, using the enclosed nanoESI source (CEESI source) with ACN vapor at a doping rate 50 μL (liquid) /min, using the enclosed nanoESI source without doping ACN vapor, and using a commercial open nanoESI source (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.3, http://www.maxquant.org/) using Andromeda as search engine against the NCBI human protein database (35922 entries, downloaded from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/H_sapiens/mRNA_Prot/human.protein.faa.gz) with precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and fragment mass deviation of 0.5 Da. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Trypsin was set as specific proteolytic enzyme. Peptides with a minimum six amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed for the analysis. For peptide and protein identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) cutoffs were both set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Suppressing the background interferences and enhancing the analytes signals are long-term goals in high performance electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) analyses. We observed that performing electrospray in the presence of a concentrated acetonitrile atmosphere suppresses background interferences and enhances peptide signals. An enclosed nanoESI source was utilized to provide a stable atmosphere of concentrated acetonitrile vapor for high performance ESI-MS analyses. The median MS signal intensity increased by 5 times for a set of 23 BSA tryptic peptides in direct ESI-MS analysis. Further, the number of reproducibly and precisely quantified peptides could be improved 67% in six replicate label-free quantitative proteome analyses by this strategy.

### Keywords
Electrospray ionization, Acetonitrile, Mass spectrometry, Background interference

### Affiliations
DICP
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, Liaoning, P. R. China.

### Submitter
Jin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Fangjun Wang
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, Liaoning, P. R. China.


