### Accession
PXD034848

### Title
Shotgun protemoics of lobules 1-4 and crus 2

### Description
Data used to produce Figure 2D from "A multifaceted gradient in human cerebellum of structural and functional development." Shotgun proteomic analysis from tissue samples taken from lobules 1-4 and crus 2 of the human cerebellum. Single subject, 3yo female.

### Sample Protocol
Ten total tissue samples were extracted from a formalin-fixed human cerebellum. N=5 tissue samples were taken from an anterior region spanning lobules I-IV and N=5 tissue samples were taken from a posterior region spanning Crus II. All ten tissue samples were processed through an identical tissue processing pipeline designed for shotgun proteomics of formalin-fixed tissue, described below. Tissue processing completed by the Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Core of the Department of Molecular Biology at Princeton University. Formalin-fixed cerebellum samples were dissolved in 5% SDS and 50mM TEAB buffer.  Trypsin digestion was performed using S-Trap micro spin column digestion protocol. Trypsin digested samples were dried completely in a SpeedVac and resuspended with 20ul of 0.1% formic acid pH 3 in water.  2ul (~ 360ng) was injected per run using an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system.  Samples were loaded directly onto a 45cm long 75um inner diameter nano capillary column packed with 1.9um C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch, Germany) mated to a metal emitter in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, USA).  Column temperature was set at 45C and two-hour gradient method with 300nl per minute flow was used.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (positive mode, profile data type, AGC gain of 4e5, maximum injection time of 54 sec and mass range of 375-1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap followed by HCD fragmentation in the ion trap with 35% collision energy.  A dynamic exclusion list was invoked to exclude previously sequenced peptides for 60s and maximum cycle time of 3s was used.  Peptides were isolated for fragmentation using quadrupole (1.2 m/z isolation window).  The ion-trap was operated in rapid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Sequest HT algorithms (Eng, McCormack, & Yates 1994, J Am Soc Mas Spectrum) within the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0 suite (Thermo Scientific, USA).  10 ppm MS1 and 0.4 Da MS2 mass tolerances were specified.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were specified as dynamic modifications.  Pyro glutamate conversion from glutamic acid and glutamine are set as dynamic modifications at peptide N-terminus.  Acetylation was specified as dynamic modification at protein N-terminus.  Trypsin digestion with maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  Files were searched against UP000005640 Human database downloaded from Uniprot.org.   Scaffold (version Scaffold 5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003, Analytical Chemistry). Scaffold data represent normalized protein quantities, relative to the amount of quanta observed within a tissue sample.

### Publication Abstract
The organization of the basic tissue and functional properties of the cerebellum across development is unknown. Combining several large datasets, we demonstrate in the human cerebellum a static tissue gradient in adults that mirrors a similar growth-rate gradient across development. Quantitative tissue metrics corroborate unique densities of certain lipids and proteins among lobules, and cerebellar structural development closely follows cerebellar functional properties through childhood.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Human, Lobule, Crus

### Affiliations
Princeton Neuroscience Institute

### Submitter
Jesse Gomez

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse Gomez
Princeton Neuroscience Institute


