### Accession
PXD002600

### Title
Protein expression in TKI-resistant RCC cells.

### Description
Resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors is an essential issue concerning targeted therapy in renal cancer. This research focuses on molecular background of resistance to axitinib and sorafenib observed from the very beginning of a standard two-dimensional cell culture in monolayer as well as in three-dimensional models (soft agar and suspension cultures). Resistance was observed only in commercially available human kidney cancer stem cells. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed several proteins which may be functionally connected with the resistance to axitinib in normoxia and to sorafenib in hypoxia.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation HKCSCs, which have turned out to be resistant to TKIs in specific conditions, were seeded in T25 polystyrene flasks, not pre-coated, and cultured in StemXVivo Mesenchymal Stem Cell Suspension Medium containing EMT (epithelial to mesenchymal transition) Supplement (R&D Systems, cat. no. CCM004). Cells were cultured as follows: 1. in normoxia: a) treated with 1.5 µM axitinib, b) treated with 0.15µM sorafenib c) untreated; 2. in hypoxia: a) treated with 1.5 µM sorafenib, b) treated with 0.15 µM axitinib, c) untreated. On day 3, TKIs were added to the culture. On day 6, total protein was isolated. Total protein was isolated using RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) and Phospahatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein pellet was obtained and densed after incubating overnight under acetone. Mass spectrometry Three biological replicates were prepared for each analytical group. Protein extracts were subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were digested overnight with 10 ng/ul trypsin, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 60°C and cysteins were blocked with 10 mM MMTS for 10 min at room temperature. Resulting peptide mixtures were analysed with a LC-MS system composed of a nanoHPLC chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters), directly coupled to the ion source of the LTQ Orbitrap Velos working in MS mode (profile datasets, no data sequencing). Tandem mass spectrometry for peptide sequencing was carried out separately for each group with a following procedure: peptide mixtures from all biological replicates were mixed into a single sample and measured in triplicate. To increase the proteome coverage, each of the three MS/MS measuremets covered different m/z range: 300-600, 600-900 or 900-2000 Th. In the course of further qualitative analysis, data from these three measurements were merged into one datafile, so that each analytical group was characterized by a single set of proteins.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The acquired MS/MS data were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.5, Matrix Science) and a database search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science, Mascot Server 2.4.1) against the SwissProt database (release 2015_01, 547,357 sequences; 194,874,700 residues) restricted to human proteins (20,274 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. Other Mascot search settings were as follows: enzyme — semiTrypsin, missed cleaveages — 1, fixed modifications: Methylthio (C), variable modifications: Oxidation (M). A statistical assessment of peptide assignments was based on the concatenated target/decoy database search strategy (merged target/decoy databases generated with software developed in-house (Malinowska et al, 2012)). This procedure (Supplementary Method 2) provided q-value estimates for each peptide spectrum match (PSM) in the dataset. All PSMs with q-values> 0.01 were removed from further analysis. A protein was regarded to be identified confidently when at least two peptides of this protein were found. Proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were excluded from analysis. Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group (cluster). The mass calibration and data filtering described above were carried out with Mscan (Mikula et al, 2010) software, developed in-house. Peptide/protein identifications derived from all analytical groups were exported and used in further quantitative analysis. Protein quantification Label-free quantification was performed essentially as described in (Malinowska et al, 2012) using 2D heat-maps generated from LC-MS profile datasets and the list of protein/peptide identification. The abundance of each peptide was determined as the height of a 2D fit to the monoisotopic peak of the isotopic envelope. Quantitative values were next exported into text files, along with peptide/protein identifications into pairwise statistical analysis with Diffprot software (Malinowska et al, 2012). A non-parametric resampling-based test statistics with local variance estimate makes Diffprot an approproate tool for analysis of small scale biological experiments. Diffprot was run with the following parameters: number of random peptide sets=106; clustering of peptide sets with 80% similarity or higher, normalization by LOWESS. Results for proteins present in one of the analysed groups in pairwise comparison were manually validated on the heat-maps.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem cell, Kidney cancer, Label free, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


