### Accession
PXD039294

### Title
Cellular and extracellular composition of meningeal trabeculae

### Description
The meninges are a tripartite system of membranous tissue comprised of pial, arachnoid and dural layers that cover both the brain and spinal cord. Between the arachnoid and pial layers is the subarachnoid space filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Though the meninges have long been thought to provide largely a protective function, a growing number of studies highlight this tissue to be a nest of immune activity, harboring T cells, B cells, macrophages, and a variety of other myeloid cell types during health and disease. But despite the burgeoning prospect that the meninges might play a decidedly more active role in immune and other regulatory processes than previously thought, little is known about their structural makeup. Contributing to this void, considerable technical challenges prevent sophisticated analysis of the meninges at cellular and molecular levels. In addition, removal of the brain and spinal cord from their bony encasement leads to tearing of the tenuous meninges and significant disruption of the delicate inter-membrane arrangements. Also lacking are sufficient molecular targets to identify the various meningeal structural elements, only hinted at so far by scanning electron microscopy. Accordingly, we developed a method to allow removal of brain and spinal meninges while minimizing risk of parenchymal contamination and performed shotgun proteomics on the two meningeal domains. While the vast majority of proteins at both locales overlapped, several proteins – including those of structural nature – were exclusive to brain or spinal meninges. Targeting proteins revealed in the proteomic data, the cellular and extracellular elements that provide the meninges’ structure were identified using confocal and electron microscopy, and were observed for the first time in high-resolution

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a slightly modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method in a Microcon YM-10 10 kD molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific)(Wisniewski et al., 2009). First, samples were diluted in UA buffer (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and reduced for 1.5 hr at 37°C using 25 mM dithiothreitol.  Fully reduced proteins were concentrated onto the filter and the buffer was spun through the 10 kD MWCO filter at 14,000 x g for 40 min. The proteins and filter assembly were washed a second time with 200 µL UA buffer and spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. Next, cys residues were alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer for 15 min in the dark at 37°C, after which the filters were spun at 14,000 x g for 30 min and the flow-through buffer was removed. Two more buffer exchange steps were instituted against 100 µL UB buffer (8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), each time with identical centrifugation conditions. A simultaneous protein resuspension and filter wash step using 50 µL UB buffer was used to aid removal of the proteins from the filter for placement into clean 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. The filter was washed twice to resuspend any remaining proteins with 50 µL aliquots of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and pooled with the first protein aliquot. Endoproteinase LysC (Pierce) was added at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio and samples left to digest at 37°C for 16 hr. Samples were then diluted to <1 M urea with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) added at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio and left to digest for an additional 8 hr at 37°C. Proteolysis was quenched using formic acid and the resulting peptides desalted using C18 Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Pierce) per manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted peptides were injected onto a Waters nanoEase m/z Peptide UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, 130 Å, 75 µm x 250 cm) and separated using a 300 nL/min nanoflow 180 min reversed phase gradient on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC UPLC instrument (Thermo Scientific). The Ultimate 3000 UPLC was coupled directly to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and eluted peptides were subject to nanoflow electrospray ionization and direct entry into the mass spectrometer. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive mode using a Top 15 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus reference proteome database (Reference proteome UP000000589, accessed October 18, 2020) using the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0)(Cox and Mann, 2008). The following parameters were used for peptide/protein identification: 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide levels, variable modifications include oxidized Met, acetyl protein N-term, N-terminal peptide Gln to pyro Glu, and deamidation of Asn and Gln. Fixed carbamidomethylation on Cys residues, a minimum value of 5 amino acid per peptide, and trypsin digestion specificity with 2 missed cleavages were also employed. All other parameters were kept at default values.

### Publication Abstract
The meninges surround the brain and spinal cord, affording physical protection while also serving as a niche of neuroimmune activity. Though possessing stromal qualities, its complex cellular and extracellular makeup has yet to be elaborated, and it remains unclear whether the meninges vary along the neuroaxis. Hence, studies were carried-out to elucidate the protein composition and structural organization of brain and spinal cord meninges in normal, adult Biozzi ABH mice. First, shotgun, bottom-up proteomics was carried-out. Prominent proteins at both brain and spinal levels included Type II collagen and Type II keratins, representing extracellular matrix (ECM) and cytoskeletal categories, respectively. While the vast majority of total proteins detected was shared between both meningeal locales, more were uniquely detected in brain than in spine. This pattern was also seen when total proteins were subdivided by cellular compartment, except in the case of the ECM category where brain and spinal meninges each had near equal number of unique proteins, and Type V and type III collagen registered exclusively in the spine. Quantitative analysis revealed differential expression of several collagens and cytoskeletal proteins between brain and spinal meninges. High-resolution immunofluorescence and immunogold-scanning electronmicroscopy on sections from whole brain and spinal cord - still encased within bone -identified major proteins detected by proteomics, and highlighted their association with cellular and extracellular elements of variously shaped arachnoid trabeculae. Western blotting aligned with the proteomic and immunohistological analyses, reinforcing differential appearance of proteins in brain vs spinal meninges. Results could reflect regional distinctions in meninges that govern protective and/or neuroimmune functions.

### Keywords
Brain, Trabeculae, Multiple sclerosis, Spinal cord, Meninges, Shotgun proteomics, Extracellular

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment University of Connecticut Storrs, CT 06269
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy L. Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, Center for Open Research Resources & Equipment University of Connecticut Storrs, CT 06269


