### Accession
PXD015912

### Title
Strategies to enable large-scale proteomics for reproducible research.

### Description
An experiment was designed to assess the reproducibility of SWATH-MS measurements collected from different mass spectrometers in a single facility over a period spanning approximately four months. Data were acquired with 90-minute gradient lengths at the Australian Cancer Research Foundation International Centre for the Proteome of Human Cancer (ProCan) on six SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 QTOF mass spectrometers. Multiple replicate aliquots were prepared for eight samples. These comprised a dilution series of ovarian cancer tissue (0%, 3.125%, 6.25%, 12.5%, 25% and 50%) offset by yeast and a fixed proportion (50%) of prostate cancer tissue (Samples 1-6), a 1:1 mix of ovarian cancer tissue and yeast cells (Sample 7), and a human cell line (HEK293T; Sample 8). On each mass spectrometer, sets of 20 replicate aliquots (three aliquots of Samples 2-5, and two aliquots of Samples 1, 6-8) were run during each of thirteen 48-hour periods. Experimental data were acquired in 48-hour time periods on each instrument continuously for eight days (with sets of 20 replicates commencing on days 1, 3, 5 and 7), once per week for the remainder of the month (commencing on days 14, 21 and 28), and then once per month for the remainder of the first three months (commencing on days 56 and 84). After each instrument underwent a major clean, the sets of 20 replicates were again run continuously for a further eight days (commencing on days 101, 103, 105 and 107). Data were therefore acquired during a total of thirteen 48-hour periods over approximately four months, during which time the mass spectrometry facility was fully operational. Mass spectrometer maintenance schedules varied according to each individual instrument's performance, and each instrument commenced data acquisition asynchronously within 28 days from the experiment start.

### Sample Protocol
The prostate cancer tissue, ovarian cancer tissue, yeast cells and HEK293T cells were each prepared as a single batch using Accelerated Barocycler Lysis and Extraction (ABLE) in a barocycler instrument, as described in Lucas et al J Proteome Res 2019. Refer to the publication that accompanies this data deposition for full sample processing details.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed with OpenSWATH [version 2.4.0, revision a7b4f64], implemented using the Docker container cmriprocan/openms:1.2.4. PyProphet [version 2.0.4] was used for FDR control, implemented using the Docker container cmriprocan/openms-toffee:0.14.2. We used a subsample ratio equal to 10/1557 and the software was run in non-parametric mode with scoring of both MS1- and MS2-level data. We applied a threshold of 5% run-specific peak-group FDR cut-off, with a threshold of 1% for global peptide and global protein FDR filtering.

### Publication Abstract
Reproducible research is the bedrock of experimental science. To enable the deployment of large-scale proteomics, we assess the reproducibility of mass spectrometry (MS) over time and across instruments and develop computational methods for improving quantitative accuracy. We perform 1560 data independent acquisition (DIA)-MS runs of eight samples containing known proportions of ovarian and prostate cancer tissue and yeast, or control HEK293T cells. Replicates are run on six mass spectrometers operating continuously with varying maintenance schedules over four months, interspersed with ~5000 other runs. We utilise negative controls and replicates to remove unwanted variation and enhance biological signal, outperforming existing methods. We also design a method for reducing missing values. Integrating these computational modules into a pipeline (ProNorM), we mitigate variation among instruments over time and accurately predict tissue proportions. We demonstrate how to improve the quantitative analysis of large-scale DIA-MS data, providing a pathway toward clinical proteomics.

### Keywords
Swath; dia; mass spectrometry; reproducibility; procan

### Affiliations
Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney
Head, Cancer Data Science (ProCan) Children's Medical Research Institute University of Sydney Westmead, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebecca Poulos

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhong
Head, Cancer Data Science (ProCan) Children's Medical Research Institute University of Sydney Westmead, NSW, Australia


