### Accession
PXD026451

### Title
Proteomics of cardiac stromal cells and dermal fibroblasts secretomes

### Description
The proteomics characterization of the secretomes as well as the evaluation of their potential to induce cell and tissue responses are widely used strategies. Here are presented the mass spectrometry data of the resident cardiac stromal cells (CRSC) and dermal fibroblasts secretomes, which enables the comparison of their compositions.

### Sample Protocol
The conditioned media were daily collected over three days, submitted to two centrifugations and pooled. Thirty micrograms (one volume) of protein from each sample was mixed with three volumes of SDS-PAGE sample buffer (160 mM Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 10% b-mercaptoethanol, 24% glycerol, and 0.02% bromophenol blue) and were resolved in 10% SDS-PAGE. Then, each SDS-PAGE lane were sliced in small pieces, reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA an digested with trypsin. The peptides were analyzed in triplicate (for vCM3 and nCM1 samples) and in duplicate (for other samples) by LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC 1000 on line with a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography was performed in a C18 column (30 cm length, 75 um I.D., 2.4 um particle) with a flow of 250 nl/min and a linear gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 120 min. The MS data was acquired in DDA mode, with the MS1 full scan performed in the orbitrap (60,000 resolution) and the MS2 in the linear trap quadrupole, where the top 10 most intense ions were subjected to CID fragmentation. Three consecutive run batches, spaced in time, were carried out using the same experimental protocol and equipment, according to the following scheme: vCM3 and nCM1 in parallel; vCM1, vCM2, fCM1 and nCM2 in parallel; and fCM2 and fCM3 in parallel.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from LC-MS/MS was analyzed in MaxQuant software, version 1.6.1.0. The default parameters were used including: trypsin as protease; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; acetylation of protein N-terminal and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The Homo sapiens database, containing 71,599 entries, downloaded from uniprot on 05/17/2018 was used.

### Publication Abstract
In the heart, tissue-derived signals play a central role on recruiting/activating stem cell sources to induce cardiac lineage specification for maintenance of tissue homeostasis and repair. Cardiac resident stromal cells (CRSCs) may play a pivotal role in cardiac repair throughout their secretome. Here, we performed the characterization of CRSCs and their secretome by analyzing the composition of their culture-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) and conditioned medium (CM) and by investigating their potential effect on adipose-derived stem cell (ADSC) and progenitor cell behavior. We confirmed that CRSCs are a heterogeneous cell population whose secretome is composed by proteins related to cellular growth, immune response and cardiovascular development and function. We also observed that CRSC secretome was unable to change the behavior of ADSCs, except for proliferation. Additionally, CM from CRSCs demonstrated the potential to drive proliferation and cardiac differentiation of H9c2 cells and also the ability to induce angiogenesis in vitro. Our data suggest that the CRSCs can be a source of important modulating signals for cardiac progenitor cell recruitment/activation.

### Keywords
Dermal fibroblasts, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Cardiac stromal cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Basic Biology of Stem Cells (LABCET), Instituto Carlos Chagas - FIOCRUZ-PR, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Melo de Aguiar
Laboratory of Basic Biology of Stem Cells (LABCET), Instituto Carlos Chagas - FIOCRUZ-PR, Brazil


