### Accession
PXD041217

### Title
False positive glycopeptide identification through in-FAIMS glycan fragmentation.

### Description
Glycosylation is an important post-translational modification characterized by extensive heterogeneity. While mass spectrometry (MS) is the premier technique to characterize glycoproteins, the study of intact glycopeptides presents challenges often not observed in the study of unmodified species. High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) involves in-line gas-phase separation and offers the potential to analyze glycopeptides without prior enrichment. While FAIMS has been assessed for its use in glycoproteomics, most of these studies focus heavily or exclusively on N-glycoproteomics. Therefore, we evaluated FAIMS for O-glycoprotein and mucin analysis. We generated three samples: the mucin-domain glycoprotein podocalyxin, a recombinant glycoprotein mixture, and a WGA enriched human platelet sheddome. Although FAIMS allowed for the identification of new podocalyxin O-glycosites, it yielded less glycopeptide identifications and glycoforms. FAIMS seemed to be more useful in the increasingly complex samples, since we observed a higher number of identified glycosylated species. Because of the labile nature of glycosidic bonds, and presence of a buffer gas in FAIMS separation, we investigated the possibility of increased in-source fragmentation during FAIMS analysis. We compared total ion chromatograms of identifications eluting within a minute of identifications bearing larger glycan structures, albeit with the same peptide backbone. FAIMS experiments showed a 2-5-fold increase in spectral matches from in-FAIMS fragmentation compared to control experiments. These results were also replicated in other previously published data, indicating that this is a systematic behavior. In summary, our study highlights that, although there are potential benefits gained when using FAIMS separation, caution must be exercised when using FAIMS due to in-FAIMS fragmentation, which limits its applicability in the field of O-glycoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Podocalyxiin was digested using mucinases BT4244 and SmE and, in the case of BT, sialidase treatmennt. Samples were redced and alkylated following mujcinase digestion and trypsin digested. A glycoprotein mixture was generated by combining equal partes by mass of alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (fetuin) (P12763 - 1725-PI), von Willebrand factor (P04275 - 2764-WF), coagulation factor XII (P00748 - 1473-SE), serotransferrin (P02787 - 2914-HT), monocyte differentiation antigen (CD14) (P08571 - 383-CD/CF) and apolipoprotein E (P02649 - 3520-AR). An aliquot (2 µg) of each was combined and diluted to 60 µL of 50mM AmBic. Reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion was performed. The glycoplatelet sheddome was generated, and enriched with WGA-LAC. Following, SmE digestion, alkylation and trypsin digestion were performed in that order. Samples were desalted using an SPE cleanup.  RAW data was acquired using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC. Sample amounts of 750 ng and 300 ng were injected for experiments with and without FAIMS separation, respectively, onto a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap -100µm by 2cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size). The column was then washed with loading pump solvent (2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water). Following this, the pre-column was switched in-line with an EASY-Spray column packed with C18 PepMap material for gradient elution. The column temperature was held at 40 C using the EASY-Spray ionization source, and samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µg/µL. The method used a flow gradient of 0 to 95% Solvent B in 70 min with a total duration of 90 min. MS measurements were performed in positive ion mode. MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution full width at half maximum (FWHM) at 400 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e4, and an m/z scan range of 300-1500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude after 3 times for a repeat duration of 10 and an exclusion duration of 10. Charge states 2-6 were filtered for fragmentation, where MS2s were generated with a 3 s duty cycle. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with an isolation window of 2 m/z, 30% collision energy, detection in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 FWHM at 400 m/z, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an AGC target of 1e4 ions. An EThcD scan was triggered if the HCD scan contained 3 out of 8 oxonium fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, and 292.103) at greater than 5% relative intensity. EThcD used calibrated charge-dependent ETD times, maximum injection time was set to 200 ms, and supplemental activation was set to 20%. Ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM at 400 m/z. For FAIMS experiments, the Thermo Scientific FAIMS Pro (FMS02-10001) interface was employed.

### Data Protocol
Podocalyxin RAW files were searched using O-Pair hosted in the MetaMorpheus suite, and the glycoprotein mixture and platelet-extracted proteins were searched using Byonic. Finally, we reanalyzed data acquired by Alagesan et al27 (PXD038673) by searching it with Byonic and investigating instances of in-FAIMS fragmentation. The term "Depleted Human Serum" will be used to refer to this data throughout the manuscript. Calculations and code: Search results were analyzed with R Studio (httips://www.r-project.org/). Code for the calculation of aliphatic index was determined using the Peptides31 package, which assigned a value to each peptide depending on the number and type of aliphatic side chains in the peptide. Data visualization was performed with the ggplot232. Lastly, a two-sided student’s t-test in the rstatix33 package was used to determine whether there were significant differences in the average peptide length, aliphatic index, and glycan mass of peptides identified with and without FAIMS. Glyco-SourceFragFinder was developed to identify potential cases of in-FAIMS and/or in-source fragmentation (IFF, ISF). It is included as a supplementary material and has been made freely available at https://github.com/MalakerLab/Glyco-SourceFragFinder. O-Pair: Searches were performed using the MetaMorpheus suite version 0.0.320.34 The podocalyxin protein sequence was downloaded from Uniprot (O00592). Here, the O-glycopeptide search using the default O-glycan database was used, which contains 12 O-glycan structures. Protease digestion was set to nonspecific with 24 missed cleavages. Deamidation on Asn and oxidation on Met were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a constant variable modification.  Byonic: Searches were performed using Byonic v4.0.12.35 For the glycoprotein mixture, a database was created with the Uniprot protein sequences (P12763, P04275, P00748, P02787, P08571, P02649) and was used for all searches, while the human proteome (SwissProt, downloaded June 9, 2021) was used for the platelet-extracted and depleted human serum sample. All searches performed were fully tryptic, where the digestion termini were set to K/R on the C-termini and maximum missed cleavages were set to 3. The fragmentation type was set to read directly from the scan headers. N- and O-glycopeptide searches were performed simultaneously, with the 9 most common O-glycans designated as common modifications with a maximum of two per peptide and 132 N-glycans designated as uncommon modifications with a maximum of one per peptide. The raw data of the depleted human serum sample was searched using the same parameters, but with solely using an O-glycan database. Other variable modifications were set as common for these searches, with a maximum of two common and one unusual modification per peptide. Glycopeptides were filtered for score > 300 and log prob > 3 to ensure accurate peptide sequence. Manual Localization of O-glycopeptides: Manual validation of localized O-glycosites was performed as previously described using Thermo XCalibur.36 In summary, glycan composition and peptide sequence were validated using the HCD spectrum. If the peptide had one possible O-glycosite in its sequence, O-glycans were localized to this site. If that was not the case, the EThcD spectrum was used to localize glycosites, where glycan masses were assigned based on the mass shifts on the c/z ions. If the presence of O-glycosylation could not be confirmed for the given site using the c/z fragment ions but its absence was confirmed for other probable sites, the site was designated as correct.36 Manual inspection was also performed for all peptides with length over 20 amino acids and with a charge state greater than 5. Validation of in-source and in-FAIMS fragmentation: Briefly, Glyco-SourceFragFinder flagged identifications eluting within one minute of others with the same peptide backbone but bearing larger glycans. To confirm IFF or ISF, we extracted the total ion chromatogram (XIC) of masses corresponding to potential false-positive glycopeptides, alongside those from glycopeptides with equal peptide backbone and larger glycan masses.

### Publication Abstract
High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separates glycopeptides in the gas phase prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, thus offering the potential to analyze glycopeptides without prior enrichment. Several studies have demonstrated the ability of FAIMS to enhance glycopeptide detection but have primarily focused on N-glycosylation. Here, we evaluated FAIMS for O-glycoprotein and mucin-domain glycoprotein analysis using samples of varying complexity. We demonstrated that FAIMS was useful in increasingly complex samples as it allowed for the identification of more glycosylated species. However, during our analyses, we observed a phenomenon called "in FAIMS fragmentation" (IFF) akin to in source fragmentation but occurring during FAIMS separation. FAIMS experiments showed a 2- to 5-fold increase in spectral matches from IFF compared with control experiments. These results were also replicated in previously published data, indicating that this is likely a systemic occurrence when using FAIMS. Our study highlights that although there are potential benefits to using FAIMS separation, caution must be exercised in data analysis because of prevalent IFF, which may limit its applicability in the broader field of O-glycoproteomics.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Enrichment., Mucin-domain glycoproteomics, Ion mobility separation, Mucinomics faims

### Affiliations
Graduate Student, Malaker Lab
Department of Chemistry, Yale University

### Submitter
Valentina Rangel Angarita

### Lab Head
Dr Stacy Alyse Malaker
Department of Chemistry, Yale University


