### Accession
PXD004094

### Title
proteomics profiling of early retina degeneration of RCS rats

### Description
We employed proteomics analysis approach for in-depth retinal protein profiling of dystrophic RCS rats and non-dystrophic congenic controls through LTQ-orbitrap MS. We aim to identify the key molecular pathways and transcript factors involved in early retinal degeneration by differential proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Dystrophic RCS (RCS-rdy-p+) rats and non-dystrophic congenic controls used in this study were bred in the animal facility of the southwest eye hospital, the Third Military Medicine University, Chongqing, china. A total of sixteen rats were used in this study: eight of them were dystrophic RCS rats while the rest were non-dystrophic congenic controls. We divided them into four experimental cohorts according to age 18d, 24d, 30d and 36d. All rats used in the study were sacrificed by overdose intraperitoneal injection anesthesia with 4% chloral hydrate. The retina were obtained from fresh eye balls of the rats and transferred into ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) immediately. Retinal proteins were extracted from RCS rats and controls. Briefly, freshly isolated rat retinas were suspended in the hypotonic lysis buffer containing cell lysis buffer (20 mM Tris PH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Na3VO4, 0.5μg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)), 5M urea, 2M thiourea, 100mM DTT, 40mM Tris, 20μg/ml DNase I, 5μg/ml RNase A and triple-repeated freezing and thawing at liquid nitrogen and room temperature, respectively. The tissue lysates were homogenized using ultracentrifugation with 30min at 10000×g, 4℃, followed by incubation at 4℃ for 2 hours. After incubation, the protein concentration of each individual tissue lysate was measured using the BCA protein assay (Beyotime Biotechnology Company, China) and bovine serum albumin as a protein standard. Then, tissue proteins (3.5 mg) were loaded on a 10% of SDS-polyacrylamide gel for electrophoresis. The samples were stored at -20°C until proteomics analysis. In order to generate peptides suitable for LTQ-orbitrap MS analysis, these samples were in-gel digested by adding trypsin and digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight. The HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) separation methods were applied to acquire satisfying MS raw data. Each peptide samples were analyzed quadric by LTQ-orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher scientific, USA) located on the Third Military Medicine University, Chongqing, China.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification in MaxQuant, the database search engine Andromeda was used to search MS/MS spectra against Rattus norvegicus database (updated at 2/08/2015, 29887 proteins) downloaded from Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002494) with a tolerance level of 6 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. Trypsin/p was used as enzyme and two Max.missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications and Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The Max.number of modifications per peptide was set as five and contaminants were included. The ‘match between runs’ feature was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. FDR for PSM (protein level and peptide spectrum match) level were both set as 1% and every peptide would be used only once in the protein identification process, in a razor peptide fashion. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set as two. Protein quantification was based on the MaxLFQ algorithm, using both unique and razor peptides for protein quantification with the minimum ratio count for protein quantification setting as two. All other configures were set as default. At last, The result was in the proteinGroups.txt file in the columns called ‘LFQ Intensity …’ calculated for each protein according to MaxLFQ algorithm based on the (raw) intensities and normalized on multiple levels to ensure that profiles of LFQ intensities across samples accurately reflect the relative amounts of the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rcs rat, Retinitis pigmentosa, Retina, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
southwest eye hospital, third medicine military university
Southwest Hospital/Southwest Eye Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chong Qing, 400038, China

### Submitter
Martin Ju

### Lab Head
Dr ZhengQin Yin
Southwest Hospital/Southwest Eye Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chong Qing, 400038, China


