### Accession
PXD010974

### Title
Study physiological and biochemical response of Phaeocystis antarctica to different irradiance and manganese/ iron deficiency

### Description
Iron and light are typically recognized as major limiting factors controlling phytoplankton growth in the Southern Ocean. Recent field-based evidence suggests, however, that manganese concentrations in this region can be low enough to impact phytoplankton physiology and primary productivity. Our study examined the interactive influence of combined iron and manganese deprivation on protein expression and photophysiology in Phaeocystis antarctica, a key Antarctic phytoplankter, and provide taxon-specific proteomic evidence that natural Southern Ocean Phaeocystis populations regularly experience stress due to combined low manganese and iron availability. In culture, combined low iron and manganese induced large scale changes in the Phaeocystis proteome and resulted in reorganization of key components of the photosynthetic apparatus; these differences were largely distinct from those arising from changes in irradiance. These results implicate manganese availability as an important driver of Southern Ocean productivity and demonstrate the utility of peptide mass spectrometry as a tool for mapping of manganese contributions to HNLC conditions in this region.

### Sample Protocol
Phaeocystis antarctica (CCMP3314, syn. CCMP1374 obtained from NCMA at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Science, West Booth-bay Harbor, Maine, USA) was cultured using aseptic and trace metal clean technique in modified artificial seawater medium Aquil. The cells were acclimated at six different conditions, high light with replete Fe and Mn, optimum light with replete Fe and Mn, low light with replete Fe and Mn, low light with low Fe, low light with low Mn, low light with deplete Fe and Mn) for at least 10 generations. The acclimated cells were inoculated into three replicates for sub-continuous cultivation in early exponential phase. The cell samples were harvest for protein extraction at their steady state and stored in -80 freezer. The proteins were extracted from frozen cells in extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris HCl, pH 7.5; 5% glycerol, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10 mM EDTA) by combined heating, sonicating and flash freezing process. 100ug proteins from each replicate sample was precipitated using acetone and resuspended in urea and triethyammonium bicarbonate, following with reduction with DTT, and alkylation by iodoacetamide and digestion by trypsin. TMT labelling of peptides were performed using the TMT-10plex Kit based on a minor modification of the manufacturer’s instruction (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Equal amounts of labelled peptides from each sample were pooled in 0.01M ammonium formate, 5% acetonitrile. Every ten samples were pooled as one MS running sample and there were two separate pooled peptide samples (TMT run 1 and TMT run 2) in total. And there were two common samples were added in both pools as internal standards. Each pooled sample was pre-separated by high pH reverse phase (RP) liquid chromatography, in 60 fractions. These fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions to be subjected to online LC-MS analysis.  Peptide fractions were desalted, solubilized in 12 µL of 1% formic acid and analysed by RP LC-MS/MS. For each fraction, an aliquot of 1 µL of peptides was injected onto a 75 µm x 30 cm column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) self-packed with 4 µm, 90 Å, Proteo C18 material (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Online chromatography was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo-Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min.  Peptides were separated using a gradient of 3 to 35% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over 65 min followed by 5 min at 95% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid). Column outflow was interfaced into the mass spectrometer via a Thermo nanosource (Thermo-Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mass spectrometry was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo-Scientific, San Jose, CA) operated in data-dependent mode. Survey scans (MS1) were performed using the Orbitrap over a scan range of 300-1500 m/z and resolution setting of 30,000. A lock mass of 445.12003 m/z was used to achieve internal mass calibration. Based on MS1 scans, MS2 scans were performed using the ion trap, selecting the top 10 most intense precursor (MS1) ions for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35% collision energy with a precursor isolation window of 2 m/z. MS2 scans were only collected on peptides with charge states of 2+ or 3+ with a minimum MS1 intensity of 50 counts. Advanced gain control (AGC) settings were 5 x 105 for Orbitrap scans and 2 x 105 for ion trap scans. Reporter ions were quantified using the most intense ion found in the MS2, using higher-energy collision dissociation HCD with 65 as normalized collision energy, and scanned at 15,000 resolution on the orbitrap mass analyser.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral files from mass spectrometry were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.1.21). SEQUEST searches were against a transcriptome assembly from Phaeocystis antarctica strain CCMP1374 combined with a common contaminant dataset, setting 20ppm and 0.5 Da mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin was set as the specific enzyme for protein digestion and allowed to have maximum 2 missed cleavages. N-terminal and lysine TMT 6-plex (+229.16239) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) were configured as static modification, and methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications. Decoy database searches were performed and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and maximum Cn 0.05 were applied and validated using Percolator. At least one unique peptide sequences were detected in protein database. The highest-scoring protein detected by longest peptide was identified as a master protein. For this extended multiplexed experiment, the TMT reporter ion intensities of identified proteins were normalized via a three-step procedure as previously described. Briefly, we first normalized for sample loading and labelling reaction efficiency, second to compare across the two TMT experiments, and third to scale using the weighted trimmed means as recommended in literature and described in our publication. Only proteins observed in all twelve TMT channels (four treatments, three biological replicates) were included in analyses described here and the final normalized values (TMM) were used for determining differential expression, conducting principle component analyses, and calculating standard scores. Differential protein expression was determined by testing protein-specific negative binomial generalized linear models, with one explanatory variable that has four levels (lowmn-lowfe, highmn-lowfe, lowmn-highfe, and highmn-highfe) and no intercept. Dispersion estimates for each model were obtained using Cox-Reid profile-adjusted likelihood. Each protein has a coefficient which predicts whether a treatment increases or decreases its expression and an empirical Bayes quasi-likelihood F-test was applied, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction, to determine significance of those coefficients. To determine differential expression across treatments, a null hypothesis must be specified in the model (i.e. a comparative baseline). To examine protein expression profiles, we used both the Fe/Mn replete condition as a baseline condition, as well as the Fe/Mn deplete condition. All differential expression analyses were conducted in R, and we used a Type I error rate of 5% throughout.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deprivation, Proteomic, Phaeocystis antarctica, Iron, Photosynthesis, Manganese

### Affiliations
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax Nova Scotia Canada B3H-4R2

### Submitter
Miao Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Erin M. Bertrand
Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax Nova Scotia Canada B3H-4R2


