### Accession
PXD028825

### Title
Citrullination of glucokinase is linked to autoimmune diabetes

### Description
Inflammation, including reactive oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines in tissues amplify various post-translational modifications (PTMs) of self-proteins.  A number of PTMs have been identified as autoimmune biomarkers in the initiation and progression of Type 1 diabetes (T1D).  In this study, we have identified the citrullination of pancreatic glucokinase (GK) as a result of inflammation, triggering autoimmunity and affecting GK biological functions.  Glucokinase is expressed in hepatocytes to regulate glycogen synthesis, and in pancreatic beta cells as a glucose sensor to initiate glycolysis and insulin signaling.  We identify autoantibodies and autoreactive CD4+ T cells to glucokinase epitopes in the circulation of T1D patients and NOD mice.  Finally, citrullination alters GK biologic activity (Km) and suppresses glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.  Our studies define glucokinase as a T1D biomarker, providing new insights of how inflammation drives PTMs to create both neoautoantigens and affect beta cell metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro citrullination, 0.1U of rabbit peptidylarginine deiminase (PADI2; Sigma-Aldrich) were added to 50 µg of recombinant human pancreatic glucokinase (rhGK; LS-G3456, LSBio) in reaction buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl, 10mM CaCl2 and 5mM DTT) at 37°C for 2.5 hrs and kept at -80°C in multiple aliquots to avoid freeze and thaw until used.  Minimum 6 µg PAD-treated-rhGK were reduced, alkylated and tryptic digested for LS-MS/MS analysis. LCMS/MS data collection was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to a Waters NanoACQUITY UPLC.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected on a QE-Plus mass spectrometer coupled to a NanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters Inc.). A Waters Symmetry® C18 180 μm × 20 mm trap column and a 1.7-μm, 75 μm × 250 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC column (35°C) was utilized for the separation.  Collected LC MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer Software (v. 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched were carried out in MASCOT Search Engine (Matrix Science) using the below parameters; oxidation (M), deamidated (N/Q) and citrullination (R) as the variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification.  Mascot results were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.11.0 and then Scaffold PTM 3.3.0 was used to re-analyzes MS/MS spectra identified as modified peptides and calculates Ascore values and site localization probabilities to assess the level of confidence in each PTM localization.  Scaffold PTM then combines localization probabilities for all peptides containing each identified PTM site to obtain the best estimated probability that a PTM is present at that particular site.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Type 1 diabetes, Glucokinase

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry


