### Accession
PXD015484

### Title
Mkt1 is required for RNAi-mediated silencing and establishment of heterochromatin in fission yeast

### Description
Constitutive domains of repressive heterochromatin are maintained within the fission yeast genome through self-reinforcing mechanisms involving histone methylation and small RNAs. Non-coding RNAs generated from heterochromatic regions are processed into small RNAs by the RNA interference pathway, and are subject to silencing through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. While the pathways involved in maintenance of the repressive heterochromatin state are reasonably well understood, less is known about the requirements for its establishment. Here we describe a novel role for the post-transcriptional regulatory factor Mkt1 in establishment of heterochromatin at pericentromeres in fission yeast. Loss of Mkt1 does not affect maintenance of existing heterochromatin, but does affect its recovery following depletion, as well as de novo establishment of heterochromatin on a mini-chromosome. Pathway dissection revealed that Mkt1 is required for RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional silencing, downstream of small RNA production. Mkt1 physically associates with pericentromeric transcripts, and is additionally required for maintenance of silencing and heterochromatin at centromeres when transcriptional silencing is impaired. Our findings provide new insight into the mechanism of RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional silencing in fission yeast, and unveil an important role for post-transcriptional silencing in establishment of heterochromatin that is dispensable when full transcriptional silencing is imposed.

### Sample Protocol
Following immunoprecipitation, beads were isolated with a magnet and resuspended in 8M urea. Proteins were then reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at room temperature and then alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for another 30 min at ambient temperature in the dark. Samples were then digested with LysC (1;50µG of protein) (Wako Chemicals, Japan) for 4 hours at room temperature before further diluted with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) in order to achieve urea concentration < 2M. Samples were further digested overnight with trypsin (1;50µG of protein) (Pierce Scientific, UK) at room temperature.  Following digestion, samples were acidified with 10% TFA to pH <2.5 and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. MS-analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and on a Q Exactive mass spectrometers both coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (Ishihama et al 2002) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany) was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm ID, 8-μm opening, 300-mm length; New Objective) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min, then to 95% in 11 min. For LTQ Orbitrap Velos, FTMS spectra were recorded at 60,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the twenty most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson in the ion trap for MS2 (normal scan, wideband activation, filling 5.0E5 ions for MS scan, 1.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion for 60 s). For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution (scan range 350-1400 m/z) and the ten most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson for MS2 (filling 1.0E6 ions for MS scan, 5.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 60 ms, dynamic exclusion for 50 s).

### Data Protocol
Searches were conducted using the MASCOT search engine (ver. 2.4.1) against the complete Schizosaccharomyces pombe database (PomBase, December, 2013). MS accuracy was set to 6 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.6 Da. LysC and trypsin were used as proteases allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of tyrosine, threonine and serine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Constitutive domains of repressive heterochromatin are maintained within the fission yeast genome through self-reinforcing mechanisms involving histone methylation and small RNAs. Non-coding RNAs generated from heterochromatic regions are processed into small RNAs by the RNA interference pathway, and are subject to silencing through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. While the pathways involved in maintenance of the repressive heterochromatin state are reasonably well understood, less is known about the requirements for its establishment. Here, we describe a novel role for the post-transcriptional regulatory factor Mkt1 in establishment of heterochromatin at pericentromeres in fission yeast. Loss of Mkt1 does not affect maintenance of existing heterochromatin, but does affect its recovery following depletion, as well as de novo establishment of heterochromatin on a mini-chromosome. Pathway dissection revealed that Mkt1 is required for RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional silencing, downstream of small RNA production. Mkt1 physically associates with pericentromeric transcripts, and is additionally required for maintenance of silencing and heterochromatin at centromeres when transcriptional silencing is impaired. Our findings provide new insight into the mechanism of RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional silencing in fission yeast, and unveil an important role for post-transcriptional silencing in establishment of heterochromatin that is dispensable when full transcriptional silencing is imposed.

### Keywords
Heterochromatin, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Rna interference

### Affiliations
Unioversity of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Elizabeth Bayne

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Bayne
Unioversity of Edinburgh


