### Accession
PXD000606

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Protein Methylation in the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Protein methylation catalyzed by SAM-dependent methyltransferase represents a major PTM involved in important biological processes. Because methylation can occur on nitrogen, oxygen and sulfur centers and multiple methylation states exist on the nitrogen centers, methylproteome remains poorly documented. Here we present the methylation by isotope labeled SAM (MILS) strategy for a highly-confident analysis of the methylproteome of the SAM-auxotrophic Saccharomyces cerevisiae based on the online multidimensional μHPLC/MS/MS technology. We identified 117 methylated proteins, containing 182 methylation events associated with 174 methylation sites. About 90% of these methylation events were previously unknown. Our results indicated, 1) over 6% of the yeast proteome are methylated, 2) the amino acid residue preference of protein methylation follows the order Lys >> Arg > Asp > Glu ≈ Gln ≈ Asp > His > Cys, 3) the methylation state on nitrogen center is largely exclusive, and 4) the methylated proteins are located mainly in nucleus/ribosome associated with translation/transcription and DNA/RNA processing. Our dataset is the most comprehensive methylproteome known-to-date of all living organisms, and should significantly contribute to the field of protein methylation and related research.

### Sample Protocol
The SAM auxotroph yeast strainS. cerevisiae(ΔSAM1,ΔSAM2)was constructed on theSAM1disruption strainS. cerevisiaeYDR502C (MATa;his3Δ1;leu2Δ0;met15Δ0;ura3Δ0;ΔSAM2)background, which was obtained from the American TypeCulture Collection. Firstly, theSAM1disruption cassette withlong homologous regions was constructed by restriction-free(RF) cloning strategy. Then the linearSAM1disruption cassettewas prepared with a PCR reaction using a primer pair SAM1-F/SAM1-R and transformed intoS. cerevisiaeYDR502C forSAM1disruption with homologous recombination as described previ-ously[22]. The potential colony was verified by PCR using theirgenomic DNA samples as templates, P5/P7 and P6/P8 as primerpairs forSAM1disruptant analysis, as well as phenotypecharacterization by spotting on SC + SAM or SC−SAM plate.Synthetic dextrose (SD) medium consisted of 2% (w/v)glucose, 0.67% (w/v) yeast nitrogen base (Difco, Detroit, USA)with (NH4)2SO4and without amino acids. SD complete was SDmedium with required essential nutrients (20 mg/L uracil,20 mg/L histidine, 20 mg/L methionine and 100 mg/L leucine).SD complete lacking uracil and supplemented with 60μMSAM(SD-Ura + SAM) was used for selectingSAM1disruptants. YPDwhich consisted of 1% (w/v) yeast extract (Oxoid, Basingstoke,UK), 2% (w/v) peptone (Difco) and 2% (w/v) dextrose was used togrow yeast strainS. cerevisiaeYDR502C. YPD + SAM (60μM) andYPD + [CD3]SAM (60μM) were used to growS. cerevisiae(ΔSAM1,ΔSAM2).S. cerevisiae(ΔSAM1,ΔSAM2) was inoculated into100 mL of medium to an OD600of 0.02 and cultivated for 24 h.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were converted into Mascot-compatible peaklists using DTA Supercharge (v2.0a7)[24]then searched againstthe yeast database (5885 entries) (ftp://genomeftp.Stanford.edu/yeast/datadownload/sequence/genomic_sequence/orf_protein/orf_trans.fasta.gz) using Mascot Version 2.3 (Matrix Science).To evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR), reversed se-quences were appended to the database. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification of +57.0215. BecauseMascot allows a maximum of nine variable modifications tobe searched concurrently, the variable modifications insearch of methylation in different amino acids were set in 6groups as follows: 1) in light methyl Lys and Arg searches:mono-methyl-Lys,  mono-methyl-Arg,  di-methyl-Arg,  di-methyl-Lys, tri-methyl-Lys; 2) in heavy methyl Arg and Lyssearches: mono-methyl (CD3)-Arg, mono-methyl (CD3)-Lys,di-methyl (CD3)-Arg, di-methyl (CD3)-Lys, tri-methyl (CD3)-Lys;3) in methyl Cys, Asp and Glu searches: mono-methyl-Cys,mono-methyl-Asp, mono-methyl-Glu, mono-methyl (CD3)-Cys,mono-methyl (CD3)-Asp, mono-methyl (CD3)-Glu; 4) in methylHis,  Asn  and  Gln  searches:  mono-methyl-His,  mono-methyl-Asn,  mono-methyl-Gln,  mono-methyl  (CD3)-His,mono-methyl (CD3)-Asn, mono-methyl (CD3)-Gln; 5) in methylSer, Thr and Tyr searches: mono-methyl-Ser, mono-methyl-Thr,mono-methyl-Tyr,  mono-methyl  (CD3)-Ser,  mono-methyl(CD3)-Thr, mono-methyl (CD3)-Tyr;and6)inmethylTrpsearch:mono-methyl-Trp, mono-methyl (CD3)-Trp. The detailed massshifts per methylated modification are shown in Table S1.Oxidized methionine as variable modification of +15.9949 wasincluded in all the four groups. When testing the possibility ofconverting SAM of heavy form into methionine of heavy form,(CD3)-Met was set as variable modification. Peptides weresearched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to twomissed cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Themass tolerances were 50 ppm for parent masses and 0.8 Da forfragment masses. It should be noted that no more than 5 variablemodifications were allowed for a single peptide and the minimalpeptide length allowed is 6. The identification of a proteinrequires at least one unique corresponding peptide. Methylatedpeptides with Mascot score≥20 (P≤0.05) were saved for furthermethylated sites' assignment. Methylated peptides without H:Lpairs of approximately the same abundance were removed fromthe identification list. In the manual verification process, onlymethylated peptides with at least 3 sequential b ions or y ionswere saved; while for those peptides with low signal/noise, the228JOURNAL OF PROTEOMICS 114 (2015) 226–233 [22][23][23][24] number of sequential b ions or y ions was 5. Methylation siteswere initially determined depending on database searching, andfurther verified by manual inspection to remove peptides thatwere not properly assigned. The surface accessibility of identifiedmethylation sites was analyzed using NetSurfP[25]by uploadingsequences of methylated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc/ms/ms, Methylation, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Division of Biotechnology
Division of Biotechnology, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China

### Submitter
KEYUN WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Hanfa Zou
Division of Biotechnology, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China


