### Accession
PXD010142

### Title
Update on virtual-experimental 2DE approach in chromosome-centric human proteome project

### Description
In the boundaries of chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project c-HPP to obtain information about proteoforms coded by chromosome 18, several cell lines were analyzed. In our study we have been using proteoform separation by 2DE (sectional analysis) and semi-virtual 2DE with following shotgun mass-spectrometry using LC ESI-MS/MS. Previously, we published a first draft of this research, where only HepG2 cells were used. Here, next step was done using liver, glioblastoma, fibroblasts, kidney cells and plasma. Altogether, confident (2 significant sequences minimum) information about proteoforms coded by ~80 genes was obtained. The 3D-graphs showing distribution of different proteoforms from the same gene in 2D map were generated. Additionally, semi-virtual 2DE approach allowed for detecting more proteoforms and estimate their pI more precisely

### Sample Protocol
Cells. Human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2), embryonic kidney (HEK), fibroblast (FLEH), and glioblastoma cells were cultured in medium (DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin) under standard conditions (5% CO2, 37OC). To prepare cell samples for protein extraction, the cells were detached with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA solution, washed 3 times with PBS, and treated by lysis buffer 4,5. Liver tissue samples were provided within the framework of collaboration on the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Extraction was performed by lysis buffer after grinding the tissue in liquid nitrogen according to 2-DE protocol described in 6,7. Sample Preparation and Two-dimensional Electrophoresis (2DE). Samples were prepared as described previously 8,9. Cells (~107) containing 2 mg of protein, were treated by 100 µl of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% dithiothreitol (DTT), 2% (v/v) ampholytes, pH 3-10, protease inhibitor mixture). The protein concentration in the sample was determined by the method of Bradford 10. 2DE was performed using immobilized pH gradient (IPG) 11 for isoelectric focusing (IEF). Proteins were separated by IEF using ImmobilineDryStrip 3-11 NL, 7 cm (GE Healthcare) following the manufacturer's protocol. The samples in the lysis buffer were mixed with rehydrating buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2 % CHAPS, 0.3% DTT, 0.5% IPG (v/v) buffer, pH 3-11 NL, 0.001% bromophenol blue) in final volume of 125 µl (250 µg of protein) / strip. Strips (4 per experiment) were passively rehydrated for 4h at 4°C. IEF was performed on an IPGphor (GE Healthcare) which was programmed as follows: first step - 300 V 1h, second step – gradient to 1000 V, 1h, third step – gradient to 5000 V, 1.5h, fourth step – 5000 V 1h, temperature 20°C and maintained at the voltage 500 V. After IEF, strips were soaked 10 min in the equilibration solution (50 mM Tris, pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 30% (v/v) glycerol, 1% DTT). This process was followed by 10-min incubation in the equilibration solution containing iodoacetamide instead of DTT (50 mM Tris, pH 8.8, 6 M urea, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 30% (v/v) glycerol, 5% iodoacetamide). The strips were placed on the top of the 12% polyacrylamide gel of the second direction and sealed with a hot solution of 1 ml of 0.5% agarose prepared in electrode buffer (25mM Tris, pH 8.3, 200 mM glycine, and 0.1% SDS) and electrophoresed to second direction under denaturing conditions using the system Ettan™ DALTsix (240 x 200 x 1 mm, “GE Healthcare”). Electrophoresis was carried out at room temperature at constant power 3.5 W per gel12,13. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue R350, scanned by ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare) or Typhoon FLA 9500 (GE Healthcare), and analyzed using ImageMaster 2D Platinum 7.0 (GE Healthcare). In case of semi-virtual 2DE, after IEF, the 24-cm strip was cut into 48 equal sections using scissors, and each section was transferred to Eppendorf tube. For complete reduction, 300 µL of 3 mM DTT, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample and incubated at 50°C for 15 minutes. For alkylation, 20µl of 100mM iodoacetamide (IAM) were added to the same tube and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes.   For digestion, 0.1 mg/ml stock trypsin was diluted 1:10 into 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 100 µl of diluted trypsin was added into each tube. Samples were incubated for 4-24 hours at 37°C (overnight). Supernatants were collected to new labeled 0.5 ml tubes. Supernatants may contain peptides that have diffused out of the gel slices. Peptides were extracted by adding 150 µl of 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to each tube containing gel slices. Extracts were dried in Speed Vac, reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, and analyzed by Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification were performed using Mascot “2.4.1” (Matrix Science) and emPAI. A table with information about all detected protein proteoforms was built. All proteins detected in the same section were given the pI of this section. Accordingly, the same proteins detected in different sections were considered as different proteoforms.

### Publication Abstract
In the boundaries of the chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (c-HPP) to obtain information about proteoforms coded by chromosome 18, several cell lines (HepG2, glioblastoma, LEH), normal liver, and plasma were analyzed. In our study, we have been using proteoform separation by two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) (a sectional analysis) and a semivirtual 2DE with following shotgun mass spectrometry using LC-ESI-MS/MS. Previously, we published a first draft of this research, where only HepG2 cells were tested. Here, we present the next step using more detailed analysis and more samples. Altogether, confident (2 significant sequences minimum) information about proteoforms of 117 isoforms coded by 104 genes of chromosome 18 was obtained. The 3D-graphs showing distribution of different proteoforms from the same gene in the 2D map were generated. Additionally, a semivirtual 2DE approach has allowed for detecting more proteoforms and estimating their pI more precisely. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010142.

### Keywords
Chromosome-centric, Proteome, Two-dimensional electrophoresis, Esi lc-ms/ms, Mass spectrometry, Inventory, Proteoforms, Chromosome 18

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Pogodinskaya 10, Moscow, 119121, Russia
IBMC

### Submitter
Elena Petrenko

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislav Naryzhny
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Pogodinskaya 10, Moscow, 119121, Russia


