### Accession
PXD007972

### Title
Drug-driven phenotypic convergence supports rational treatment strategies of chronic infections

### Description
Chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections evades antibiotic therapy and are associated with mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. We find that in vitro resistance evolution of P.aeruginosa towards clinically relevant antibiotics leads to phenotypic convergence towards distinct states. These states are associated with collateral sensitivity towards several antibiotic classes and encoded by mutations in antibiotic resistance genes, including transcriptional regulator nfxB. Longitudinal analysis of isolates from CF patients reveals similar and defined phenotypic states, which are associated with extinction of specific sub-lineages in patients. In depth investigation of chronic P.aeruginosa populations in a CF patient during antibiotic therapy revealed dramatic genotypic and phenotypic convergence. Notably, fluoroquinolone-resistant subpopulations harboring nfxB mutations were eradicated by antibiotic therapy as predicted by our in vitro data. This study supports the hypothesis that antibiotic treatment of chronic infections can be optimized by targeting phenotypic states associated with specific mutations to improve treatment success in chronic infections.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 in 10 ml of MHBII. After 10 h of incubation at 37 °C and 180 rpm, cells were collected by centrifugation, snap frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C. Cell preparation and proteomic analysis were performed as previously described (Bonde et al., 2016). First, 100 μl of urea (8 M, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.2) was added to the cell pellets. After this, two 3-mm zirconium oxide beads (Glen Mills, NJ, USA) were added, and the cells were disrupted using a Mixer Mill (MM 400 Retsch, Haan, Germany) for 2 min at 25 Hz. Following 30 min at 4 °C, the cells were again subjected to 2 min in the mixer mill, after which an additional 100 μl of the urea solution was added. Following another cycle of 30 min at 4 °C followed by 2 min at 25 Hz, the samples were centrifuged 10 min, and 100 μl of supernatant was collected and diluted with 400 μl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were concentrated to 100 μl using a 3 kDa cutoff filter. Samples containing 100 μg of proteins in 50 μl of solution were used for digestion. Before adding 1 ug/sample trypsin, 5 μl of 100 mM DTT was added, and samples were kept at 37 °C for 45 min. Subsequently, 10 μl of 100 mM iodoacetamide was added, and samples were kept in the dark for 45 min. Tryptic digestion was carried out for 8 h, after which 10 μl of 10 % TFA was added, and samples were StageTipped using C18 (Empore, 3M, USA) according to a previously described procedure (Rappsilber et al., 2007). For Nanoscale LC analysis of the trypsin-digested samples, a nanoACQUITY system (Waters, USA) equipped with a Symmetry C18 5-μm, 180 μm × 20 mm precolumn and a nanoACQUITY BEH130 C18 1.7-μm, 75 μm × 250 mm analytical reversed-phase column (Waters, USA) was used. For each sample, 1 µg of protein was trapped on the precolumn using mobile phase A, consisting of 0.1 % formic acid in water with a flow rate of 8 μL min−1 for 4 min. Mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. A reversed-phase stepped gradient was used to separate peptides: i) from 6 % to 14 % acetonitrile in water over 28 min, ii) from 14 % to 25 % acetonitrile in water over 40 min, iii) from 25 % to 38 % acetonitrile in water over 15 min, iv) from 38 % to 60 % acetonitrile in water over 10 min, and v) from 60 % to 99 % acetonitrile in water over 20 min. Between each injection, a 30 min wash method was applied. Both methods used a constant column temperature of 35 °C and a flow rate of 250 nL min−1. The described gradient data were acquired using a Synapt G2 (Waters, Manchester, UK) Q-ToF instrument operated in positive mode using electrospray ionization with a NanoLock-spray source. Using the internal fluidics system of the mass spectrometer, leucine enkephalin was used as a lock mass. The lock mass channel was sampled every 60 s. For each injection, the mass spectrometer was operated in resolution mode, with continuum spectra being acquired. During acquisition, the mass spectrometer alternated between low- and high-energy modes using a scan time of 0.8 s for each mode over 50–2,000 Da. In the low-energy MS mode, data were collected at a constant collision energy of 4 eV. In the elevated-energy MS mode, the collision energy was increased from 15 to 40 eV.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were obtained using Progenesis QI for Proteomics version 2.0 and the P. aeruginosa UniProt proteome database (ID: UP 208964). Settings for the PLGS search engine were FDR 1 %, tryptic peptides with one missed cleavage allowed, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modification. For quantification, only unique peptides of the proteins of interest were used, enabling comparisons of protein abundance across the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections evade antibiotic therapy and are associated with mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. We find that in&#xa0;vitro resistance evolution of P.&#xa0;aeruginosa toward clinically relevant antibiotics leads to phenotypic convergence toward distinct states. These states are associated with collateral sensitivity toward several antibiotic classes and encoded by mutations in antibiotic resistance genes, including transcriptional regulator nfxB. Longitudinal analysis of isolates from CF patients reveals similar and defined phenotypic states, which are associated with extinction of specific sub-lineages in patients. In-depth investigation of chronic P.&#xa0;aeruginosa populations in a CF patient during antibiotic therapy revealed dramatic genotypic and phenotypic convergence. Notably, fluoroquinolone-resistant subpopulations harboring nfxB mutations were eradicated by antibiotic therapy as predicted by our in&#xa0;vitro data. This study supports the hypothesis that antibiotic treatment of chronic infections can be optimized by targeting phenotypic states associated with specific mutations to improve treatment success in chronic infections.

### Keywords
Collateral sensitivity, Nfxb, Cystic fibrosis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Phenotypic convergence, Drug resistance, Chronic infections

### Affiliations
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark,
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability


### Submitter
Tune Wulff

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Otto Alexander Sommer
1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


