### Accession
PXD036830

### Title
Hepatic processing of Z variant α-1-antitrypsin alters ERAD capacity to regulate cholesterol biosynthesis in a zebrafish model

### Description
Homozygosity for the Z allele of α1-antitrypsin (ZAAT) predisposes affected individuals to developing liver disease as the serpin misfolds and forms insoluble polymers that accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of hepatocytes, resulting in gain-of-function hepatotoxicity. This prevents secretion of ZAAT leading to serum insufficiency. A zebrafish model expressing human ZAAT in the liver shows no signs of hepatic accumulation despite displaying serum insufficiency, suggesting defect in ZAAT secretion occurs independently of its tendency to accumulate in hepatocytes. In this study, proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of the ZAAT-expressing zebrafish liver provided strong evidence of suppressed Srebp2-mediated cholesterol biosynthesis. qPCR confirms this observation in the human liver cell line stably expressing ZAAT. We proposed that the engagement of misfolded ZAAT by the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) system inhibits the turnover of Srebp2-repressing elements therefore hindering the activation of Srebp2. Protein quality control factors was manipulated to dissect the intracellular processing of ZAAT further mechanistically. Ablation of erlec1 resulted in a further suppression in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, confirming a role of this ER lectin in targeting misfolded ZAAT to ERAD. Deletion of the two ER mannosidase I homologs in zebrafish enhanced ZAAT secretion without inducing hepatic accumulation. Together, the present study provides novel insights into hepatic ZAAT processing and suggest potential therapeutic targets to improve ZAAT secretion and alleviate serum insufficiency in this form of α1-antitrypsin disease.

### Sample Protocol
Adult zebrafish livers were solubilised in 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) using standard protocols. Briefly, extracted livers were placed in 1% SDC in 100 mM Tris pH 8.1 and homogenised for 3 x 10 s using an electric homogeniser. Samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 min then sonicated for 3 x 10 s (samples were cooled on ice between sonication bursts). Samples were fractionated by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 5 min. The soluble fraction was collected, and the protein concentration measured. Up to 400 µg of liver protein was digested with trypsin for ~12 h on a column using standard filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) manufacturer protocol. Digested protein was concentrated to 50 µl using a Speedvac, cleaned up using ZipTip (following the manufacturer’s protocol) and concentrated again to ~5 µl. Samples were diluted to 20 µl in 0.1% formic acid and iRT peptides added for mass-spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed by the Monash Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility. Spectral data were acquired using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) mass Spectrometer. An acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) analytical column and an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) trap column was used to chromatographically separate the tryptic peptides. Mass spectrometric DDA (data-dependent acquisition) data were searched against a modified version of Uniprote Zebrafish database (GFP, human AAT, iRT peptides added) using Byonic (ProteinMetrics) embedded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) considering a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Spectronaut 9 was used for both the generation of a sample-specific spectral library as well as to interrogate all mass spectrometric DIA files.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals homozygous for the Pi*Z allele of SERPINA1 (ZAAT) are susceptible to lung disease due to insufficient &#x3b1;1-antitrypsin secretion into the circulation and may develop liver disease due to compromised protein folding that leads to inclusion body formation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of hepatocytes. Transgenic zebrafish expressing human ZAAT show no signs of hepatic accumulation despite displaying serum insufficiency, suggesting the defect in ZAAT secretion occurs independently of its tendency to form inclusion bodies. In this study, proteomic, transcriptomic, and biochemical analysis provided evidence of suppressed Srebp2-mediated cholesterol biosynthesis in the liver of ZAAT-expressing zebrafish. To investigate the basis for this perturbation, CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing was used to manipulate ER protein quality control factors. Mutation of <i>erlec1</i> resulted in a further suppression in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, confirming a role for this ER lectin in targeting misfolded ZAAT for ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Mutation of the two ER mannosidase homologs enhanced ZAAT secretion without inducing hepatic accumulation. These insights into hepatic ZAAT processing suggest potential therapeutic targets to improve secretion and alleviate serum insufficiency in this form of the &#x3b1;1-antitrypsin disease.

### Keywords
Alpha-1-antitrypsin; serpina1; zebrafish; liver; erad

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Phillip I Bird
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


