### Accession
PXD035449

### Title
Cell-type specific tagging of glycoproteins in murine-human co-culture samples glycoproteomics lysates

### Description
We report a strategy termed Bio-Orthogonal Cell line-specific Tagging of Glycoproteins (BOCTAG). Cells are equipped by transfection with an artificial biosynthetic pathway (mut-AGX1/NahK/Nh-GalNAc-T2) that transforms an alkyne tagged sugar into the corresponding nucleotide-sugar. Only transfected cells incorporate the bioorthogonal sugar into glycoproteins in the presence of non-transfected cells. The incorporation of alkyne-sugar in glycoproteins allows the installation, by copper(I)-catalyzed reaction, of an acid cleavable biotinylated tag. Glycoproteins are enriched using Streptavidin and. after on-bead digestion, glycopeptides are eluted in acid-conditions to be then analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Murine 4T1(GFP-expressing) and human MCF7 cells stably transfected with plasmids either encoding AGX1 F383A and B. longum NahK or empty plasmid were individually plated or co-cultured (1:1 ratio). Cells were fed either DMSO or 10 μM Ac4GalN6yne. Cell lysates (cells grown with FBS) were collected. 300 µg of each sample was used for the next step.  Samples were clicked with an acid-cleavable biotin-picolyl azide, precipitated and subjected to Neutravidin enrichment. On-bead reduction/alkylation was performed, and samples were on-bead digested with LysC. Beads with bound glycopeptides following on-bead digest were incubated with 11% (v/v) formic acid. The supernatant was collected and the acid-cleavage treatment was repeated a second time. Beads were washed with LCMS-grade acetonitrile. The wash and the acidic supernatants were combined together and trypsin was added.  Glycopeptides were dried by SpeedVac.   Glycopeptides were desalted by UltraMicroSpinTM (The Nest group Inc., Ipswich, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and vacuum-dried by SpeedVac to remove any traces of organic solvents.   Dried glycopeptides were resuspended in 16 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in LCMS-grade water, sonicated for 15 min, vortexed briefly and centrifuged for 5 min at 18,000 g.    Sample mixtures were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Eclipse with ETD (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher).   The sample (15 μL for glycopeptide fractions and 5μL out of 16 μL for peptide fractions) was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a 50 cm, 75 µm PepMap RSLC C18 column (ES903) after pre-concentation onto a 2 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap100 m nanoViper.   The column was held at 40 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.275 μL/min using a 120 and 140 minutes gradient for peptides and glycopeptides, respectively. Solvents were: A = 5% (v/v) DMSO, 95% (v/v)0.1% formic acid in water; B = 5% (v/v) DMSO, 20% (v/v)0.1% formic acid in water, 75% (v/v) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.   The gradient profile was as follows: 0 min 98% A, 2% B; 6 min 98% A, 2% B; 114 min 60% A, 40% B; 115 min 95% A, 5% B; 119 min 5% A, 95% B; 120 min 98% A, 2% B: 140 min 98% A, 2% B.  MS1 scans were collected with a mass range from 300-1500 m/z, 120K resolution, 4x105 ion inject target, and 50 ms maximum inject time. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude for 10 seconds with a repeat count of 3. Charge states 2-6 with an intensity greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation at top speed for 3s. Selected precursors were fragmented using HCD at 28% nCE with 2 Da isolation window, 5x104 inject target, and 54 ms maximum inject time before collection at 30K resolution in the Orbitrap. For precursors from 300-1000 m/z, presence of 3 oxonium ions over 5% relative abundance triggered a charge calibrated ETD scan to be collected in the ion trap with a 3 Da isolation window, 1x104 inject target, and 100ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Data evaluation of glycopeptides was performed with Byonic™ (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, USA). For glycopeptide analysis, search parameters included semi-specific cleavage specificity at the C-terminal site of R and K, with two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for MS1s, 20 ppm for HCD MS2s, and 0.2 Da for ETD MS2s. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation (common 1), asparagine deamidation (common 1), and a custom database of O-glycans that included HexNAc, HexNAc-NeuAc, HexNAc-Hex, HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc, HexNAc2-Hex-NeuAc and HexNAc-Hex-NeuAc2 with an additional 287.1371 m/z to account for the chemical modification. A maximum of two variable modifications were allowed per peptide. All identifications with |logP| greater than 3 that contained chemically modified glycans were manually validated and localised using a combination of HCD and ETD information.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
4t1, Mcf7, Lysate, Human-murine, Co-culture; glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, The Francis Crick Institute
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Benjamin Schumann

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Schumann
Imperial College London


