### Accession
PXD037864

### Title
Vibrio parahaemolyticus BB22OP T6SS2 secretome

### Description
Compare the secreted proteins of a wild-type Vibrio parahaemolyticus strain with those of a mutant in hcp2, rendering the T6SS2 inactive

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown in LB media containing 3% NaCl for 4 hours. Cells were then precipitated, and the medium was filtered using a 0.22 micron filter. Proteins in the medium were precipitated using sodium deoxicolate and TCA, and protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone. Proteins were then resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 and 8 M Urea, and then reduced with 3 mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with  10 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature for  30 min in the dark), and digested in 2M Urea and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by high collision dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan. The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (Mathias Mann's group) vs. Vibrio parahaemolyticus BB22OP from the NCBI database with mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor masses and 4.5 ppm after recalibration for both precursor and the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine was accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. Minimum number of samples identified per protein was set to 2. Peptide- level and protein- level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of peptides enabling quantitation from each LC/MS run for each peptide identified in any of the samples. Statistical analysis of the identification and quantification results was done using Perseus 1.6.2.2 software (Mathias Mann's group). The intensities data was transformed to log2. Missing values were replaced with 18 (on the logarithmic scale), which corresponds to the lowest intensity that was detected. T-Test with Permutation-based FDR (with 250 randomisation, threshold value = 0.05) was done and differential proteins were with P value <0.05 and Difference >1 in log 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretion, T6ss, Vibrio parahaemolyticus

### Affiliations
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Dor Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Dor Salomon
Tel Aviv University


