### Accession
PXD006751

### Title
An apoplastic peptide activates salicylic acid signaling in Zea mays

### Description
Papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) play important roles in plant defense mechanisms. Previous work identified a set of five apoplastic PLCPs (CP1A, CP1B, CP2, XCP2 and CatB) which are crucial for the orchestration of SA-dependent defense signaling and vice versa in maize (Zea mays). One central question from these findings is which mechanism is triggered by apoplastic PLCPs to induce SA-dependent defenses. By a mass spectrometry approach we discovered a novel peptide (Zip1 = Zea mays immune signaling peptide) to be enriched in apoplastic fluid upon SA treatment. Zip1 induces PR-gene expression when applied to naїve maize leaves. Moreover, it activates apoplastic PLCPs similar as SA does, suggesting Zip1 to play an important role in SA-mediated defense signaling. In vitro studies using recombinant protein showed that CP1A and CP2, but not XCP2 and CatB, release Zip1 from its pro-peptide (PROZIP1) in vitro. Strikingly, metabolite analysis showed direct induction of SA de novo synthesis by Zip1 in maize leaves. In line with this, RNA sequencing revealed that Zip1-mediated changes in maize gene expression largely resemble SA-induced responses. Consequently, Zip1 increases maize susceptibility to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. In summary, this study identifies the PLCP-released peptide signal Zip1, which triggers SA signaling in maize.

### Sample Protocol
To identify apoplastic fluid peptides by mass spectrometry apolastic fluid of salicylic acid or mock treated plants was extracted. The peptide fraction was isolated by filtration of 5 ml apoplastic fluid, corresponding to 4.5 mg total protein, via a 10 kDa Amicon Centrifugation Filter (EMD Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany).  The <10kDa apoplastic fraction was adjusted to a final concentration of 0.5% formic acid (FA) and 5% acetonitril (ACN). The acidified peptide solution was passed in 150 µL steps over pre-equilibrated Pierce C18 spin columns. (#89870, 2× 200 µL 0.5% FA, 5% ACN). Next, the columns were washed with 4× 0.5% FA, 5% ACN to remove excess salts. Finally the bound peptides were eluted with 2× 50 µL 0.1% FA, 70% ACN and concentrated in a vacuum concentrator until <5 µL liquid remained. The Volume was then adjusted to 20 µL by adding 0.1% FA.  LC-MS/MS-experiments were performed on a Thermo LTQ Velos mass spectrometer coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC. The LTQ Velos mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.1). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode, survey scanning between mass-to-charge ratio of 500 and 1500, with an ionization potential of 1.9kV. Peptides were separated on a single reverse phase C18 column (inner diameter 75 mm, packed with 12-cm ReproSil- Pur C18-AQ [3 µm]) using an acetonitrile gradient (120 min 5 to 80%; 20 min 80%), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were fragmented by collision-induced decay in a data-dependent fashion, fragmenting the 20 most intense multiply charged precursors in each MS scan. Collision-induced decay energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. Following fragmentation, precursors were excluded from further MS/MS acquisition for 60 s with a list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members maximum.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra data were searched using the MASCOT algorithm (version 2.3.02) first against a database of known contaminants (as incorporated in MASCOT) followed by searching against the maize sequences from the database ZmB73_5b_FGS_translations_20110205.fasta (www.maizesequence.org/index.html). MASCOT searches allowed for oxidation of Met residues (16 Da), static modification of Cys residues (57 Da due to alkylation with iodoacetamide), enzyme specificity set to “none”, and a mass tolerance set to ±0.25Da for precursor mass and ±0.35 Da for product ion masses. The Decoy Database Search was turned on. The resulting MS2 spectra matches were assembled and filtered. Peptides with an ion score above 35 were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Localized control of cell death is crucial for the resistance of plants to pathogens. Papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) regulate plant defence to drive cell death and protection against biotrophic pathogens. In maize (Zea mays), PLCPs are crucial in the orchestration of salicylic acid (SA)-dependent defence signalling. Despite this central role in immunity, it remains unknown how PLCPs are activated, and which downstream signals they induce to trigger plant immunity. Here, we discover an immune signalling peptide, Z. mays immune signalling peptide 1 (Zip1), which is produced after salicylic acid (SA) treatment. In vitro studies demonstrate that PLCPs are required to release bioactive Zip1 from its propeptide precursor. Conversely, Zip1 treatment strongly elicits SA accumulation in leaves. Moreover, transcriptome analyses revealed that Zip1 and SA induce highly overlapping transcriptional changes. Consequently, Zip1 promotes the infection of the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea, while it reduces virulence of the biotrophic fungus Ustilago maydis. Thus, Zip1 represents the previously missing signal that is released by PLCPs to activate SA defence signalling.

### Keywords
Salicylic acid, Zea mays, Apoplastic fluid

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


