### Accession
PXD027613

### Title
Paleofeces Analysis from Iron Age Hallstatt Salt Miners

### Description
Paleofeces are an important source of information to study the evolution of dietary habits and human health. The UNESCO World Heritage region of Hallstatt-Dachstein/Salzkammergut is one of Europe’s oldest cultural and industrial landscapes; its underground salt mines dating back at least to the 14th century BC are one of the few archaeological sites where paleofeces are well preserved. The high salt concentrations and the constant annual temperature at around 8°C inside the isolated Hallstatt mines have perfectly preserved organic archaeological artefacts (e.g. paleofeces, clothing, mining tools) that provide unique insights into the daily life of a progressive community in Hallstatt. Here we subjected human paleofeces dated from the Bronze Age to early Modern Times to an in-depth microscopic, metagenomic and proteomic analysis. This allowed us to reconstruct the diet of the former population and gain insights into their ancient gut microbiome composition. Our dietary survey identified bran and glumes of different cereals as one of the most prevalent plant fragments. This highly fibrous, carbohydrate-rich diet was supplemented with proteins from broad beans and occasionally with fruits, nuts, or animal food. Linked to these traditional dietary habits all ancient miners up to the early Modern times have gut microbiome structures akin to modern non-Westernized individuals which may indicate a shift in the gut community composition of modern Westernized populations due to quite recent dietary and lifestyle changes. When we extended our microbial survey to fungi present in the paleofeces, we observed in one of the Iron Age samples a high abundance of Penicillium roqueforti and Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA. Genome-wide analysis indicates that both fungi were involved in food fermentation and provide the first molecular evidence for blue cheese and beer consumption during Iron Age Europe.

### Sample Protocol
Paleofeces samples (ID 2610, 2604, 2611, 2612) and a blank control sample to highlight any contamination were resuspended in 800 µL 5% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and disrupted at 4°C using three 2.8 mm ceramic beads (Qiagen, USA) and a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Corp, USA) at 6500 rpm for 30 s. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 7 min, the supernatant removed and centrifuged twice at 13,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was subjected to the S-Trap™ mini spin column digestion protocol (ProtiFi, USA). Briefly, samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid in water (pH ≤ 1). Binding/wash buffer (100 mM TEAB (final) in 90% methanol) was added to each sample at 6.4 x the volume of each sample. Samples were vortexed and applied to the S-Trap column in ≤ 500 µL aliquots until the entire sample was loaded (personal communication from Dr. John Wilson, ProtiFi). After each sample load the S-Trap column was centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 s. Samples were washed to remove any residual SDS by adding 3x 400 µL binding/wash buffer and centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 s after each wash, and 1 min after the last wash. Proteins were digested on the S-Trap at 37°C for 13 h by adding 125 µL digestion buffer containing trypsin gold (Promega, USA) in 125 mM NH4HCO3. The S-Trap was rehydrated with 100 µL 125 mM NH4HCO3 and peptides eluted with 80 µL 125 mM NH4HCO3, 80 µL 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water, and 80 µL 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in water. Peptide eluates were pooled and dried under centrifugal evaporation (Savant, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were analyzed by high-resolution nano LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap-Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were resolubilized in 50 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water. 5 µL of each sample were loaded onto a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (75 um ID, C18 3 µm (dp), Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) and separated using a 50 cm C18 2 µm (dp) Easy Spray column (ES903, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) using a 120-minute gradient. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient used 5% to 22% mobile phase B over 105 minutes, followed by separation from 22% to 32% mobile phase B over the remaining 15 minutes. The column was washed and equilibrated at 95% and 5% mobile phase B, respectively, over 40 minutes following each run. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min and the column was heated at 45°C. Mass spectra were acquired on the Orbitrap-Eclipse mass spectrometer using data dependent acquisition (DDA) with dynamic exclusion. The precursor scan range was from 375-1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution and 100% normalized target AGC (4e5) with a 50 ms maximum injection time. The duty cycle was set to acquire as many MS/MS spectra as possible over a three second period following each precursor scan. A 1.2 m/z selection window was used to acquire MS/MS spectra at 30,000 resolution, a normalized AGC target of 100% (5e4), 54 ms maximum injection time, and fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 30. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds, with peptide match set to preferred and isotope exclusion turned on. Charge exclusion was set to 1 and greater than 7.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from ProteoWizard and analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v6.0.0-rc16 Noctilucent). The analysis pipeline consisted of database searching with Comet (version 2018.01 rev. 4) against a 17-species UniProt FASTA database (Table S18) and shuffled decoy sequences. Comet parameters included variable modifications of +15.994915 Da (Met, Cys, His, Tyr, Trp, and Phe), and +0.984016 (Asn and Gln). A precursor tolerance of 20 ppm was set, a fragment bin tolerance of 0.02 and fragment bin offset of 0. Semi-enzymatic cleavage with up to 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and an isotope error tolerance of 3. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were validated using PeptideProphet and iProphet. Protein inference was performed using ProteinProphet. Relative quantitation of protein groups was performed using StPeter. Observed protein groups for each sample were derived from the set of protein groups validated with ProteinProphet at an estimated 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
We subjected human paleofeces dating from the Bronze Age to the Baroque period (18<sup>th</sup> century AD) to in-depth microscopic, metagenomic, and proteomic analyses. The paleofeces were preserved in the underground salt mines of the UNESCO World Heritage site of Hallstatt in Austria. This allowed us to reconstruct the diet of the former population and gain insights into their ancient gut microbiome composition. Our dietary survey identified bran and glumes of different cereals as some of the most prevalent plant fragments. This highly fibrous, carbohydrate-rich diet was supplemented with proteins from broad beans and occasionally with fruits, nuts, or animal food products. Due to these traditional dietary habits, all ancient miners up to the Baroque period have gut microbiome structures akin to modern non-Westernized individuals whose diets are also mainly composed of unprocessed foods and fresh fruits and vegetables. This may indicate a shift in the gut community composition of modern Westernized populations due to quite recent dietary and lifestyle changes. When we extended our microbial survey to fungi present in the paleofeces, in one of the Iron Age samples, we observed a high abundance of Penicillium roqueforti and Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA. Genome-wide analysis indicates that both fungi were involved in food fermentation and provides the first molecular evidence for blue cheese and beer consumption in Iron Age Europe.

### Keywords
Human, Paleofeces, Iron age, Ancient, Salt mine, Feces, Hallstatt

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


