### Accession
PXD037843

### Title
Immunopeptidomics reveals determinants of Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigen presentation on MHC class I (SureQuant data)

### Description
CD8+ T cells contribute to protective immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), but the principles that govern presentation of Mtb peptides on MHC class I (MHC-I) on the surface of infected macrophages for CD8+ T cell recognition are incompletely understood. Here, we use internal standard parallel reaction monitoring (IS-PRM, also known as SureQuant) to rigorously validate identifications of Mtb-derived MHC-I peptides obtained in data-dependent MS analyses. We further use SureQuant to quantify presentation of Mtb peptides derived from the secreted effector proteins EsxA and EsxJ across multiple experimental conditions. We show that presentation of both EsxA- and EsxJ-derived peptides requires the activity of the mycobacterial ESX-1 type VII secretion system, possibly indicating that ESX-1-mediated phagosome membrane damage allows Mtb proteins to access MHC-I antigen processing pathways. We show that this requirement is independent of type I interferon signaling that occurs downstream of phagosome damage. Treatment with inhibitors of conventional proteolytic pathways involved in MHC-I antigen processing inhibits presentation of self peptides as expected, but does not inhibit presentation of Mtb peptides, implying an alternative or redundant mechanism of processing.

### Sample Protocol
Deidentified buffy coats were obtained from Massachusetts General Hospital. Samples are acquired and provided to research groups with no identifying information. HLA-A*02:01+, HLA-B*57:01+ leukapheresis samples (leukopaks)were obtained from StemCell. PBMCs were isolated by density-based centrifugation using Ficoll (GE Healthcare). CD14+ monocytes were isolated from PBMCs using a CD14 positive-selection kit (Stemcell). Isolated monocytes were differentiated in R10 media [RPMI 1640 without phenol red (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco), 1% HEPES (Corning), 1% L-glutamine (Sigma)] supplemented with 25 ng/mL M-CSF (Biolegend, 572902). Monocytes were cultured on appropriate ultra-low-attachment plates or flasks (Corning) for 6 days. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) H37Rv was grown in Difco Middlebrook 7H9 media supplemented with 10% OADC, 0.2% glycerol, and 0.05% Tween-80 to mid-log phase. Strains expressing GFP were grown in media supplemented with 50 μg/mL hygromycin B (Sigma-Aldrich), and strains expressing luxABCDE were grown in media supplemented with 20 μg/mL Zeocin (Thermo). The Mtb culture was pelleted by centrifugation, washed once with PBS, resuspended in R10 media and filtered through a 5 μm syringe filter to obtain a single-cell suspension. Macrophages were infected at the indicated multiplicity of infection (MOI) for 4 h and then washed with PBS to remove extracellular Mtb. Infected macrophages were cultured in R10 media for the remainder of the experiment. Where indicated, macrophages were pre-treated with R10 media containing 20 μM E64d (Cayman), 0.5 μM MG-132 (Cayman), or 10 nM bafilomycin (InvivoGen), or DMSO alone (or other concentration of drug where indicated). The culture media was supplemented with an equal concentration of drug during infection with Mtb, and after washing off extracellular Mtb. Where indicated, the culture media was supplemented with 10 ng/mL of IFN-β after infection with Mtb. UV-mediated peptide exchange and quantification of hipMHC complexes by ELISA were performed as previously described (Stopfer et al., 2020). Amidated peptides with sequences AL[+7]ADGVQKV-NH2, ALNEQIARL[+7]-NH2, and SLPEEIGHL[+7]-NH2 were used to make hipMHC standards. 50 million macrophages per condition (data-dependent analysis) or 10 million macrophages per condition (quantitative SureQuant analysis)  were cultured as described above in ultra-low-attachment T75 flasks (Corning). macrophages were infected at MOI 2.5 as described above, or mock-infected with media containing no Mtb. Where indicated for specific DDA MS experiments (donor B), the culture media was supplemented with 10 ng/mL of IFN-γ for 24 hours prior to infection with Mtb. Where indicated for specific DDA MS experiments (donor C), the culture media was supplemented with 0.5 µg/mL of cycloheximide for the final 6 hours of culture prior to MHC-I isolation. 72 hours post-infection, cells were detached using PBS supplemented with 2 mM EDTA, washed with PBS, and lysed in 1 mL (DDA analysis) or 0.5 mL (SureQuant analysis) of MHC lysis buffer [20 mM Tris, 150 mM sodium chloride, pH 8.0, supplemented with 1% CHAPS, 1x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce), and 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Sigma-Aldrich)]. Lysate was sonicated using a Q500 ultrasonic bath sonicator (Qsonica) in five 30-second pulses at an amplitude of 60%, cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 x g, and sterile filtered twice using 0.2 μm filter cartridges (Pall NanoSep). For quantitative SureQuant analyses, the protein concentration of the lysates was normalized by BCA assay (Pierce), and 100 fmol of each hipMHC standard was added to each sample. Lysates were then added to protein A sepharose beads pre-conjugated to pan-MHC-I antibody (clone W6/32), prepared as previously described (Stopfer et al., 2020), and incubated rotating at 4°C overnight (12-14 hours).Beads were then washed with 500 μL Tris buffer (50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) and peptide-MHC complexes eluted by incubating in 500 μL 10% acetic acid for 20 minutes. C18 SpinTips (Pierce) were washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, activated with 90% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, and washed with 0.1% formic acid. Eluate from MHC-I IPs was applied to the column by centrifugation. The column was washed with 0.1% formic acid, and peptides were eluted by applying elution solvent (30% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid) by centrifugation twice. Eluates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
SureQuant data were analyzed using Skyline. Relative abundances of peptides were computed by taking the area under the curve of each of the three most abundant fragment ions, normalizing by the corresponding fragment ions of the synthetic SIL standard, and computing theaverage ratio of these three fragments between a given condition and a reference condition. These relative abundances were then further normalized by the mean relative abundance of the hipMHC standards spiked into each sample (at least two reliably detected in each analysis).

### Publication Abstract
T cells must recognize pathogen-derived peptides bound to major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) in order to initiate a cell-mediated immune response against an infection, or to support the development of high-affinity antibody responses. Identifying antigens presented on MHCs by infected cells and professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) during infection may therefore provide a route toward developing new vaccines. Peptides bound to MHCs can be identified at whole-proteome scale using mass spectrometry-a technique referred to as "immunopeptidomics." This technique has emerged as a powerful tool for identifying potential vaccine targets in the context of many infectious diseases. In this review, we discuss the contributions immunopeptidomic studies have made to understanding antigen presentation and T cell priming in the context of infection and the potential for immunopeptidomics to inform the development of vaccines to address pressing global health problems in infectious disease.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Antigen presentation, Tuberculosis, Mhc, Tb, Macrophage, Phagocyte

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Owen Leddy

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


