### Accession
PXD005166

### Title
Fast and slow muscle proteins in scallops

### Description
We performed the first quantitative proteomics analysis of differences between striated (fast) and catch (slow) adductor muscle in Yesso scallop (Patinopecten yessoensis), with the goal to uncover muscle specific genes and proteins, as well as enzymes of metabolic pathways in fast and slow adductor muscle of scallops. The present findings highlight the functional roles of muscle contractile proteins, calcium signaling pathways, membrane and extracellular matrix proteins, and glycogen metabolism involved in the different contractile and metabolic properties between fast and slow muscles. The present findings will help better understand the molecular basis underlying muscle contraction and its physiological regulation in invertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Two-year-old live individuals of P. yessoensis (n = 6) were obtained from a commercial hatchery in Yantai, China. To obtain high quality of gene expression data, all of these scallops were cultured at the same condition, in sea water at 16 ± 2°C for three days at YSFRI (Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute). Scallops were fed with Isochrysis galbana and two-thirds of the culture water was exchanged every day. The striated and smooth adductor muscles were separately dissected from each scallop was frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen individually. Two biological replicates were used for transcriptomic and proteomic analysis in this study. Total proteins were extracted using the cold acetone method.The proteins in tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were digested with trypsin (5 μg trypsin/100 μg total protein) at 37°C for 12 h. The iTRAQ labelling was performed using iTRAQ labelling kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacture’s instruction. The resulted samples were then digested with 5 μg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 36 h. The digested samples were dried, dissolved and labelled with the iTRAQ reagents. The iTRAQ-labelled samples were then pooled and subjected to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. The labelled samples were fractionated using a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (LC-20AB, Shimadzu, Japan) connected to an SCX column (Ultremex column, 4.6 mm I.D. × 250 mm, Phenomenex).

### Data Protocol
All of the mass spectrometry data were collected using Bruker Daltonics micrOTOFcontrol and analyzed using the Data Analysis Software (Version 3.2). The tolerance settings for peptide identification in the Mascot searches were 0.05 Da for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS. The Uniprot database was downloaded and integrated into the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.01) through its database maintenance unit. The Mascot search results were exported into a DAT FILE and normalized and quantified using Scaffold version 3.0 Software. The proteins were functionally annotated using the WEGO (web Gene Ontology Annotation Plot) web service (http://wego.genomics.org.cn/cgi-bin/wego/index.pl). The consensus sequences were then subjected to BLAST searches against the corresponding database, and the top hits were selected using an E-value cut-off of 10–5. Next, a functional category gene enrichment test using Blast2GO was performed to reveal the significantly enriched proteins with an FDR significance threshold of 0.05 (fold changes > 1.2). The differentially expressed proteins related to biological pathways were detected using the KEGG resource (www.genome.jp/kegg/). Lastly, we allocated the differentially expressed proteins to biological pathways using the KEGG(Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) resource(www.genome.jp/kegg/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adductor muscle, Scallop, Muscle protein

### Affiliations
YSFRI
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute

### Submitter
Xiujun Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Aiguo Yang
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute


