### Accession
PXD002004

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Profiles of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia <TO BE UPDATED>

### Description
<TO BE UPDATED> Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a common, adult B-cell leukaemia that has challenges in prognosis and treatment. It is characterised by a heterogeneous clinical course with multiple distinct phenotypes currently defined genetically or with target-specific monoclonal antibodies. While many studies have examined specific protein targets or global mRNA expression in CLL, few have attempted to characterise expression across the whole proteome. To achieve a non-biased, global proteomics characterisation, 14 CLL samples representing the genetic mutant subgroups NOTCH1, SF3B1 and WT, were subjected to quantitative mass spectrometry and compared with normal B cells using two isobaric tag experiments (TMT 10-plex).  6150 proteins were fully quantitated revealing a strong correlation between the regulated proteins across the CLL samples, independent of subtype. >800 proteins demonstrated significant upregulation (p<0.05) across the CLL samples. In addition to several novel cell surface markers, overexpressed proteins were strongly indicative of dysregulation to mRNA processing, spliceosome activity, transcriptional control by RNA pol II and epigenetic mechanisms (all p<10-10). A strong enrichment was observed for proteins coded by chromosome 12, often observed with trisomy in CLL (p<0.001). Downregulated proteins included cell adhesion molecules such as integrins and suggested a reduced capacity for endothelial transmigration (both p<10-10). These findings confirm many previous observations of CLL-specific protein overexpression (eg. CD5, ROR1, matriptase) and identify several novel surface targets for investigation. They also suggest that strong patterns of protein expression exist across CLL subtypes. Together, these results demonstrate the potential of proteomics and advocate the characterisation of further cancer samples by such methods.

### Sample Protocol
<TO BE UPDATED> Lysate preparation B-cell pellets were lysed by trituration using a 23 gauge needle in 0.5 M TEAB with 0.05 % SDS and were sonicated at 20 % amplitude for 2 x 30 seconds on ice, with a 30 second interval. Lysates were cleared at 16,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined by Direct Detect spectrometer (Millipore). 100 µg of lysates for each of the 14 CLL samples and 200 µg of lysate for the three healthy donor samples were reduced with 50 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 60 minutes at 60°C and were alkylated with 200 mM MMTS for 15 minutes at room temperature. Proteolysis and peptide labelling Protein material was digested overnight at room temperature in the dark, using 30:1 proteomics grade trypsin (Roche). CLL sample peptides were assigned to two TMT 10-plex label sets, A and B, as follows: 128N A,B: NOTCH1-3999, NOTCH1-2886; 128C A,B: NOTCH1-2497, NOTCH1-2483; 129N A,B: NOTCH1-568, SF3B1-625; 129C A,B: SF3B1-653, SF3B1-4140; 130N A,B: SF3B1-3405, SF3B1-1194; 130C A,B: uk-3156, WT-1125; 131 A,B: WT-4621, WT-2459. For the healthy donors, all 200 µg of B-cell peptides were labelled in the same reaction with labels 126 A+B, 127N A+B and 127C A+B for donors 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Reactions were allowed to proceed for 2 hours at room temperature and were quenched with 8 µl of hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Reactions were lyophilised at room temperature by vacuum concentration and were individually reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and pooled to 10-plex A and 10-plex B, with half the labelled material from each of the three healthy donors being assigned to each 10-plex.  Peptide purification and pre-fractionation Labelled peptide pools 10-plex A and 10-plex B were cleaned with 100 μl capacity C18 tips (Thermo Scientific) with three iterations eluting in 2%, 50% and 98% ACN (Fisher Scientific), 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific). The isolated peptides were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator at room temperature and reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH. Peptides were resolved using high-pH reverse-phase C8 chromatography (150 mm x 3 mm ID x 3.5 µm particle, XBridge, Waters) at 300 µl/min with a LC-20AD HPLC system (Shimadzu). Peptides were eluted over a 120 minutes gradient (mobile phase A; 0.1% NH4OH, mobile phase B; 99.9% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH) of 2% B 0-X minutes…. Peptide fractions were collected into tubes coated with PEG-20 (Sigma) to minimise peptide loss [ref] and were lyophilised at room temperature. Chromatography for the two 10-plex analyses were aligned and compared. The top 20, consistently high-abundance, peptide fractions were selected for individual analysis and the remaining fractions were orthogonally concatenated, eg. 1 and 60, 2 and 61, 3 and 62 etc. Detailed in supplementary X. MS analysis Lyophilized peptide fractions were individually reconstituted or serially pooled in 15 μl of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and 5 μl were loaded by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) at 20 μl/min for 4 min onto a C18 PepMap100 trapping cartridge (5 mm × 500 µm ID, 5 μm particle) (Thermo Scientific) in mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. Depending on fraction peptide abundance, peptides were eluted over an 8, 5 or 3 hour gradients of 2–18% (XXX min), 18–35% (XXX min), and 35–85% (XXX min) organic phase (94.9% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% formic acid) in aqueous phase (2% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and resolved on an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (50 cm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm particle) at 300 nl/min retrofitted to a PicoTip nESI emitter (New Objective). MS/MS characterisation was conducted as described previously. In brief, the top 12 + 2 and +3 precursor ions were characterized with by Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) at 120,000 mass resolution. And were characterized by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a dynamic exclusion (±5 ppm) of 60 s. Additionally the DMSO ion at 401.922718 was used as an MS lockmass and the TMT-H+ ion at 230.170422 was used as an internal MS/MS lockmass.

### Data Protocol
<TO BE UPDATED> MS Data Processing Target-decoy searching was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 software using SequestHT, with Percolator used to estimate FDR with a threshold of q ≤ 0.01. Spectra were subject to a two stage search; firstly allowing only a single missed cleavage, minimum peptide length of 7, searched against the human UniProt Swissprot database (downloaded 10/01/15), precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and no variable modifications. The second search of all spectra with q ≤ 0.01, allowed 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, searched against the human UniProt trembl database (downloaded 10/01/15), precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a maximum of 2 variable (1 equal) modifications of; TMT (Y), oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and phospho (S,T,Y). In both cases, fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da for the HCD spectra and 0.5 Da for the CID spectra and fixed modifications of Methythio (C), TMT (K and N-terminus) were used. Reporter ions were extracted with a tolerance of 20 ppm. Data from the two 10-plex experiments was searched separately.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a heterogeneous B-cell cancer exhibiting a wide spectrum of disease courses and treatment responses. Molecular characterization of RNA and DNA from CLL cases has led to the identification of important driver mutations and disease subtypes, but the precise mechanisms of disease progression remain elusive. To further our understanding of CLL biology we performed isobaric labeling and mass spectrometry proteomics on 14 CLL samples, comparing them with B-cells from healthy donors (HDB). Of 8694 identified proteins, &#x223c;6000 were relatively quantitated between all samples (q&lt;0.01). A clear CLL signature, independent of subtype, of 544 significantly overexpressed proteins relative to HDB was identified, highlighting established hallmarks of CLL (<i>e.g.</i> CD5, BCL2, ROR1 and CD23 overexpression). Previously unrecognized surface markers demonstrated overexpression (<i>e.g.</i> CKAP4, PIGR, TMCC3 and CD75) and three of these (LAX1, CLEC17A and ATP2B4) were implicated in B-cell receptor signaling, which plays an important role in CLL pathogenesis. Several other proteins (<i>e.g.</i> Wee1, HMOX1/2, HDAC7 and INPP5F) were identified with significant overexpression that also represent potential targets. Western blotting confirmed overexpression of a selection of these proteins in an independent cohort. mRNA processing machinery were broadly upregulated across the CLL samples. Spliceosome components demonstrated consistent overexpression (<i>p</i> = 1.3 &#xd7; 10<sup>-21</sup>) suggesting dysregulation in CLL, independent of SF3B1 mutations. This study highlights the potential of proteomics in the identification of putative CLL therapeutic targets and reveals a subtype-independent protein expression signature in CLL.

### Keywords
Cll, Bridging controls, Tmt, Whole cell, Cancer, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK
Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Spiro Garbis
Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK


