### Accession
PXD027628

### Title
Radiation exposure elicits a neutrophil-driven response in healthy lung tissue that enhances metastatic colonization

### Description
Radiotherapy, a treatment modality received by more than half of all cancer patients, remains one of the most effective approaches to achieve local tumour control.  Despite increased accuracy driven by technological advances, healthy tissue injury due to off-target radiation exposure can still occur. In this study, we sought to understand the biological effect of radiation-mediated injury to the lung in the context of cancer metastasis, since we had previously reported that tissue regeneration is a feature of the metastatic microenvironment of this organ. We have exposed healthy mouse lung tissue to radiation prior to the induction of metastasis and observed a strong enhancement of cancer cell growth. Lung tissue was preconditioned into a profoundly tumour-supportive microenvironment governed by enhanced regenerative Notch signalling. Most importantly, we found that locally activated neutrophils were key drivers of these tissue perturbations, significantly increasing the metastatic proficiency of irradiated lung tissue and endowing arriving cancer cells with an augmented stemness phenotype. We show that by preventing neutrophil-dependent Notch activation in the irradiated tissue, we were able to significantly offset the radiation-enhanced metastases. Mechanistically, we identified the release of neutrophil granules as the effectors of the pro-tumorigenic preconditioning of the irradiated lung tissue. These findings not only reveal a novel tumour-supportive function of neutrophils in the context of tissue-injury, but also have important clinical implications by suggesting targeting their activity could maximise the success of radiotherapy for the treatment of cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Ly6G+ lung or bone marrow neutrophils were isolated from lung suspensions by MACS-sorting. The cells were lysed by adding three cell-pellet volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, protease inhibitors) then using a tip-sonicator for 10 cycles with 15 seconds of each cycle and 1 minute of interval on ice. Insoluble material was then removed by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Following a Bicinchonic Acid (BCA) assay for protein quantification, 25 g of total protein was transferred into 6 labelled tubes and adjusted to a final volume of 25 μl with 50 mM TEAB. Reduction and alkylation was performed using DTT and iodoacetamide in 50mM TEAB. Proteins were then precipitated overnight by adding six volumes of ice-cold acetone. The next day, proteins were resuspended in 25 μl of 50mM TEAB and digested by trypsin for 16 hours at 37°C (1:50 w:w). Peptides were then desalted using a C18 macrospin column (The Nest Group Inc, USA) and re-solubilised in 50 mM TEAB and subsequently labeled using a 0.2 mg TMT 10-plex kit (Thermo Scientific). Peptide labelling efficiency was assessed by analysing an aliquot using a QExactive orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer to ensure that all samples displayed > 98 % labelling efficiency. Next, 5 % hydroxylamine was added to each sample to sequester unreacted label and the samples were mixed. The 10-plex sample was desalted using a C18 macrospin column and peptides were eluted with 80 % acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. High pH reversed-phase fractionation (Pierce, UK) was employed with nine fraction collected and dried to completeness. Each fraction was analysed using a Fusion Lumos Tribrid orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system. The sample was loaded onto a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 75 μM × 2 cm) then transferred onto a C18 reversed-phase column (PepMap RSLC; 50 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2–25 % buffer B (75 % acetonitrile, 20 % water, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO) at a flow rate of 275 nl/min over 135 minutes followed by a second linear gradient of 25-40 % buffer B over 25 minutes. MS1 instrument settings: spectra were acquired in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with scan range of 350–1500 m/z; maximum injection time 50 milliseconds; AGC target value 4E5; 30 % RF lens setting; 90 second dynamic exclusion. MS2 instrument settings: precursor ions with charge states z = 2–7+ were selected for MS/MS higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation; 38 % energy; acquired in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution; maximum injection time 105 milliseconds; AGC target value 1E5.

### Data Protocol
All data were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.13. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB Mus musculus database downloaded in July 2017 and a list of default contaminants. Reversed decoy sequences were used to estimate false discovery rates. Additional MaxQuant setting were; Trypsin with two missed cleavages, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The MaxQuant output proteinGroups.txt file was imported to Perseus version 1.4.0.2. Proteins were filtered to common contaminants and decoy sequences. Intensity values were log 2 transformed and normalisation for each channel was performed by median subtraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metastasis, Radiotherapy, Neutrophil granules, Cancer

### Affiliations
Tumour Host Interaction laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, NW1 1AT London
Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Ilaria Malanchi
Tumour Host Interaction laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, NW1 1AT London


