### Accession
PXD021528

### Title
Cullin 4b modulates Wnt signaling and CRL4b targets Irgm1 to fuel intestinal stem cell stemness and niche

### Description
Background & Aims: Hierarchical organization of intestine relies on their stem cells by self-renew and producing committed progenitors. Although signals like Wnt are known to animate the continued renewal by maintaining intestinal stem cells (ISCs) activity, molecular mechanisms especially E3 ubiquitin ligases that modulate ISCs ‘stemness’ and supportive niche have not been well understood. Here, we investigated the role of Cullin 4B (Cul4b) in regulating ISC functions. Methods: We generated mice with intestinal epithelial-specific disruption of Cul4b (pVillin-cre; Cul4bfn/Y), inducible disruption of Cul4b (Lgr5-creERT2; Cul4bfn/Y, CAG-creERT2; Cul4bfn/Y) and their control (Cul4bfn/Y). Intestinal tissues were analyzed by histology, immunofluorescence, RNA sequencing and mass spectrum. Intestinal organoids deprived from mice with pVillin-Cre; Cul4bfn/Y, Lgr5-Cre; Cul4bfn/Y, Tg-Cul4b and their controls were used in assays to measure intestinal self-renewal, proliferation and differentiation. Wnt signaling and intestinal markers were analyzed by immunofluorescence and immunoblot assays. Differential proteins upon Cul4b ablation or Cul4b-interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrometry.  Results: Cul4b specifically located at ISCs zone. Block of Cul4b impaired intestinal homeostasis maintenance by reduced self-renewal and proliferation. Transcriptome analysis revealed that Cul4b-null intestine lose ISC characterization and showed disturbed ISC niche. Mechanistically, reactivated Wnt pathway could recover intestinal dysfunction of Cul4b knockout mice. Analysis of differential total and ubiquitylated proteins uncovered the novel targeting substrate of Cullin-Ring ubiquitin ligase 4b (CRL4b), immunity-related GTPase family M member 1 (Irgm1) in intestine. Decreased Irgm1 rescued abnormally interferon signaling, overemphasized autophagy and downstream phosphate proteins in Cul4b knockout mice. Conclusion: We conclude that Cul4b is essential for ISC self-renewal and Paneth cell function by targeting Irgm1 and modulating Wnt signaling. Our results demonstrate that Cul4b is a novel ISC stemness and niche regulator.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse intestine was cut longitudinally and washed three times with cold PBS. Villi were carefully scraped away and small pieces (5 mm) of intestine were incubated in 2 mM EDTA in PBS for 30 min on ice. These pieces were then vigorously suspended in cold PBS and the mixture was passed through 70 μm cell strainers.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and Acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Spectrum clustering is a powerful strategy to minimize redundant mass spectra by grouping them based on similarity, with the aim of forming groups of mass spectra from the same repeatedly measured analytes. Each such group of near-identical spectra can be represented by its so-called consensus spectrum for downstream processing. Although several algorithms for spectrum clustering have been adequately benchmarked and tested, the influence of the consensus spectrum generation step is rarely evaluated. Here, we present an implementation and benchmark of common consensus spectrum algorithms, including spectrum averaging, spectrum binning, the most similar spectrum, and the best-identified spectrum. We have analyzed diverse public data sets using two different clustering algorithms (spectra-cluster and MaRaCluster) to evaluate how the consensus spectrum generation procedure influences downstream peptide identification. The BEST and BIN methods were found the most reliable methods for consensus spectrum generation, including for data sets with post-translational modifications (PTM) such as phosphorylation. All source code and data of the present study are freely available on GitHub at https://github.com/statisticalbiotechnology/representative-spectra-benchmark.

### Keywords
Cul4b; intestinal stem cells (iscs); irgm1; stem cell niche

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
Shandong University

### Submitter
Yujia Fan

### Lab Head
Dr Yujia Fan, Xiaohan Huo, Beibei Guo, Xiaohui Zhang, Jiabei Lian, Shang Gao, Baichun Jiang, Haiyang Guo, Hao Dou, Yaoqin Gong, Huili Hu
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.


