### Accession
PXD025551

### Title
Quantitative global Proteome and Phosphorylome Analyses Reveal Potential Biomarkers in Kidney Cancer

### Description
Nowadays, high-throughput quantitative proteomic and transcriptomic approaches have been widely used for exploring molecular mechanisms and acquiring biomarkers for cancers. Our study aims to illuminate the multi-dimensional molecular mechanisms underlying renal cell carcinoma via investigating the quantitative global proteome and the profile of phosphorylation. A total of 5428 proteins and 8632 phosphorylation sites were quantified in RCC tissues, with 709 proteins and 649 phosphorylation sites changing in expression compared with matched adjacent non-tumor tissues. These differentially expressed proteins were mainly involved in the metabolic process terms involving glycolysis pathway, oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism which had been considered to be a potential mechanism of RCC progression. Moreover, phosphorylation analysis indicated that these up-regulated phosphorylated proteins were implicated in glucagon signaling pathway and cholesterol metabolism, while the down-regulated phosphorylation proteins were predominantly involved in glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, carbon metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids. In addition, we also found several new candidate proteins such as CD14, MPO, NCF2, SOD2, PARP1 up-regulated and MUT, ACADM, PCK1 down-regulated in RCC, which might be recognized as new biomarkers for RCC. These findings could broaden our insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms of RCC and acquire biomarker candidates for the treatment of RCC.

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, we took out the sample from - 80 ° C, weighed a proper amount of tissue sample into the mortar and added liquid nitrogen to fully grind to the powder. The samples of each group were respectively added with 4 times of the volume of the powder lysis buffer (8m urea, 1% protease inhibitor, 1% phosphatase inhibitor) and followed by sonication three times on ice. At 4 ° C, 12000 g was used for 10 min, the cell fragments were removed, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined by BCA kit (Abcam, UK). In preparation of trypsin digestion, the final concentration of dithiothreitol was 5 mM and reduced at 56 ° C for 30 min. After that, the final concentration of iodoacetamide was 11 mM and incubated in darkness for 15 min at room temperature. Finally, diluted the urea concentration of the sample to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added in a mass ratio of 1:50 (pancreatin: protein) and digestion was performed overnight at 37 ° C. The trypsin was added in the ratio of 1:100 (pancreatin: protein) to continue digesting for 4 hours. The peptides were desalted by strata x C18 (Phenomenex, USA) and freeze-dried in vacuum. The peptide powder was dissolved with 0.5M TEAB and labeled according to the operating instructions of TMT kit (Thermo, USA). The simple operation process is as follows: after unfreezing, the labeling reagent is dissolved with acetonitrile, mixed with peptide sample, incubated at room temperature for 2 h, and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. javascript:void(0);The peptide sample was classified by high pH reverse HPLC using a thermo betasil C18 column (5 μ m particle size, 10 mm Internal diameter, 250 mm length).The simple operation process is as follows: 60 fractions were separated in 60 minutes with the peptide grading gradient of 8% - 32% acetonitrile and pH of 9.0, and then for the proteomics analysis,the peptide fractions were combined into 18 fractions, for phosphorylation proteomics analysis the peptide was combined into 8 fractions, and the combined components and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For phosphorylated peptides enrichment, the peptide sample was dissolved in the enrichment buffer solution (50% acetonitrile / 6% trifluoroacetic acid), the supernatant transfer to new centrifuge tube and add a certain amount of IMAC materials. The mixed sample was placed on a rotating shaker and incubated gently. After incubation, the resin was washed three times with wash buffer solution of 50% acetonitrile / 6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, 10% ammonia buffer was used to elute the phosphopeptide, and the eluent was collected and vacuum freeze-dried. Desalting was carried out according to the instructions of C18 ziptips after drying, and analysis was followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Excel was used for investigation of differentially expressed proteins with quantification ratios >1.5 as the upregulation threshold and <0.67 as the downregulation threshold, a p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. DAVID was performed to classify proteins into three categories（biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function）against the background of Homo sapiens. Online tool Search Tool the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) database (http://www.string-db.org) was performed to evaluate the protein–protein interaction (PPI) information. we imported the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) to STRING and only experimentally validated interactions with a combined scored>0.7 were selected as significant. Then these significant DEPs were mapped into Cytoscape plugin to create network visualizations. Finally, we put the resulting PPI network to module analysis with the Plugin MCODE with the default parameters (Degree cutoff ≥2, Node score cutoff ≥2, K‐core ≥2, and Max depth=100). Moreover, the function and pathway enrichment analysis were performed for DEGs in the modules.The prognosis of proteins were analyzed by online software GEPIA(http://gepia.cancer-pku.cn/index.html). P<0.05 was considered to be significant. We used Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database to identify enriched pathways. p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Currently, high&#x2011;throughput quantitative proteomic and transcriptomic approaches have been widely used for exploring the molecular mechanisms and acquiring biomarkers for cancers. Our study aimed to illuminate the multi-dimensional molecular mechanisms underlying renal cell carcinoma (RCC) via investigating the quantitative global proteome and the profile of phosphorylation. A total of 5,428 proteins and 8,632 phosphorylation sites were quantified in RCC tissues, with 709 proteins and 649 phosphorylation sites found to be altered in expression compared with the matched adjacent non&#x2011;tumor tissues. These differentially expressed proteins were mainly involved in metabolic process terms involving the glycolysis pathway, oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid metabolism which have been considered to be a potential mechanism of RCC progression. Moreover, phosphorylation analysis indicated that these upregulated phosphorylated proteins are implicated in the glucagon signaling pathway and cholesterol metabolism, while the downregulated phosphorylated proteins were found to be predominantly involved in glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, carbon metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids. In addition, several new candidate proteins, CD14, MPO, NCF2, SOD2, PARP1, were found to be upregulated and MUT, ACADM, PCK1 were downregulated in RCC. These proteins may be recognized as new biomarkers for RCC. These findings could broaden our insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms of RCC and identify candidate biomarkers for the treatment of RCC.

### Keywords
Renal cell carcinoma; proteomes; phosphorylomes; biomarkers; pathways

### Affiliations
sir run run shaw hospital
Sir run run shaw hospital

### Submitter
yuanlei chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yuanlei chen
Sir run run shaw hospital


