### Accession
PXD018209

### Title
Unbiased proteomic profiling uncovers a targetable GNAS/PKA/PP2A axis in SCLC

### Description
Using unbiased kinase profiling, we identified protein kinase A (PKA) as an active kinase in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Inhibition of PKA activity genetically, or pharmacologically by activation of the PP2A phosphatase, inhibits SCLC expansion in culture and in vivo. Conversely, GNAS (G-protein α subunit), a PKA activator that is genetically activated in a small subset of human SCLC, promotes SCLC development. Phosphoproteomic analyses identified many new PKA substrates and mechanisms of action. In particular, PKA activity is required for the propagation of SCLC cancer stem cells in transplantation studies. Broad proteomic analysis of recalcitrant cancers has the potential to uncover novel targetable signaling networks, such as the GNAS/PKA/PP2A axis in SCLC.

### Sample Protocol
Multiplexed Inhibitor Beads (MIBs) assays Kinase chromatography, mass spectrometry and analytical processing were performed as described previously (Roskoski, 2016; Sos et al., 2014). Bait compounds were purchased or synthesized as described previously (Sos et al., 2014) and coupled to sepharose using 1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide chemistry. Cell lysates were diluted in binding buffer with 1 mol/L NaCl, and affinity purification was performed with gravity chromatography after pre-clearing. The bound kinases were stringently washed and then eluted with SDS followed by extraction/precipitation, tryptic digest and desalting. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS-MS) was performed on a Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with in-line high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an EASY-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Covalent Capture Labeling experiments for covalent capture enrichment were performed on 2 mg of protein lysate per sample (N=2/line) as previously described (Levin et al., 2016). Briefly, samples were incubated in lysis buffer supplemented with 250 μM Bn-ATPγS, 250 μM ATP, 5 mM GTP, 10 mM MgCl2, and 20 μg of purified PKA as indicated. Labeling reactions were performed at 37°C for 60 min before quenching with 50 mM EDTA. Thirty-microliter aliquots of each reaction were alkylated with 2 μL of 100 mM p-nitro mesylate (PNBM) for 30 min at room temperature. Thiophosporylation was detected by immunoblot with the antithiophosphate ester antibody (110C). Covalent capture of thiophosphorylated proteins was performed as described previously (Hertz et al., 2010). Briefly, lysates were denatured by adding 60% (wt/vol) solid urea, 10 mM final TCEP, and incubating at 55 °C for 30 min. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, brought to a pH of 8, and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:20 ratio. Peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid, desalted on a SepPak C18 column (Waters), and speed-vacuumed to dryness. Peptides were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and 50% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and adjusted to pH 7. The peptide solution was incubated overnight rocking with 100 μL of iodoacetyl Sepharose resin in the dark (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Beads were washed by gravity flow with water, 5 M NaCl, 50% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 5% (vol/vol) formic acid, and 10 mM DTT followed by elution with 1 mg/mL oxone (Sigma). Peptides were desalted with ZipTips (Millipore) and speed-vacuumed until dry. LC-MS/MS Analysis and Data Processing All desalted peptides were resuspended into 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded on to a nanoACQUITY (Waters) UPLC instrument for reversed-phase chromatography with a C18 column (BEH130, 1.7-μm bead size, 100 µm × 100 mm) in front of an LTQ Orbitrap Velos. The LC was operated at a 600-nL/min flow rate and peptides were separated over an 80-min gradient from 2 to 50% buffer B (buffer A: water and 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Global Phosphoproteomics Cells were treated with vehicle or 8-Br-cAMP for 60 minutes. Cells were then collected, lysed, and subjected to tryptic digest. Samples were desalted and lyophilized, and phosphoenrichment was performed with immobilized metal affinity chromatography following established protocols (Swaney and Villen, 2016). Phosphopeptides were then additionally desalted and data acquired using a Thermo Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All mass spectrometry was performed at the Thermo Fisher Scientific Proteomics Facility for Disease Target Discovery at UCSF and the J. David Gladstone Institutes.

### Data Protocol
MIBs:Label-free quantification was performed with Skyline (Schilling et al., 2012), and statistical analysis with MSstats (Choi et al., 2014). Substrate Identification: Survey scans were recorded over a 350–1,800 m/z range and MS/MS fragmentation was performed using HCD on the top eight peaks. A second injection (i.e., technical replicate) of each sample was performed using ETD fragmentation on the top six peaks. Peak lists were generated with an in-house software called PAVA and searched against the SwissProt Homo sapiens database (downloaded June 27, 2013; 20,264 entries) using Protein Prospector (v5.10.10). Data were searched with a 20-ppm tolerance for parent and fragment ions (HCD or 20 ppm/0.6 Da ETD), allowing for standard variable modifications and S/T/Y phosphorylation. Filtering of background peptides and phosphopeptides was accomplished using an in-house R script described previously (Lipp et al., 2015). Global Phosphoproteomics:  Prospector was used for peptide assignment (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm) and Skyline was used for all quantification (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view). Statistical comparison was done using MS Stats (Choi et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Using unbiased kinase profiling, we identified protein kinase A (PKA) as an active kinase in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Inhibition of PKA activity genetically, or pharmacologically by activation of the PP2A phosphatase, suppresses SCLC expansion in culture and in&#xa0;vivo. Conversely, GNAS (G-protein &#x3b1; subunit), a PKA activator that is genetically activated in a small subset of human SCLC, promotes SCLC development. Phosphoproteomic analyses identified many PKA substrates and mechanisms of action. In particular, PKA activity is required for the propagation of SCLC stem cells in transplantation studies. Broad proteomic analysis of recalcitrant cancers has the potential to uncover targetable signaling networks, such as the GNAS/PKA/PP2A axis in SCLC.

### Keywords
Kinase proteomics, Small cell lung cancer, Inhibitor beads, Analog specific

### Affiliations
University of California, San Francisco
Medicine, University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
John Gordan

### Lab Head
Dr John Gordan
Medicine, University of California San Francisco


