### Accession
PXD041592

### Title
Proteomics via immune-precipitation assisted Mass-Spectrometry of Androgen receptor in INS1 cells.

### Description
IP- Mass Spec of INS1 cells treated with DHT or GLP1 and then subjected to IP of AR protein and subsequent mass spec to identify binding partners of AR relevant to Insulin signaling and secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: 832/3 cells were treated with vehicle, DHT (10-8 M) (Steraloids) or DHT and GLP-1 (10-8 M) all treatments were added 5 minutes before harvesting, DHT was added the day before as well. Cell monolayers were rinsed with phosphate buffered saline and then scraped with nondenaturing IP buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Sigma-Aldrich) and protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™, Sigma-Aldrich). The cell suspension was passed through a 20-gauge needle 10 times. The whole-cell extract was purified by centrifugation at 12000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Cell extracts (1 mg total protein) were incubated with 2μg of anti-AR antibody (Abcam) or rabbit IgG control (Cell Signaling) overnight at 4°C under rotation. Protein A-conjugated agarose beads (Cell Signaling) were added to protein-antibody mixture the following day for 2 hours. The beads were pelleted at 13,000 g for 3 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and beads were washed 5 times with ice-cold 1X IP buffer. The IP antibody and immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from the beads into 4X SDS loading buffer containing BME by boiling the samples for 10 minutes at 98°C. Samples were flicked during the heat step to ensure efficient elution. The purified samples were briefly centrifuged, and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained, and the protein bands were cut from the gel following PierceTM Silver Stain Kit for Mass Spectrometry (ThermoFisher) protocol. The gel bands were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and destained with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The reduction was performed by adding 25 mM Dithiothreitol in 25 NH4HCO3 and incubating at 37 oC for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 55 mM Iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. Gel pieces were dehydrated by acetonitrile wash, dried by SpeedVac for 2 min, and submitted to trypsin digestion with a 1:50 ratio of protein vs. enzyme solution at 37 oC overnight. Digested peptides were extracted using 1% formic acid and an additional extraction with 70% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid. The final tryptic peptides were dried to concentrate the peptides and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MSMS analysis.   LC-MS: Proteomics analysis was performed on a Q Exacitive Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC and nanoelectrospray ionization. Peptides were separated with an nC18 analytical column (C18 Pepmap 100, 3 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm i.d. ×150 mm) using 100 min buffer gradient a low flow rate at 300 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition in positive mode was performed for data collection. Acquired data was searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using the SEQUEST search engine with label-free quantification workflow against the UniProt database of Rattus norvegicus (http://www.uniprot.org; Proteome ID: UP000002494). Search parameters were trypsin cleavage sites with two missed cleavage site allowance; precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at ±10ppm and 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. As most proteins identified in IP experiments are non-specific binders, we compared proteins identified in the AR vs IgG interactome and eliminated contaminant proteins that were enriched in both.

### Data Protocol
Proteins enriched in the AR immunoprecipitate by 2-fold up or down between treatments were selected. Enriched proteins were analyzed and integrated using Enrichr (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/), Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com) and STRING version 11.5 (https://string-db.org/). Proteins of interest were selected for heatmap representation, where proteins were normalized via a Z-test in R using customized scripts and plotted using the ggplot2 and heatmap.2 packages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ins1, Beta cell biology, Androgen receptor, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Post-Doctoral research fellow
Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology Tulane University

### Submitter
Mirza Muhammad Fahd Qadir

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Franck Mauvais-Jarvis
Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology Tulane University


