### Accession
PXD018439

### Title
Time-resolved proteomic profiling for CHO-K1 fed-batch cultivations

### Description
The majority of recombinant protein therapeutics are produced with Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells. Productivity depends on the initial cell line engineering in terms of integration site or choice of an appropriate promotor for the recombinant gene expression, as well as media and process parameter optimization. Here, proteomic profiling is used to identify optimization targets for a pharmaceutical relevant cell line system. Triplicates of CHO-K1 cell 2 L bioreactor fedbatch cultivations were performed and daily sampled for nLC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Collected data from day 3 up to day 11 showed high Pearson correlation of 93.7 ± 4 % with ca. 2500 proteins quantified. The different growth phases were separated by principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering approaches. Subsequent statistical analysis revealed distinct protein profiles, where steady increase or decrease over time were the most prominent clusters. Fisher exact enrichment tests yielded in significantly enriched protein annotations which were successfully mapped to growth and metabolic changes during fedbatch cell cultivation. Major improvements in cellular and process understanding were achieved and yielded in the identification of promising new targets, like strong endogenous promotors, for cellular engineering and process optimization of this biopharmaceutical relevant cell line.

### Sample Protocol
For LFQ-based proteomic analysis 3-6 ml cells of three biological replicates were harvested every day from day three. Cells were centrifuged at 400 g for 5 minutes, washed with PBS and stored at -80 °C. 2 ml of Tris EDTA (TE)-buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 0.25 % phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II & III (Sigma, now Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), pH 8.5) was added to lyse the cells and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. The supernatant was collected after 30 minutes centrifugation at 4 °C and 17.000 g and quantified by BCA. The subsequent MS sample preparation workflow included reduction (7 mM DTT, 30 min, 56 °C) and alkylation of cysteines (20 mM IAA, 30 min, room temperature, dark).  A reaction stop was induced by 14 mM DTT (45 min, room temperature, dark). 30 µg whole cell lysate was used for an overnight trypsin digestion with a 1:100 trypsin to protein ratio (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Mannheim, Germany). A pre-purification with polymeric reversed phase WWP2 sorbent was performed via the semi-automated positive pressure workstation Resolvex A200 (Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland). Peptides were resolubilized in 15 µl of LC-MS grade water with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 5 % acetonitrile (ACN). The concentration was measured by NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). 2 µg of purified peptides were injected and separated by UltiMate 3000 RSLC Dionex system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) on a 25 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18-LC-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) with an effective gradient of 1 - 35 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min within 60 minutes. Online ESI-Orbitrap mass spectrometry measurements were carried out by a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with the dual ESI/MALDI interface (Spectroglyph LLC, Kennewick, Washington, United States). Full MS spectra were measured with a resolution of 70.000, an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT of 64 ms in a scan range of 350-2000 m/z. In a data-dependent top 10 acquisition mode precursors were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 28 and measured with a resolution of 17.500, a AGC target of 2e5 and maximum IT of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
LFQ-based protein quantification was performed in MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 (Tyanova et al. 2016a), with applying “match between run”. The default parameters for label-free algorithm within MaxQuant were used (min. ratio count >2, fast LFQ, stabilize large ratios, require MS/MS for comparison and advanced site intensities were set to true), except that only unique peptides were used for peptide quantification. For database searches C. griseus and Mus musculus (UniProt, TrEMBL) database were used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set as followed: Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to two and a FDR of 0.01 was selected for protein and peptide identification. Subsequent filtering and statistics was performed in Perseus version 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al. 2016b). The expression proteomic evaluation workflow covers filtering of “proteingroups.txt” for “only identified by site”, reverse and potential contaminants and included log2 transformation. Next to filtering for a minimum of three valid quantitative data a categorical annotation into groups for each time point was performed to calculate statistical relevant hits via ANOVA or two-sample t-test (Permutation-based FDR < 0.05, S0: 0.1). The C. griseus functional protein annotation (GO and KEGG) was carried out within the Perseus environment with a database assembled by the German network for bioinformatics infrastructure (https://www.denbi.de/). For GO annotations C. griseus protein sequences were blasted against M. musculus SwissProt/TrEMBL database, for KEGG annotations the online tool BlastKOALA was used (Kanehisa et al. 2016). Significantly enriched annotations were calculated via Fisher-exact test (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.02) and were based on significantly changed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Fedbatch cultivation, Nlc-ms/ms, Proteomics, Cho

### Affiliations
Bielefeld University
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany

### Submitter
Louise Schelletter

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Noll
Cell Culture Technology, Technical Faculty, Bielefeld University, Germany


