### Accession
PXD026450

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein glycosylation enriched by HILIC and Ti-IMAC

### Description
In this work, we performed a fully descriptive analysis N- and O- linked glycosylation of SARS-COV-2 S glycoprotein. We investigated that dual-functionalized Ti-IMAC material enable the simultaneous enrichment and separation of neutral and sialyl glycopeptides of a recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein from HEK293, which will eliminate the signal suppression of neutral glycopeptides to sialyl glycopeptides and improve the glycoform coverage of S protein. We have profiled 19 of its 22 potential N-glycosylated sites with 398 unique glycoforms in dual-functional Ti-IMIAC approach that is 1.6-fold of that in conventional HILIC method. We also identified O-linked glycosylation site that was not found in dual-functional Ti-IMIAC approach. In addition, we have also identified mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) glycosylation, which substantially expands the current knowledge of the spike protein’s glycosylation and enables the investigation of the influence of mannose-6-Phosphate on its cell entry.

### Sample Protocol
Protein source and reagents. The recombinant full lenth SARS-CoV-2 spike (40589-V08H4, Met1-Pro1213-His-tag; R683A, R685A, F817P, A892P, A899P, A942P, K986P, V987P) protein expressed in the HEK 293 cell line was obtained from Sino Biological US Inc. (Wayne, PA, USA). The purity of the purchased protein was > 90 %. Trypsin and Chymotrypsin, Sequencing Grade, were from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).  Protein digestion. Aliquots of SARS-CoV-2 S protein were dissolved in 8M urea/50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8) to a final concentration of 8 mg/mL. The S protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 120 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The protein solution was diluted to 1 M urea with 50 mM TEAB and then trypsin was added to the samples with protein: trypsin ratio at 50:1 and incubated at 37 oC water bath for 8 h. After trypsin digestion, the protein was continually digested by chymotrypsin with protein: chymotrypsin ratio at 50:1 and incubated at 37 oC water bath for 16 h. Glycopeptide enrichment. Aliquots of 2 μg digested S proteins were dry down in SpeedVac and prepared for either HILIC enrichment or dual-functional Ti-IMAC enrichment: HILIC enrichment was performed with homemade HILIC stage-tip which uses a neutral, polar material (PolyHYDROXYETHYL A: 12μm and 300 Å from PolyLC Inc.). Briefly, 2 mg of cotton wool was weighed and inserted into a 200 µL pipette tip. Place the pipette tip on a 2 mL sample vial with the help of an adapter unit. HILIC beads were dissolved into 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solvent and the HILIC beads slurry was vortexed for 15 min to activate the HILIC beads. Transfer the HILIC slurry onto the top of the cotton wool. Centrifuge the sample vial to remove the solvent at 500 xg for 2 min. Add 200 µL 1% TFA to flush the beads. Centrifuge the sample vial at 500 xg for 2 min to remove the liquid. Condition the HILIC beads with 200 µL 80% ACN/1% TFA for three times. 2 μg tryptic S proteins sample was dissolved in 100 µL 80% ACN/1% TFA and loaded onto the HILIC stage-tip. Centrifuge the sample vial at 500 xg for 2 min and flow through of the sample was re-loaded to the HILIC stage-tip twice. Then wash away the non-glycopeptides with 100 µL 80% ACN/ 1% TFA for three times, and then elute the glycopeptides with 100µL 0.1% FA water for twice. The sample was immediately dried down in SpeedVac. Samples were stored at -20 oC and re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) before LC-MS/MS analysis and load 20% of each sample for analysis. Dual-functional Ti-IMAC enrichment was performed in HILIC-mode, the 2 μg tryptic S proteins sample was loaded onto 100 μg Ti(IV)-IMAC materials with 100 μl 80% ACN/3%TFA buffer, which is similar with the conventional HILIC enrichment, and an aqueous layer will be generated across the substantial hydroxyl, amine groups and phosphate chelated Ti (IV) ions on the material surface. Wash the beads twice with 100 μl 80% ACN/0.1%TFA buffer. After enrichment, the standard protein samples were eluted with following two elution steps: 1) 100 μl 0.1% FA (v/v) for twice, 2) 100 μl 6% TFA (v/v) for twice. Samples were immediately dried down in SpeedVac. Samples were stored at -20 oC and re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) 20% of each sample for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Enriched S protein glycopeptides were analyzed by Ultimate 3000 nanoLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Re-dissolved sample was injected onto a 75 μm i.d. × 15 cm length homemade column with an integrated HF etched emitter tip and packed with 1.7 μm, 130 Å, BEH C18 material from a Waters UPLC column (Waters, Milford, MA). Peptides were separated with a gradient that ramped from 97% solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O) and 3% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 30% solvent B over 80 min and then kept each of 75% solvent B, 95% solvent B, and 100% solvent A for 10 min. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. MS method was set according to the following parameters: MS scan range (m/z) = 400-2000; resolution = 120,000; AGC target = 1.0e6; maximum injection time = 250 ms; included charge state = 2-6; dynamic exclusion duration = 30 s. MS/MS method is a top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode in which all MS/MS dissociations were performed with stepped higher energy collisional dissociation (step-HCD): resolution = 60,000; AGC target =1.0e5; maximum injection time = 150 ms; stepped collision energy = 22%, 30%, 38%.

### Data Protocol
Data processing. Byonic V3.10 (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA) was used to analyze the acquired MS and MS/MS spectra of intact glycopeptides. An advantage of this software was that it allowed manually adding M6P glycans in the glycan database for searching. Raw files were searched against SARS-COV-2 spike protein sequences downloaded from Uniprot with properly mutation added. Precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm were selected. The phosphorylation of serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y) and the oxidation of methionine (M) were set as variable modifications. Meanwhile, the  carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification. Common N-linked glycopeptides searching used a human N-glycome database that contains 182 glycans and O-glycome database that contains 70 glycans. In addition, M6P glycopeptides were searched by expanding the N-glycome database to include N-linked M6P glycans consisting of HexNAc (2-4)-Hex (3-9)-Phospho (1-2) modification. Peptide identifications were filtered at two-dimensional false discovery rate (2D FDR) <1%, PEP 2D <0.05, |Log Prob|>1, and Byonic Score >150. Manual inspection of MS/MS spectra of M6P glycopeptides was performed to examine if Byonic identification results contained phosphorylated hexose diagnostic ions. All searches allowed for a maximum total of two common modifications. Glycoforms were categorized according to the follow rules: 1. High Mannose: glycan composition was “HexNAc(2)Hex(5-9)”; 2. Paucimannose : glycan composition contains variations in “HexNAc(1-2)Hex(0-4)”; 3: Mannose-6-Phosphate glycosylation: glycan composition contains “phospho”; 4: Sialylation: glycan composition contains “NeuAc”; 5: Fucosylation: glycan composition contains “Fuc” but remove the data contains “NeuAc”; 6: Hybrid & Complex: glycan composition minus all of above five types.

### Publication Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) presents a serious threat to human health all over the world. The development of effective vaccines has been focusing on the spike (S) glycoprotein, which mediates viral invasion to human cells through its interaction with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. In this work, we perform analytical characterization of N- and O-linked glycosylation of the SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein. We explore the novel use of dual-functionalized titanium (IV)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Ti-IMAC) material for simultaneous enrichment and separation of neutral and sialyl glycopeptides of a recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S glycoprotein from HEK293 cells. This strategy helps eliminate signal suppression from neutral glycopeptides for the detection of sialyl glycopeptides and improves the glycoform coverage of the S protein. We profiled 19 of its 22 potential N-glycosylated sites with 398 unique glycoforms using the dual-functional Ti-IMAC approach, which exhibited improvement of coverage by 1.6-fold compared to the conventional hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) glycopeptide enrichment method. We also identified O-linked glycosylation site that was not found using the conventional HILIC approach. In addition, we reported on the identification of mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) glycosylation, which substantially expands the current knowledge of the spike protein's glycosylation landscape and enables future investigation into the influence of M6P glycosylation of the spike protein on its cell entry.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Spike protein

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA. Email: lingjun.li@wisc.edu 2Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

### Submitter
Junfeng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
1School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA. Email: lingjun.li@wisc.edu 2Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.


