### Accession
PXD005928

### Title
Proteome differences between sporulated oocysts of ToxoDB#9 and Type II Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Understanding of protein expression difference in the same stage of T.gondii among different genotypes will facilitate the elucidation of genotypic divergence among the T.gondii strains. A 4-plex iTRAQ (isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation) based LC-MS/MS approach was employed to survey the differentially expressed proteins of sporulated oocysts between ToxoDB#1 (PRU) strain and ToxoDB#9 (PYS) strain for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
PRU strain and PYS strain oocysts from cat feces were purified and were sporulated with 2% H2SO4 at room temperature for 7 days after centrifuging the suspension of oocysts at 350g. Total protein from the same amount sporulated oocysts of PRU strain and PYS strain of T. gondii were extracted and the protein concentration was measured by BCA assay. 100μg protein of each sample was reduced, alkylated, and then precipitated. Proteins of Prugniuad (PRU) strain sporulated oocysts and PYS strain sporulated oocysts were labelled with 113, 114 and 119, 121, respectively. Then, SCX fraction and LC-MS/MS analysis were conducted.

### Data Protocol
Mascot generic format (.mgf) data file transformed from raw MS data by Proteome Discoverer™ 1.4 were queried to Toxoplasma gondii ME49 strain database (http://www.ToxoDB.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/TgondiiME49/fasta/data/). Proteins were further identified and quantited with ProteinPilotTM Software 4.5 (AB SCIEX) and parameters for identification and identification were set as follows: FDR<0.01 for identification of peptides and proteins; confidence level of 95% or unused confidence score larger>1.3 for quantification. Criteria for differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) designation were a fold-change≥1.5 for upregulated proteins and a fold-change≤0.67 for downregulated proteins. the biological functions of significantly differentially expressed proteins were performed with Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analysis (http://www.geneontology.org). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/) was used to analyse pathway DEPs involves. Search Tool of the Retrieval of Interaction Genes/Proteins (STRING) database was used to predict protein-protein interactions for DEPs

### Publication Abstract
Research exploring the proteome of <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> oocysts has gained momentum over the past few years. However, little is known about the oocyst's protein repertoires that contribute to differential virulence among <i>T. gondii</i> strains. Here, we used isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation-based proteomic analysis of oocysts of two <i>T. gondii</i> strains exhibiting the virulent PYS (ToxoDB#9) phenotype versus the less virulent PRU (Type II, ToxoDB#1) phenotype. Our aim was to determine protein expression patterns that contribute to the virulence of a particular phenotype. A total of 2,551 proteins were identified, of which 374 were differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (|log<sub>2</sub> fold change| &#x2265; 0.58 and <i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). DEPs included 192 increased and 182 decreased proteins. Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway analyses revealed a large number of DEPs enriched in various metabolic processes. Protein interaction network analysis using STRING identified inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH), Bifunctional GMP synthase/glutamine amidotransferase protein, Glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase, and Citrate synthase as the top four hubs. Of the 22 virulence proteins commonly expressed in the oocysts of the two strains, 13 and 2 proteins were increased in PYS strain and PRU strain, respectively. Also, 10 and 3 of the 22 identified oocyst wall proteins showed higher expression in oocysts of PRU strain and PYS strain, respectively. These findings revealed new proteomic differences in the oocysts of <i>T. gondii</i> strains of different genotypic backgrounds.

### Keywords
Itraq; differentially expressed protein (dep), Oxoplasma gondii; sporulated oocyst; genotype

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
Ze-Xiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


