### Accession
PXD038811

### Title
FOX transcription factors are common regulators of Wnt/β-catenin signaling

### Description
The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is a critical regulator of development and stem cell maintenance. Mounting evidence suggests that the context-specific outcome of Wnt signaling is determined by the collaborative action of multiple transcription factors, including members of the highly conserved forkhead box (FOX) protein family. The contribution of FOX transcription factors to Wnt signaling has not been investigated in a systemic manner. Here, by combining β-catenin reporter assays with Wnt pathway-focused qPCR arrays and proximity proteomics of selected FOX family members, we determine that most FOX proteins are involved in the regulation of Wnt pathway activity and the expression of Wnt ligands and target genes. We conclude that FOX proteins are common regulators of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway that may control the outcome of Wnt signaling in a tissue-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
The labelling and sample preparation of TurboID experiments was performed as described previously (Branon et al., 2018, Pizzolato et al., 2022). Briefly, N-terminal TurboID-FOX proteins were transiently transfected into 293T cells using jetOPTIMUS (Polyplus Transfection, Illkirch, France). After 21 h of transfection, cells were treated with 50 µM biotin, and incubated for 3 h at 37 ºC, 5% CO2. Cells were surface washed with ice cold PBS for three times to remove excess biotin and then harvested centrifuging at 1500 rpm for 15 min.  Cells were washed thrice with ice-cold PBS buffer by centrifugation to remove any remaining biotin. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail for 15 min on ice. Pre-washed streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare, USA) were added to the cell lysate and incubated overnight at 4 ºC with end-over-end rotation. The beads were washed once with 1 ml of RIPA buffer, once with 1 ml of 1M KCl, once with 1 ml of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 ml of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and twice with 1 ml RIPA lysis buffer. The beads then transferred to new Eppendorf tube and washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) and 2 M urea/50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) buffer. Beads were incubated with 0.4 μg of trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 2 M urea/50 mM Tris containing 1 mM DTT for 1 h at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. After incubation, the supernatant was collected and the beads were washed twice with 60 μl of 2 M urea/50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) and the washes were combined with the collected supernatant. The supernatant was reduced with 4 mM DTT for 30 min at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. The samples were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at 25 °C with end-over-end rotation. For the complete digestion of the sample an additional 0.5 μg of trypsin was added and incubated at 25 °C overnight with end-over-end rotation. After overnight digestion the samples were desalted with C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) Pipette tips and then dried with vacuum centrifuge. TurboID samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry, using an Easy nano LC 1200 system interfaced with a nanoEasy spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the chromatographic separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100A 75 µm x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nanoLC was operating at 300 nl/min flow rate with a gradient (6-40% in 95 min and 5 min hold at 100%) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) for 100 min.  Separated peptides were electro sprayed and analyzed using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in positive polarity in a data-dependent mode. Full scans were performed at 120,000 resolutions at a range of 380–1400 m/z. The top 15 most intense multiple charged ions were isolated (1.2 m/z isolation window) and fragmented at a resolution of 30,000 with a dynamic exclusion of 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by Proteome Discover 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) searching the UniProt database with Sequest HT search engine. The search parameters were: Taxonomy: Homo sapiens; Enzymes; trypsin with two missed cleavages, no variable Modifications; fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl; Peptide Mass Tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS Fragment Tolerance, 0.02 Da. Quantification of the analyzed data were performed with Scaffold 5 a Proteome Software using total spectral count.

### Publication Abstract
The Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway is a critical regulator of development and stem cell maintenance. Mounting evidence suggests that the outcome of Wnt signaling is determined by the collaborative action of multiple transcription factors, including members of the highly conserved forkhead box (FOX) protein family. However, the contribution of FOX transcription factors to Wnt signaling has not been investigated in a systematic manner. Here, we performed complementary screens of all 44 human FOX proteins to identify new Wnt pathway regulators. By combining &#x3b2;-catenin reporter assays with Wnt pathway-focused qPCR arrays and proximity proteomics of selected candidates, we determine that most FOX proteins are involved in the regulation of Wnt pathway activity. As proof-of-principle, we additionally characterize class D and I FOX transcription factors as physiologically relevant regulators of Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling. We conclude that FOX proteins are common regulators of Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin-dependent gene transcription that may control Wnt pathway activity in a tissue-specific manner.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Lc-ms/ms, Fox transcription factors, Turboid

### Affiliations
LINKÖPING UNIVERSITY
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

### Submitter
Lavanya Moparthi

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Koch
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences (BKV), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden; Wallenberg Centre for Molecular Medicine (WCMM), Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.


