### Accession
PXD027519

### Title
MAA-SIP biomethanisation with hydrogen addition

### Description
By using metagenome resolved protein stable isotope probing (protein-SIP) through incubations of identical reactors with 13C labelled bicarbonate over a period of 48 hours, the study aims to map differences in the metabolic behaviour of the microbial community during anaerobic digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using bead beating followed by freeze-thraw cycles. Extracted proteins were digested using in-gel digestion protocol, following desalting and analysis of tryptic peptides by automated liquid chromatograph-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
To identify the peptides/proteins a search using OMSSA in an OpenMS pipeline, with the precursor mass tolerance set to 5 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to 0.01 Da, and false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%. RIA and the labelling ratio (LR) were determined using OpenMS and the MetaProSIP tool with a minimum correlation of 0.7 and a mass window of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Biogas production from organic waste is a waste-to-energy technology with the potential to contribute significantly to sustainable energy production. Upgrading of biogas using in situ biomethanation with hydrogen has the potential for surplus electricity storage, and delivery of biogas with a methane content of &gt;90%, allowing for easier integration into the natural gas grid, as well as conversion to other products. Microbial communities in biomethanation reactors undergo changes, however, these changes are largely unexplored. In the present study, metagenome-resolved protein stable isotope probing (Protein-SIP) was applied to laboratory scale batch incubations operating under anaerobic digestion, and (pre-adapted) biomethanation conditions, fed with <sup>13</sup>C-labelled bicarbonate, in order to gain insight into the microbial activities during CO<sub>2</sub>-reduction. The strongest and most microbially diverse isotopic incorporation was observed in the pre-adapted biomethanation incubation. Furthermore, divergent incorporation of <sup>13</sup>C-labelled bicarbonate was also observed in the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway, with the anaerobic digester incubations primarily showing labelled proteins in the peripheral pathways leading toward production of energy and biomass. The pre-adapted biomethanation incubations consumed H<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub>, but did not convert it to CH<sub>4</sub>, suggesting the production of acetate in these incubations, which was supported by heavy labelling of key enzymes in the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. Twelve (ten high quality) metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) coding for <sup>13</sup>C-incorporated proteins were extracted from the metagenome, eight of which contained one or more of the key genes in the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway, one of which was affiliated to Methanosarcina. Together, the findings in the present study deepen our knowledge surrounding microbial communities in biomethanation systems, and contribute to the development of better strategies for implementation of biogas upgrading and microbial management.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Anaplerotic carbon fixation, Wood-ljungdahl pathway, Protein-sip, Biomethanisation, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
1Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg E, Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
1Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, DK-9220, Aalborg E, Denmark


