### Accession
PXD013664

### Title
Proteome-wide lysine succinylome profiling and comprehensive analysis of protein lysine co-modification in developing rice seeds

### Description
Lysine succinylation has been recognized as a post-translational modification (PTM) in recent years. It is plausible that succinylation may have a vaster functional impact than acetylation due to bulkier structural changes and greater charge differences on the modified lysine residue. Currently, however, the quantity of identified succinylated proteins and their corresponding functions in cereal plants remain largely unknown. In this study, 854 lysine succinylation sites on 347 proteins have been identified by a thorough investigation in developing rice seeds. Six motifs were revealed as preferred amino-acid sequence arrangements for succinylation sites, and a noteworthy motif preference was discovered in proteins associated with different biological processes, molecular functions, pathways, and domains. Remarkably, heavy succinylation was detected on major seed storage proteins, in conjunction with key enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism and starch biosynthetic pathways for rice seed development. Conserved succinylated proteins were identified amongst varying organisms. Rice proteins with co-modifications of succinylation, acetylation, malonylation, crotonylation, and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation were identified through a comprehensive comparison analysis. A striking number of highly conserved succinyl-proteins and multi-modified proteins were shown to be involved in vital metabolic events. Our study delivers a platform for expansive investigation of molecular networks administrating cereal seed development via PTMs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Proteins were isolated using a phenol extraction method (33-35, 37, 38). The ground plant organs/tissue were mixed with an extraction buffer (0.9 M sucrose, 0.5 M Tris-HCl pH 8.7, 0.05 M EDTA, 0.1 M KCl, and 2% β-mercaptoethanol), combined with subsequent addition of equal volume of saturated phenol (pH 8.0), and homogenization for 30 minutes. The phenol phase was recovered from homogenate by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The phenol extraction procedure was repeated three times. The final collection of phenol was mixed with five volumes of precipitation buffer (methanol with 0.1 M ammonium acetate and 1% β–mercaptoethanol) and resided overnight at −80°C for precipitation. The crude protein was obtained by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Afterward, the protein pellet was washed three times with cold precipitation buffer, accompanied by three-time additional washes with ice-cold 70% ethanol. The pellet was lyophilized in a speed vacuum and stored at -80 °C before proper usage.  Nonenzymatic succinylation by succinyl-CoA in vitro Fifteen dpa developing rice seed proteins were prepared in PBS (pH 7.2) at 10mg/ml. A total of 100μl (1mg) protein was mixed with freshly prepared succinyl-CoA sodium salt (S1129, Sigma) in H2O to a final concentration of 0.5mM or 1mM. Reactions were incubated at 28℃ for 12 hr with occasionally shaking. Sequentially, the proteins were purified by Sep-Pak C18 Plus Short Cartridge (WAT020515, Waters), and were lyophilized in a speed vacuum and stored at -80 °C before proper usage. All succinyl-CoA sodium salt treatments were performed with three technical replicates.  Western blot analysis Protein samples extracted from different rice organs/tissue were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membrane (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) for Western blot. Succinylated proteins were detected by utilizing rabbit-derived pan anti-succinyl lysine antibody (PTM-401, PTM Biolabs, Chicago, IL, USA) in a 1:1000 (v/v) dilution overnight at 4°C, accompanied by gentle shaking in reference to the supplier’s instruction.  Trypsin digestion The lyophilized 15 dpa rice seed protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) and the protein content was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Subsequently, 25 milligrams of protein was precipitated with cold 25% TCA (Trichloroacetic acid) for 2 hours at -20 °C, and the resulting precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. Before digestion, the protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) for 1 hour at 37 °C, and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide) for 45 minutes in dark setting at room temperature. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted with an addition of 100 mM NH4HCO3 for urea reduction to the desired concentration of less than 2M. Sequencing-grade trypsin (V5111, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) was supplemented at a 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio for an overnight digestion period and likewise at a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio for an additional 4 hour digestion period at 37 °C. HPLC fractionation and affinity enrichment of lysine succinylated peptides The peptides were fractionated into 12 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC with Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) after digestion. Briefly, peptides were initially separated into 80 fractions in a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 10). Then, the peptides were further combined into 12 fractions in a noncontiguous manner as reported (39). For succinylated peptides enrichment, fractionated peptides were dissolved once more in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed anti-succinyl-lysine agarose beads (PTM-402, PTM Biolabs, Chicago, IL, USA) at 4°C overnight, accompanied by gentle oscillation. Afterward, the beads were rinsed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ice-cold ddH2O. Enriched peptides were eluted by 0.1% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) from the beads and purified with C18 ZipTips (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) column.

### Data Protocol
The protein and succinylation sites were identified by MaxQuant software (http://www.maxquant.org/) coupled with Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) (40). The mass spectra of the raw data were searched against UniProt_Oryza sativa_japonica database (63,195 sequences, released July 2014) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing a maximum of 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was distinguished as a fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine, succinylation on both lysine and protein N-terminal were specified as fluctuating modifications. The mass error was programmed to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were adjusted to a quantity of 1%, and minimum peptide length was adjusted to a quantity of 7. Lysine succinylation sites identified with a localization probability of < 0.75 were eliminated. The remaining parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine succinylation has been recognized as a post-translational modification (PTM) in recent years. It is plausible that succinylation may have a vaster functional impact than acetylation because of bulkier structural changes and more significant charge differences on the modified lysine residue. Currently, however, the quantity and identity of succinylated proteins and their corresponding functions in cereal plants remain largely unknown. In this study, we estimated the native succinylation occupancy on lysine was between 2% to 10% in developing rice seeds. Eight hundred fifty-four lysine succinylation sites on 347 proteins have been identified by a thorough investigation in developing rice seeds. Six motifs were revealed as preferred amino acid sequence arrangements for succinylation sites, and a noteworthy motif preference was identified in proteins associated with different biological processes, molecular functions, pathways, and domains. Remarkably, heavy succinylation was detected on major seed storage proteins, in conjunction with critical enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism and starch biosynthetic pathways for rice seed development. Meanwhile, our results showed that the modification pattern of <i>in vitro</i> nonenzymatically succinylated proteins was different from those of the proteins isolated from cells in Western blots, suggesting that succinylation is not generated via nonenzymatic reaction in the cells, at least not completely. Using the acylation data obtained from the same rice tissue, we mapped many sites harboring lysine succinylation, acetylation, malonylation, crotonylation, and 2-hydroxisobutyrylation in rice seed proteins. A striking number of proteins with multiple modifications were shown to be involved in critical metabolic events. Given that these modification moieties are intermediate products of multiple cellular metabolic pathways, these targeted lysine residues may mediate the crosstalk between different metabolic pathways via modifications by different moieties. Our study exhibits a platform for extensive investigation of molecular networks administrating cereal seed development and metabolism via PTMs.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification; lysine succinylation; succinylome; rice; storage nutrient; seeds

### Affiliations
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology and Plant Pathology, Mississippi State University, Starkville MS, 39762, USA

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaohua Peng
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology and Plant Pathology, Mississippi State University, Starkville MS, 39762, USA


