### Accession
PXD011521

### Title
Global proteomic profiling of Salmonella infection by a giant phage - 2 sample SPN3US experiment

### Description
Preliminary analyses of Salmonella cells infected with phage SPN3US and a control at 20 minutes post infection.

### Sample Protocol
SPN3US was propagated on Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium in M9CA medium supplemented with 2 mM MgSO4, 1 mM CaCl2 and 0.4% glucose.  At an OD600 of 0.30, two aliquots were taken, one was infected with SPN3US at an MOI of 2 and to the uninfected control, an equivalent volume of SM buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgSO4, 0.01% (w/v) gelatin] was added.  Cultures were incubated with shaking (150 rpm), and at 20 minutes post infection a 15-mL aliquot of each culture was centrifuged at 4000 g for 2 min at room temperature to pellet the cells.  The cells were resuspended in SDS loading buffer and immediately boiled. Proteins were separated by electrophoresis in Criterion XT MOPS 12% SDS-PAGE reducing gels (Bio-Rad), with subsequent protein visualization by staining with Coomassie blue.  Each gel lane was divided into six slices.  After de-staining, proteins in the gel slices were reduced with TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride] and then alkylated with iodoacetamide before digestion with trypsin (Promega).  HPLC-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) was accomplished on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (Matrix Science; London, UK) was used to search the MS files against a locally generated SPN3US protein database that had been concatenated with the SwissProt database (2012_11_170320; version 51.6).   Subset searching of the Mascot data, determination of probabilities of peptide assignments and protein identifications, were accomplished by Scaffold (Proteome Software).  MS data files for each entire gel lane were combined via the “MudPIT” option.

### Publication Abstract
The 240-kb <i>Salmonella</i> phage SPN3US genome encodes 264 gene products, many of which are functionally uncharacterized. We have previously used mass spectrometry to define the proteomes of wild-type and mutant forms of the SPN3US virion. In this study, we sought to determine whether this technique was suitable for the characterization of the SPN3US proteome during liquid infection. Mass spectrometry of SPN3US-infected cells identified 232 SPN3US and 1,994 <i>Salmonella</i> proteins. SPN3US proteins with related functions, such as proteins with roles in DNA replication, transcription, and virion formation, were coordinately expressed in a temporal manner. Mass spectral counts showed the four most abundant SPN3US proteins to be the major capsid protein, two head ejection proteins, and the functionally unassigned protein gp22. This high abundance of gp22 in infected bacteria contrasted with its absence from mature virions, suggesting that it might be the scaffold protein, an essential head morphogenesis protein yet to be identified in giant phages. We identified homologs to SPN3US gp22 in 45 related giant phages, including &#x3d5;KZ, whose counterpart is also abundant in infected bacteria but absent in the virion. We determined the &#x3d5;KZ counterpart to be cleaved <i>in vitro</i> by its prohead protease, an event that has been observed to promote head maturation of some other phages. Our findings are consistent with a scaffold protein assignment for SPN3US gp22, although direct evidence is required for its confirmation. These studies demonstrate the power of mass spectral analyses for facilitating the acquisition of new knowledge into the molecular events of viral infection.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> "Giant" phages with genomes &gt;200&#x2009;kb are being isolated in increasing numbers from a range of environments. With hosts such as <i>Salmonella enterica</i>, <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, and <i>Erwinia amylovora</i>, these phages are of interest for phage therapy of multidrug-resistant pathogens. However, our understanding of how these complex phages interact with their hosts is impeded by the proportion (&#x223c;80%) of their gene products that are functionally uncharacterized. To develop the repertoire of techniques for analysis of phages, we analyzed a liquid infection of <i>Salmonella</i> phage SPN3US (240-kb genome) using third-generation mass spectrometry. We observed the temporal production of phage proteins whose genes collectively represent 96% of the SPN3US genome. These findings demonstrate the sensitivity of mass spectrometry for global proteomic profiling of virus-infected cells, and the identification of a candidate for a major head morphogenesis protein will facilitate further studies into giant phage head assembly.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Phage spn3us

### Affiliations
Rochester Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Julie Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Thomas
Rochester Institute of Technology


