### Accession
PXD000806

### Title
wheat seed phosphoproteome under water deficit

### Description
Drought is one of the most serious abiotic stresses, under which the crop yield is significantly reduced. Elite winter wheat cultivar Henong 341 (Triticum aestivum L.) was grown in experimental fields of China Hebei province (116°37′23″E, 37°41′02″N) Two different treatment conditions were designed: rain-fed (no water irrigation) and well-watered (water irrigation) conditions at jointing and flowering stages. Each treatment included three biological replicates and each plot was 25m2. In this study, a comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis of developing grains of 26th day after flowering (DAF) in Chinese bread wheat cultivar Henong 341 under well-watered and water-deficit conditions was performed by means of TiO2 enrichment, LC/MS/MS analysis, and Label-free peptide-intensity quantification. Under well-watered conditions, a total of 590 unique phosphopeptides corresponding to 603 nonredundant phosphorylation sites, representing 471 phosphoproteins, were identified. While under water deficit, 63 unique phosphopeptides, corresponding to 61 phosphoproteins, were found to be differently regulated in phosphorylation status compared to well-watered conditions (≥2 fold intensities).

### Sample Protocol
Chinese winter wheat cultivar Henong 341 (Triticum aestivum L.) was grown in experimental fields of China Agricultural University Research Center, Wuqiao, Hebei province (116°37′23″E, 37°41′02″N) in the 2011-2012 growing season. Two different treatment conditions were designed: rain-fed (no water irrigation) and well-watered (water irrigation as field cultivation) conditions at jointing and flowering stages. Each treatment included three biological replicates and each plot was 25 m2. At the experimental location, the average annual sunshine was 2690 hours and the average annual temperature was 12.6°C. Water table ranged from 6 to 9 m, and the annual precipitation during 2011-2012 growth season was 153.9 mm. The well-watered treatment at jointing and flowering stages was the same as local field cultivation and water irrigation were conducted twice in total (each with 750 m3/hm2).The developing grains at 26 DAF from two treatments and three biological replicates were collected and stored at -70°C prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.25), and searched against the wheat database. Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerance was 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for the MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <1.0% for the identification of both peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length was set to 6. In this study, MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.25) was used to calculate the PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Potential phosphorylation residues were then grouped into three categories depending on their PTM localization probabilities. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used for the identification of phosphorylation residues. Spectra without residue-determining ions led to the identification of phosphopeptides with undetermined residues.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat (Triticum aestivum), one of the most important cereal crops, is often threatened by drought. In this study, water deficit significantly reduced the height of plants and yield of grains. To explore further the effect of drought stress on the development and yield of grains, we first performed a large scale phosphoproteome analysis of developing grains in wheat. A total of 590 unique phosphopeptides, representing 471 phosphoproteins, were identified under well-watered conditions. Motif-X analysis showed that four motifs were enriched, including [sP], [Rxxs], [sDxE], and [sxD]. Through comparative phosphoproteome analysis between well-watered and water-deficit conditions, we found that 63 unique phosphopeptides, corresponding to 61 phosphoproteins, showed significant changes in phosphorylation level (&#x2265;2-fold intensities). Functional analysis suggested that some of these proteins may be involved in signal transduction, embryo and endosperm development of grains, and drought response and defense under water-deficit conditions. Moreover, we also found that some chaperones may play important roles in protein refolding or degradation when the plant is subjected to water stress. These results provide a detailed insight into the stress response and defense mechanisms of developmental grains at the phosphoproteome level. They also suggested some potential candidates for further study of transgenosis and drought stress as well as incorporation into molecular breeding for drought resistance.

### Keywords
Drought response and defense, Seed development, Phosphoproteome, Bread wheat, Water stress

### Affiliations
school of life sciences
College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University No. 105 Xisanhuan North Road, Beijing 100048 P. R. China

### Submitter
ming zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Zhang
College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University No. 105 Xisanhuan North Road, Beijing 100048 P. R. China


