### Accession
PXD034867

### Title
Proteomic profiling skin mucus of European eel Anguilla anguilla infected with Anguillid herpesvirus

### Description
Anguillid herpesvirus 1 (AngHV) is an important viral pathogen of eel. This study was conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms and immune response at the protein levels in the skin mucus of AngHV infected Anguilla anguilla. TMT-labelling proteomics with the liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used for protein quantitative identification. And the quantitative protein amount was detected by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. A total of 3486 proteins were identified, of which 2935 were quantified. When a protein fold change greater than 1.3 or less than 0.76 was considered to indicate a differentially expressed protein (DEP), 187 up-regulated proteins and 126 down-regulated proteins were detected, and most of the DEPs were enriched in CAMs pathway, intestinal immune pathway, herpes simplex virus 1 infection pathway, phagosome pathway and p53 signaling pathway. The results of the DEPs detected by PRM were highly consistent with that of the TMT-labelled quantitative proteomic analysis results.

### Sample Protocol
Anguilla anguilla (weight:10-15 g) were randomly divided into two groups (10 fish/group). Eels in challenged group were intraperitoneally (i.p) injected with 5×106 PFU of AngHV, and eels in control group were injected with EO cell culture medium. At 6 days post-injection, three eel from each group were sedated by tricaine methane sulfonate (TMS), sacrificed and dissected. Skin mucus of the eels were collected and stored at -80℃ for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis. The peptide fractions were dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid), and directly loaded onto a home-made reverse-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.), and separated with a increased linear gradient of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 6% to 23% for 26 min, 23% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% for 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Then, the peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC at 2.0 kV electrospray voltage. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS analysis using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Database search and protein identification. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Bioinformatics analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) annotations were derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and complemented with InterProScan software. The proteins were classified into biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions, respectively, and their subcellular localization was predicted using WoLF PSORT software. The annotated proteins were then matched into the corresponding pathways using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. Enrichment analysis of the identified proteins was performed using two-tailed Fisher’s exact test for each category to analyze the functional enrichment or depletion of the identified proteins compared with all of the proteins in the database. The terms with p values of less than 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Anguillid herpesvirus 1 (AngHV) is an important viral pathogen affecting eel. This study was designed to investigate the potential molecular mechanisms and immune response elicited at the protein levels in the skin mucus of AngHV-infected <i>Anguilla anguilla</i>. Tandem mass tag (TMT)-labelling proteomics with the liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used for performing quantitative identification of the proteins. In addition, the quantitative protein amount was detected by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. A total of 3486 proteins were identified, of which 2935 were quantified. When a protein fold change was greater than 1.3 or less than 0.76, it indicated a differentially expressed protein (DEP). Overall, 187 up-regulated proteins and 126 down-regulated proteins were detected, and most of the DEPs were enriched in the CAMs pathway, intestinal immune pathway, herpes simplex virus 1 infection pathway, phagosome pathway and p53 signaling pathway. The results of the DEPs detected by PRM were highly consistent with the results of the TMT-labelled quantitative proteomic analysis. The findings of this study provide an important research basis for further understanding the pathogenesis of AngHV.

### Keywords
Anguilla anguilla; anguillid herpesvirus; tmt-labelled; proteomic; skin mucus

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China;
Institute of Biotechnology, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Ying-Ying Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jun-Qing Ge
Institute of Biotechnology, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China;


