### Accession
PXD041872

### Title
Reprogramming of transcriptome after hormetic heat stress by the endoribonuclease ENDU 2 improves lifespan and stress resistance in C. elegans

### Description
Organisms' ability to respond to life-threatening environmental impacts is crucial for their survival. While acute stress responses to unfavorable factors are well known, the physiological consequences of transient stress experiences over time, as well as their underlying mechanisms, are not well understood. In this study, we investigated the long-term effects of a short heat shock (HS) exposure on the transcriptome of C. elegans. We found that the canonical HS response was followed by a profound transcriptional reprogramming affecting many genes involved in innate immunity response. This reprogramming relies on the endoribonuclease ENDU-2 but not the heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1). ENDU-2 in this context co-localizes with chromatin and interacts with RNA polymerase Pol II, enabling specific regulation of transcription in the post-HS period. Failure to activate this post-HS response does not impair animal survival under continuous HS insult but eliminates the beneficial effects of hormetic HS. In summary, our work discovers that the RNA-binding protein ENDU-2 mediates the hormetic long-term effects of transient HS to determine aging and longevity.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel protein digestion Co-immunoprecipitation eluates were loaded onto NuPAGE® Novex® 4–12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). After gel electrophoresis, proteins were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 and gel lanes were cut into approx. ten slices of equal size. Slices were washed and destained by alternatingly incubating them with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% ethanol/10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (10 min at RT each). For reduction of disulfide bonds and subsequent alkylation, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (10 min at 60 °C) and 100 mM 2-chloroacetamide (15 min at 37 °C) were used, respectively. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C overnight and peptides were extracted using one volume of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water mixed with one volume of 100% acetonitrile. The peptides were dried down and taken up in 15µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry (HPLC-MS) HPLC-MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus MS instrument (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For the chromatography a binary solvent system was used with solvent A consisting of 0.1% formic acid and solvent B consisting of 86% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The HPLC was equipped with two μPAC™ C18 trapping columns (Pharma Fluidics) and a µPAC™ analytical column (length: 500 mm, Pharma Fluidics). Samples were washed and concentrated for 3 min with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid on the trapping column at a flow rate of 10 µl/min before switching the column in line with the analytical column. A flow rate of 0.30 µl/min was applied to the analytical column and the following gradient was used for peptide separation: 1% B to 25% B in 22 min, to 44% B in 11 min, to 90% B in 2 min, 90% B for 4 min and decreased to 1% B in 0.1 min. The column was re-equilibrated for 18 min with 1% B at a flow rate of 0.40 µl/min. The MS instrument was operated with the following parameters: 1.6 kV spray voltage; 250°C capillary temperature; for the survey scan: mass range m/z 375 to 1,700; resolution at m/z 400 was 70,000; automatic gain control 3x10E6 ions with max. fill time, 60 msec. A TOP12 data dependent acquisition method was applied with automatic gain control at 1x10E5 ions and max. fill time of 120 ms for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) of multiply charged peptide ions. The normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 28%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles were searched with MaxQuant version 2.0.2.0 against the C. elegans UniProt reference proteome (ID: UP000001940; Taxonomy: 6239; release: 2022_01; 26584 protein entries). Default settings were used with Trypsin/P as proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavages allowed. 1% false discovery rate was applied on both peptide and protein level. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications. Label-free quantification was enabled, with a minimum ratio count of 2. For data analysis, the proteingroups.txt file of MaxQuant was used and loaded into Perseus 1.6.15.0. Entries for reverse and potential contaminant hits as well as proteins only identified by site were excluded from the analysis. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Only protein groups with LFQ intensities in all replicates of the ENDU-2-EGFP IP or in all replicates of the corresponding control IPs were considered for further analysis. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution using the following settings in Perseus: width 0.5 and down shift 1.8. The protein groups were further filtered for at least two unique peptides identified and a sequence coverage > 5 %.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Ap-ms, Endu-2, Hormesis, Heat stress response, Transcriptional reprogramming, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology, University of Freiburg
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Friedel Drepper
Institute of Biology, University of Freiburg


