### Accession
PXD004722

### Title
Incomplete cytosolic iron-sulfur cluster assembly machinery of Giardia intestinalis is partially associated with mitosomes

### Description
Iron - sul fur (Fe -S) clusters are essential cofactors that enable proteins to transport electrons , sense signals or catalyze chemical reactions . The maturation of dozens of Fe - S proteins in various compartments of every eukaryotic cell is driven by several assembly pathways. The ubiquitous cytosolic Fe - S cluster assembly (CIA) pathway, typically composed of eight highly conserved proteins, depends on mitochondrial Fe -S cluster assembly (ISC) machinery . Giardia intestinalis contains one of the smallest eukaryotic genomes and the mitosome, an extremely reduced mitochondrion . Because the only pathway known to be retained within this organelle is the synthesis of Fe -S clusters mediated by ISC machinery, a likely function of the mitosome is to cooperate with the CIA pathway. We investigated the cellular localization of CIA components in G. intestinalis and the origin and distribution of CIA -related components and Tah18 -like proteins in other Metamonada. We show that ortholog s of Tah18 and Dre2 are missing in these eukaryotes. In Giardia, all CIA components are exclusively cytosolic , with the important exception of Cia2 and two Nbp35 paralogs, which are also present in the mitosomes. We propose that the dual localization of Cia2 and Nbp35 proteins in Giardia might represent a novel connection between the ISC and the CIA Pathways. 


### Sample Protocol
Each SDS gel sample was cut into small pieces (1x1x0,75 mm) and destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for two hours. Destaining solution was discarded and excess of acetonitrile was added. Samples were then briefly vortexed and ACN was discarded. Cysteines were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ABC for 1 hour at  60ºC. Reducing solution was discarded and samples were washed with ACN in excess, briefly vortexed and ACN was discarded.  Cysteine residues were blocked in 50 mM iodacetamide in 100 mM ABC for 10 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then washed with excess of ACN, briefly vortexed and ACN was discarded. Volumes of all solutions were such that rehydrated pieces of gel were completely submerged in liquid. Subsequently, samples were allowed to dry for 30 minutes at room temperature and  trypsine (5 ng/ul) in  50 mM ABC in 10% ACN was added. Samples were cleaved overnight (16-18 hours). The following day, all free liquid was collected and samples were eluted twice with 200 ul 50% ACN with 0.1% formic acid for 30 minutes in sonic bath at room temperature. All fractions were pooled and completly evaporated in vacuum concentrator. Samples were reconstitued in 2% ACN with 0.05% formic acid and desalted on C18 trap according to manufacturer´s instruction (Michrom, Macrotrap, Reverse Phase C18). After desalting, samples were completly evaporated in vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 10 ul of 0.1% formic acid. 3ul were loaded onto UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific - Dionex) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III source (AB Sciex) for LC-MS/MS analysis. The instrument was operated with Analyst TF 1.6 (AB Sciex). After the injection, the samples were trapped and desalted with 2 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid at flow rate of 5 μL/min on Acclaim PepMap100 column (5 μm, 2 cm×100 μm ID, Thermo Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated using Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (3 μm, 15 cm×75 μm ID, Thermo Scientific). The starting condition of 70 min elution gradient at constant flow of 300 nl/min was set to 5 % of phase B (0.1 % formic acid in 99.9 % acetonitrile, phase A 0.1 % formic acid). After  5 min, the percentage of buffer B raised from 5 % to 30 % B over 40 min, from 30 % to 99 % B in 5 min, stayed at 99 % B for 10 min,  descended to 5 % B and remained there for 15 min. TOF MS mass range was set to 350–1500 m/z, in MS/MS mode the instrument acquired fragmentation spectra within 100 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Peaks were extracted  using AB SCIEX MS data converter and resulting .mgf files were searched against common contaminants database (Crap) and Giardia intestinalis database (EupathDB) with Mascot 2.2.   The results from Mascot were processed with Percolator software and resulting data were analyzed with the Scaffold software with FDR set to 1% for peptide and protein. 

### Publication Abstract
Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are essential cofactors that enable proteins to transport electrons, sense signals, or catalyze chemical reactions. The maturation of dozens of Fe-S proteins in various compartments of every eukaryotic cell is driven by several assembly pathways. The ubiquitous cytosolic Fe-S cluster assembly (CIA) pathway, typically composed of eight highly conserved proteins, depends on mitochondrial Fe-S cluster assembly (ISC) machinery. Giardia intestinalis contains one of the smallest eukaryotic genomes and the mitosome, an extremely reduced mitochondrion. Because the only pathway known to be retained within this organelle is the synthesis of Fe-S clusters mediated by ISC machinery, a likely function of the mitosome is to cooperate with the CIA pathway. We investigated the cellular localization of CIA components in G. intestinalis and the origin and distribution of CIA-related components and Tah18-like proteins in other Metamonada. We show that orthologs of Tah18 and Dre2 are missing in these eukaryotes. In Giardia, all CIA components are exclusively cytosolic, with the important exception of Cia2 and two Nbp35 paralogs, which are present in the mitosomes. We propose that the dual localization of Cia2 and Nbp35 proteins in Giardia might represent a novel connection between the ISC and the CIA pathways.

### Keywords
Lc ms, Giardi intestinalis

### Affiliations
Charles University
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry BIOCEV Faculty of Science Charles University in Prague Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec, Tel +420325873925 http://www.biocev.eu/corefacilit/omics/

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Karel Harant
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry BIOCEV Faculty of Science Charles University in Prague Průmyslová 595, 252 42 Vestec, Tel +420325873925 http://www.biocev.eu/corefacilit/omics/


