### Accession
PXD026805

### Title
IRS1 phosphorylation underlies the non-stochastic probability of cancer cells to persist during EGFR inhibition therapy

### Description
Stochastic transition of cancer cells between drug-sensitive and drug-tolerant persister phenotypes has been proposed to play a key role in non-genetic resistance to therapy. Yet, we show here that cancer cells actually possess a highly stable inherited chance to persist (CTP) during therapy. This CTP is non-stochastic, determined pre-treatment, and has a unimodal distribution ranging from 0 to almost 100%. Importantly, CTP is drug-specific. We found that differential serine/threonine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) protein determines the CTP of lung and of head and neck cancer cells under EGFR inhibition, both in vitro and in vivo. Indeed, the first-in-class IRS1 inhibitor NT219 was highly synergistic with anti-EGFR therapy across multiple in vitro and in vivo models. Elucidation of drug-specific mechanisms that determine the degree and stability of cellular CTP may establish a framework for the elimination of cancer persisters, using novel rationally designed drug combinations.

### Sample Protocol
Two very low (~2%), two low (~5-10%), two high (~20-25%) and two very high (~85-90%) CTP clones, were profiled by phospho-proteomics, each with three biological replicates. The samples were lysed with 5% SDS in 50mM TrisHCl, pH 7.4 and subjected to tryptic digestion using an S-trap, followed by a phosphor-enrichment using Immobilized Metal (Fe+3) Affinity Chromatography on a robotic system (Bravo). Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry: The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Fusion Lumos). Each sample was analyzed on the instrument separately in a random order using an optimized method in discovery mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Human proteome database appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and serine-, threonine or tyrosine-phosphorylation. The quantitative comparison were calculated using MaxQuant and filtered using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as phosphosites that were identified with localization probability <0.75, and only phosphosites that had at least 2 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer peristers, Drug tolerant cells, Irs1, Nsclc, Drug resistance, Egfr inhibition, Cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science 
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Amir Prior

### Lab Head
Dr Ravid Straussman
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann institute of Science, Israel


