### Accession
PXD023036

### Title
ABPP-HT - high-throughput activity-based profiling of deubiquitylating enzyme inhibitors in a cellular context

### Description
The potency and selectivity of a small molecule inhibitor are key parameters to assess during the early stages of drug discovery. In particular, it is very informative for characterizing compounds in a relevant cellular context in order to reveal potential off-target effects and drug efficacy. Activity-based probes (ABPs) are valuable tools for that purpose, however, obtaining cellular target engagement data in a high-throughput format has been particularly challenging. Here, we describe a new methodology named ABPP-HT (high-throughput-compatible activity-based protein profiling), implementing a semi-automated proteomic sample preparation workflow that increased the throughput capabilities of the classical ABPP workflow approximately ten times while preserving its enzyme profiling characteristics. Using a panel of deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) inhibitors, we demonstrate the feasibility of ABPP-HT to provide compound selectivity profiles of endogenous DUBs in a cellular context at a fraction of time as compared to previous methodologies

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were incubated with or withou inhibitors and labelled with an activity-based probe followed by a pull-down on an Agilent Bravo Assaymap. Eluates were trypsin digested and run on a 1h gradient on a Q Exactive or on the 100 samples per day gradient on an Evosep One coupled to a timsTOF Pro.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data was processed in Maxquant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Automation, Activity-based probes, Deubiquitylating enzymes, Pharmacology, Drug discovery, Activitomics

### Affiliations
Dr. Roman Fischer Associate Professor and Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Roosevelt Drive Oxford, OX3 7FZ United Kingdom
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Raphael A Heilig

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Dr. Roman Fischer Associate Professor and Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Roosevelt Drive Oxford, OX3 7FZ United Kingdom


