### Accession
PXD002941

### Title
Novel N-terminal and lysine methyltransferases that target translation elongation factor 1A in yeast and human

### Description
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1A (eEF1A) is an essential, highly methylated protein that facilitates translational elongation by delivering aminoacyl-tRNAs to ribosomes. Here we report a new eukaryotic protein N-terminal methyltransferase, Saccharomyces cerevisiae YLR285W, which methylates eEF1A at a previously undescribed high-stoichiometry N-terminal site and the adjacent lysine. Deletion of YLR285W resulted in the loss of N-terminal and lysine methylation in vivo, whereas overexpression of YLR285W resulted in an increase of methylation at these sites. This was confirmed by in vitro methylation of eEF1A by recombinant YLR285W. Accordingly, we name YLR285W as elongation factor methyltransferase 7 (Efm7). This enzyme is a new type of eukaryotic N-terminal methyltransferase as, unlike the three other known eukaryotic N-terminal methyltransferases, its substrate does not have an N-terminal [A/P/S]-P-K motif. We show that the N-terminal methylation of eEF1A is also present in human; this conservation over a large evolutionary distance suggests it to be of functional importance. This study also reports that the trimethylation of K79 in eEF1A is conserved from yeast to human. The methyltransferase responsible for K79 methylation of human eEF1A is shown to be N6AMT2, previously documented as a putative N(6)-adenine-specific DNA methyltransferase. It is the direct ortholog of the recently described yeast Efm5 and we show that Efm5 and N6AMT2 can methylate eEF1A from either species in vitro. We therefore rename N6AMT2 as eEF1A-KMT1. Including the present work, yeast eEF1A is now documented to be methylated by five different methyltransferases, making it one of the few eukaryotic proteins to be extensively methylated by independent enzymes. This implies more extensive regulation of eEF1A by this post-translational modification than previously appreciated.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were excised, destained with 50% ACN/50% 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (v/v) and dehydrated with 100% ACN. Gel bands were then rehydrated with 5 μL sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, 10 ng/μL), 10 μL endoproteinase AspN (Promega, 10 ng/μL) or LysargiNase (27) (40 ng/μL) and made up to 50 μL with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (for AspN and trypsin) or 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate/12.5 mM CaCl2 (for LysargiNase, to give a final concentration of 10 mM CaCl2). Digests were left at 37 °C overnight and peptides extracted from the gel bands with 50% ACN/50% 0.1% formic acid (v/v) for 30 min and then 100% ACN for 10 min. Peptides were dried in a SpeedVacTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 h before being resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (v/v).

### Data Protocol
All data were converted to Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using either MassMatrix MS Data File Conversion (v. 3.9) or msConvert from the ProteoWizard Library and Tools collection (29). Data were then searched against the SwissProt database (2014_08, 546,238 sequences through to 2015_08, 549,008 sequences) using Mascot (v. 2.4, Matrix Sciences) hosted by the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Research (Melbourne, Australia) with the following settings: Enzyme: Trypsin (trypsin-digested samples), AspN (AspN-digested samples) or None (LysargiNase-digested samples); 2 allowed missed cleavages; Precursor tolerance: 4 ppm; Fragment ion tolerance: 10 mmu (Q Exactive Plus) or 0.4 Da (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro); peptide charge: 2+, 3+, 4+ (except when analysing the singly-charged KFETS peptide); Instrument: Q-Exactive_Gen (Q Exactive Plus) or ESI-TRAP (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Trimethyl (K) and Methyl (DE). For samples pertaining to N-terminal methylation the following changes were made: allowed missed cleavages was set to 0 and the following variable modifications were added: Methyl (N-term), Dimethyl (N-term), and Propyl (N-term) (in lieu of any Trimethyl N-term variable modification).

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic elongation factor 1A (eEF1A) is an essential, highly methylated protein that facilitates translational elongation by delivering aminoacyl-tRNAs to ribosomes. Here, we report a new eukaryotic protein N-terminal methyltransferase, Saccharomyces cerevisiae YLR285W, which methylates eEF1A at a previously undescribed high-stoichiometry N-terminal site and the adjacent lysine. Deletion of YLR285W resulted in the loss of N-terminal and lysine methylation in vivo, whereas overexpression of YLR285W resulted in an increase of methylation at these sites. This was confirmed by in vitro methylation of eEF1A by recombinant YLR285W. Accordingly, we name YLR285W as elongation factor methyltransferase 7 (Efm7). This enzyme is a new type of eukaryotic N-terminal methyltransferase as, unlike the three other known eukaryotic N-terminal methyltransferases, its substrate does not have an N-terminal [A/P/S]-P-K motif. We show that the N-terminal methylation of eEF1A is also present in human; this conservation over a large evolutionary distance suggests it to be of functional importance. This study also reports that the trimethylation of Lys(79) in eEF1A is conserved from yeast to human. The methyltransferase responsible for Lys(79) methylation of human eEF1A is shown to be N6AMT2, previously documented as a putative N(6)-adenine-specific DNA methyltransferase. It is the direct ortholog of the recently described yeast Efm5, and we show that Efm5 and N6AMT2 can methylate eEF1A from either species in vitro. We therefore rename N6AMT2 as eEF1A-KMT1. Including the present work, yeast eEF1A is now documented to be methylated by five different methyltransferases, making it one of the few eukaryotic proteins to be extensively methylated by independent enzymes. This implies more extensive regulation of eEF1A by this posttranslational modification than previously appreciated.

### Keywords
N-terminus, Post-translational modifications, Methyltransferases, Lysine, Methylation

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Joshua Hamey

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Ronald Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, 2052, Australia


