### Accession
PXD044586

### Title
Sac1 interaction proteomics of ALFA Sac1 and mutants

### Description
Sphingolipids are structural membrane components that also function in cellular stress responses. The serine palmitoyl-transferase (SPT) catalyzes the rate limiting step in sphingolipid biogenesis. Its activity is tightly regulated through multiple bind-ing partners, including Tsc3, Orm proteins, ceramides, and the phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P) phosphatase Sac1. The structural organization and regulatory mechanisms of this complex are not yet understood. Here, we report the high-resolution cryo-EM structures of the yeast SPT in complex with Tsc3 and Orm1 (SPOT) as dimers and monomers and a monomeric complex further carrying Sac1 (SPOTS). In all complexes, the tight interaction of the down-stream metabolite ceramide and Orm1 reveals the ceramide dependent inhibition. Additionally, observation of ceramide and ergosterol binding suggests a co-regulation of sphingolipid biogenesis and sterol metabolism within the SPOTS com-plex.

### Sample Protocol
For pulldown experiments, cells were inoculated from an overnight pre-culture in 200 ml YPD in triplicates and grown to exponential growth phase at 30 °C. Same amounts of cells were harvested at 4,000 rpm, at 4 °C for 5 min and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.Cells were lysed with 500 µl glass beads in 500 µl pull-down buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150mM KOAc, 5% Glycerol, 1% GDN, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA free, Roche) using a FastPrep (MP biomedicals). After a centrifugation step at 1,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min, super-natants were incubated for 30 min at 4 °C on a turning wheel. Supernatants were spun down at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min and incubated on a turning wheel at 4 °C with 12.5 µl pre-equilibrated ALFA beads (NanoTag Biotechnologies) or Fab-Trap beads (ChromoTek). Beads were washed two times with pull-down buffer and then four times with wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KOAc, 5% glycerol). Proteins on beads were digested and further treated according to the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics) protocol. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl LC-Load, and 2 µl were used to perform reversed-phase chroma-tography on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a TimsTOF HT mass spectrometer (Bruker Corporation, Bremen) through a Captive Spray Ion source. Peptides were separated on a  Aurora Gen3 C18 column (25cm x 75um x 1.6um) with CSI emitter (Ionoptics, Australia) at 40 °C. Elution of peptides from the column was realized via a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 10-35% in 0.1% formic acid for 44 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min following a 7 min increase to 50%, and finally, 4 min to reach 85% buffer B. Eluted peptides were directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrometer at an electrospray voltage of 1.5 kV and 3 l/min Dry Gas. The MS settings of the TimsTOF were adjusted to positive ion polarity with a MS range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The scan mode was set to PASEF. The ion mobility was ramped from 0.7 Vs/cm2 to 1.5 in 100 ms. The accumulation time was set to 100 ms. 10 PASEF ramps per cycle resulted in a duty cycle time of 1.17s. The target intensi-ty was adjusted to 14000 and the intensity threshold to 1200. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 0.4 min to avoid repeated scanning of the precursor ions, their charge state was limited from 0 to 5.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were streamed to the PASer (Parallel Search Engine in Real-Time version 2023b from Bruker) and analyzed with ProLuCID database search algorithm with the corre-sponding FASTA databases. Precursors were ranging from 600 to 6000 Da. Carbami-domethylation (C) and oxidation (M) were chosen as modifications. DDA-MBR were per-formed with MS tolerance of 10 ppm and IM tolerance of 0.05 (1/k0). Resulting data were analyzed using Perseus (V2.0.7.0, www.maxquant.org/perseus)58. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE59 partner repository. Data will be made available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids are structural membrane components that also function in cellular stress responses. The serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in sphingolipid biogenesis. Its activity is tightly regulated through multiple binding partners, including Tsc3, Orm proteins, ceramides, and the phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P) phosphatase Sac1. The structural organization and regulatory mechanisms of this complex are not yet understood. Here, we report the high-resolution cryo-EM structures of the yeast SPT in complex with Tsc3 and Orm1 (SPOT) as dimers and monomers and a monomeric complex further carrying Sac1 (SPOTS). In all complexes, the tight interaction of the downstream metabolite ceramide and Orm1 reveals the ceramide-dependent inhibition. Additionally, observation of ceramide and ergosterol binding suggests a co-regulation of sphingolipid biogenesis and sterol metabolism within the SPOTS complex.

### Keywords
Sac1; s. cerevisiae; proteomics

### Affiliations
Osnabrück University  Department of Biology/Chemistry  Bioanalytical Chemistry section 49076 Osnabrück, Germany
University of Osnabrueck; DEpartment of Biology/Chemistry

### Submitter
Florian Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Fröhlich
Osnabrück University  Department of Biology/Chemistry  Bioanalytical Chemistry section 49076 Osnabrück, Germany


