### Accession
PXD009046

### Title
Macrophage proteome in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection

### Description
This study investigates the proteomic alterations in human monocytic cell line (THP1) subsequent to infection with different strains of mycobacterium tuberculosis (H37Ra, H37Rv, BND433 and JAL2287) using the SWATH-MS strategy. THP1 proteome was analysed after 6, 18, 30 and 42 hours of infection with each strains and compared to that of uninfected cells. Our findings reveal temporal regulation of host response subsequent to Mtb infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates from infected THP1 samples were analyzed by reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (RP-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) using an NanoLC-Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent; Dublin, CA) and nanoFlex cHiPLC system (Eksigent) which is directly connected to an ABSCIEX   5600 Triple-TOF (AB SCIEX; Concord, Canada) mass spectrometer, referred as Triple TOF system.

### Data Protocol
All DDA mass spectrometry files was searched in Protein Pilot software version 5.0 (AB SCIEX, Revision- 4769) with the Paragon algorithm 5.0. For Paragon searches, the following settings were used: Sample type: Identification; Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Species: None; Search effort: Thorough ID; Results Quality: 0.05. Only peptides with a confidence score of > 0.05 were considered for further analysis.For the spectral alignment and extraction of the targeted data, datasets from SWATH MS/MS acquisitions were processed using the full scan MS/MS filtering module for DIA within PeakView v.2.1 (Sciex) and Marker view v.1.2.1 (Sciex) software using both In-house and global human reference spectral library. iRT peptides were used for spectral retention time alignment between in-house library and swath data datasets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Thp1, Host proteome, Mtb, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery Research Center (DDRC), Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana. India
THSTI, Faridabad

### Submitter
Ajay Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ajay Kumar
Drug Discovery Research Center (DDRC), Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI), NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana. India


