### Accession
PXD025778

### Title
STAT3 contributes to cisplatin resistance, modulating EMT markers and the mTOR signaling in lung adenocarcinoma cells .

### Description
Lung cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide and is strongly associated with cisplatin resistance. The transcription factor STAT3 is constitutively activated in cancer cells and coordinates critical cellular processes as survival, self-renewal, and inflammation. In several types of cancer, STAT3 controls the development, immunogenicity, and malignant behavior of tumor cells while dictates the responsiveness to radio- and chemotherapy. It is known that STAT3 phosphorylation on Ser727 by mTOR is necessary for its maximal activation, but the crosstalk between STAT3 and mTOR signaling in cisplatin resistance remains elusive. In this study, using a proteomic label-based approach, we reveal important targets and signaling pathways increased and decreased in cisplatin-resistant A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
For heavy (H)- or light (L)-lysine labeling experiments, A549 cells were maintained in a T25 flask with SILAC™ HAMF12 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS without lysine and arginine. The isotopic label incorporation, trypsin digestion, and mass spectrometry analysis were performed as previously described (Morelli et al., 2021, DOI not already available). Three independent experiments were performed.

### Data Protocol
For SILAC data analysis, the raw files were processed using MaxQuant 2012 version 1.3.0.5 (https://www.maxquant.org), and the MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot Human Protein Database [13] (release 17 February 2016; 91,974 sequences; 36,693,332 amino acid residues). The initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor, 6 ppm in the main search afterwards, and then to 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, including heavy label Lys6. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the ‘requantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions were enabled. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of peptide and protein were both set to 0.01. Data processing was performed using Perseus v.1.2.7.4 available in the MaxQuant database (https://www.maxquant.org/). First, reverse and contaminant entries were excluded from further analysis. Furthermore, aA protein ratio intensity normalized between H and L was used to compare differential protein expression abundance in the total extract from of C and CIS R cells. The protein ratios were calculated from the median of all normalized peptide ratios using unique peptides or peptides assigned to the protein group with the highest number of peptides (razor peptides).

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death worldwide and is strongly associated with cisplatin resistance. The transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is constitutively activated in cancer cells and coordinates critical cellular processes as survival, self-renewal, and inflammation. In several types of cancer, STAT3 controls the development, immunogenicity, and malignant behavior of tumor cells while it dictates the responsiveness to radio- and chemotherapy. It is known that STAT3 phosphorylation at Ser727 by mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is necessary for its maximal activation, but the crosstalk between STAT3 and mTOR signaling in cisplatin resistance remains elusive. In this study, using a proteomic approach, we revealed important targets and signaling pathways altered in cisplatin-resistant A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. STAT3 had increased expression in a resistance context, which can be associated with a poor prognosis. STAT3 knockout (SKO) resulted in a decreased mesenchymal phenotype in A549 cells, observed by clonogenic potential and by the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers. Importantly, SKO cells did not acquire the mTOR pathway overactivation induced by cisplatin resistance. Consistently, SKO cells were more responsive to mTOR inhibition by rapamycin and presented impairment of the feedback activation loop in Akt. Therefore, rapamycin was even more potent in inhibiting the clonogenic potential in SKO cells and sensitized to cisplatin treatment. Mechanistically, STAT3 partially coordinated the cisplatin resistance phenotype via the mTOR pathway in non-small cell lung cancer. Thus, our findings reveal important targets and highlight the significance of the crosstalk between STAT3 and mTOR signaling in cisplatin resistance. The synergic inhibition of STAT3 and mTOR potentially unveil a potential mechanism of synthetic lethality to be explored for human lung cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Lung cancer; cisplatin; proteomics; stat3; mtor; rapamycin.

### Affiliations
CNPEM
National Laboratory of Biosciences, LNBio, CNPEM.

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences, LNBio, CNPEM.


