### Accession
PXD028557

### Title
Inability to switch from ARID1A-BAF to ARID1B-BAF impairs exit from pluripotency and commitment towards neural crest formation in ARID1B-related neurodevelopmental disorders

### Description
The BAF complex modulates chromatin accessibility. Specific BAF configurations have functional consequences, and subunit switches are essential for cell differentiation. ARID1B and its paralog ARID1A encode for mutually exclusive BAF subunits. De novo ARID1B haploinsufficient mutations cause a neurodevelopmental disorder spectrum, including Coffin-Siris syndrome, which is characterized by neurological and craniofacial features. Here, we reprogrammed ARID1B+/- Coffin-Siris patient-derived skin fibroblasts into iPSCs, and modeled cranial neural crest cell (CNCC) formation.  We discovered that ARID1B is active only during the first stage of this process, coinciding with neuroectoderm specification, where it is part of a lineage-specific BAF configuration (ARID1B-BAF), including SMARCA4, and nine additional subunits. ARID1B-BAF acts as a gate-keeper, ensuring exit from pluripotency and lineage commitment, by attenuating NANOG, SOX2 and the thousands of enhancers directly regulated by these two pluripotency factors at the iPSC stage. In iPSCs, these enhancers are maintained active by an ARID1A-containing BAF. At the onset of differentiation, cells transition from ARID1A-BAF to ARID1B-BAF, eliciting attenuation of the NANOG/SOX2 networks, and triggering pluripotency exit.  Coffin-Siris patient cells fail to perform the ARID1A/ARID1B switch, and maintain ARID1A-BAF at pluripotency enhancers throughout all stages of CNCC formation.  This leads to a persistent and aberrant SOX2 and NANOG activity, which impairs CNCC formation. In fact, despite showing the typical neural crest signature (TFAP2A+, SOX9+), the ARID1B-haploinsufficient CNCCs are also NANOG-positive, in stark contrast with the ARID1B-wt CNCCs, which are NANOG-negative.   These findings suggest a connection between ARID1B mutations, neuroectoderm formation, and a pathogenic mechanism for Coffin-Siris syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
After collection, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS before resuspension in co-IP buffer (20mM Tris pH 7.9, 100mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5mM DTT, protease inhibitors), and rotated for 5 minutes at 4°C. After spinning down at 2000rpm for 10 minutes, the nuclear pellet was resuspended in buffer C (20mM Tris pH 8.0, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.42M NaCl, 25% glycerol, 0.2mM EDTA, 0.5mM DTT, protease inhibitors), dounce homogenized (with B pestle), and incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes. The extract was centrifuged at 12,000rpm for 30 minutes, and the supernatant was kept as nuclear extract. The nuclear extract was dialyzed overnight in BC80 (20mM Tris pH 8.0, 80mM KCl, 0.2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1mM B-mercaptoethanol, 0.2mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)), cleared, and stored at -80°C. For the IP, 1.5mg of nuclear extract was incubated for 3 hours at 4°C with 6μg ARID1B antibody and 50μL of Dynabeads Protein A, and the control IP was performed with 0.75mg of nuclear extract and 25μL of Dynabeads Protein A. Beads were washed three times with co-IP buffer, followed by a final wash with 0.05% NP-40 in PBS. Elution was performed by agitation in 0.1M glycine pH 3.0 for one minute, and 1M Tris base pH 11.0 was added to neutralize the pH of the eluate. Eluates were prepared for SDS-PAGE and run on a Novex WedgeWell 10% Tris-Glycine Gel (Invitrogen) with Tris-Glycine-SDS buffer (Bio-Rad), at 110V for 10 minutes. The gel was stained with Colloidal Blue staining kit (Invitrogen), and further processed at the proteomics facility at the Wistar Institute. Briefly, the gel lanes were excised, reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Tryptic digests were analyzed using LC-MS/MS (a standard 90 minute LC gradient on the Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with full tryptic specificity against the UniProt human database (10/02/2020) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, and also searched for the common protein N-terminal acetylation, Asn deamidation, and Met oxidation. Protein and peptide false discovery rate was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Subunit switches in the BAF chromatin remodeler are essential during development. ARID1B and its paralog ARID1A encode for mutually exclusive BAF subunits. De novo ARID1B haploinsufficient mutations cause neurodevelopmental disorders, including Coffin-Siris syndrome, which is characterized by neurological and craniofacial features. Here, we leveraged ARID1B<sup>+/-</sup> Coffin-Siris patient-derived iPSCs and modeled cranial neural crest cell (CNCC) formation. We discovered that ARID1B is active only during the first stage of this process, coinciding with neuroectoderm specification, where it is part of a lineage-specific BAF configuration (ARID1B-BAF). ARID1B-BAF regulates exit from pluripotency and lineage commitment by attenuating thousands of enhancers and genes of the NANOG and SOX2 networks. In iPSCs, these enhancers are maintained active by ARID1A-containing BAF. At the onset of differentiation, cells transition from ARID1A- to ARID1B-BAF, eliciting attenuation of the NANOG/SOX2 networks and triggering pluripotency exit. Coffin-Siris patient cells fail to perform the ARID1A/ARID1B switch, and maintain ARID1A-BAF at the pluripotency enhancers throughout all stages of CNCC formation. This leads to persistent NANOG/SOX2 activity which impairs CNCC formation. Despite showing the typical neural crest signature (TFAP2A/SOX9-positive), ARID1B-haploinsufficient CNCCs are also aberrantly NANOG-positive. These findings suggest a connection between ARID1B mutations, neuroectoderm specification and a pathogenic mechanism for Coffin-Siris syndrome.

### Keywords
Baf, Ip, Lc-ms/ms, Cncc, Arid1a, Arid1b

### Affiliations
Wistar Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th Street, BLSB 826, Philadelphia, PA, 19104

### Submitter
Sarah Offley

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Trizzino
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th Street, BLSB 826, Philadelphia, PA, 19104


