### Accession
PXD024182

### Title
Modulation of rumen microbes through extracellular vesicle released by the rumen fluke Calicophoron daubneyi

### Description
Parasite derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been proposed to play key roles in the establishment and maintenance of infection. Calicophoron daubneyi is a newly emerging parasite of livestock with many aspects of its underpinning biology yet to be resolved. This research is the first in-depth investigation of EVs released by adult C. daubneyi. EVs were successfully isolated using both differential centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and morphologically characterised though transmission electron microscopy (TEM). EV protein components were characterised using a GeLC approach allowing the elucidation of comprehensive proteomic profiles for both their soluble protein cargo and surface membrane bound proteins yielding a total of 378 soluble proteins identified

### Sample Protocol
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) - C. daubneyi culture media was utilised in order to purify EV populations through size exclusion chromatography (SEC) as previously described (Davis et al., 2019). Media was concentrated using Amicon ultra-15 centrifugal filters (Merk, Millipore), with a 10 kDa MW cut off. Samples were added to the centrifugal unit and centrifuged at 4000 × g for 20 mins at 4°C until an approximately 500 l EV enriched sample remained. EV enriched samples were 0.2 µm filtered and passed through qEVoriginal SEC columns (IZON science, U.K) following the manufacturers protocol. Briefly, columns were equilibrated with a minimum of 10 ml of PBS prior to addition of the sample. The initial 2.5 ml flow through was discarded with the following 2.5 ml EV enriched fraction retained and stored at -20°C.  Quantification using tuneable resistive pulse sensing -  A Nanopore NP200 (IZON Science) was utilised in the quantification of SEC purified EV samples. The Nanopore was calibrated using calibration particles (CPC200, 1:1000 filtered PBS). EV samples were measured at 47 mm nanopore stretch at a 100 nA voltage under 7 mbar pressure. Particles were detected through short pulses of current and the resulting data analysed using qNano particle analysis software (IZON, version 3.2).   EV Proteomic analysis -  EV proteins were resolved through sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) following the method of Laemmli, (1970). Protein concentration was first resolved using a Qubit protein assay following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, UK). Loading concentrations of 10 g were aliquoted and centrifuged at 100,000 × g at 4°C for 30 minutes (S55-S rotor, Sorval MX120 centrifuge, Thermo scientific) with the resulting supernatant discarded. The EV pellet was suspended in 10 l loading buffer and heated for 10 mins at  95°C before loading into hand-cast 7 cm x 7 cm 12.5% polyacrylamide Tris/glyceine gels and subject to electrophoresis on a Protean III system (Bio-Rad, UK). Tris/Glycine/SDS buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM Glycine, 0.1% w/v SDS pH 8.3) (BioRad, U.K) was utilised for electrophoresis, with gels run at 70 V through the stacking gel and 150 V until completion. Gels were fixed (40% v/v ethanol and 10% v/v acetic acid) for one hour prior to overnight staining with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Sigma, UK) at room temperature with gentle agitation. De-staining was achieved using 30% (v/v) methanol, 10% v/v acetic acid and gels were subsequently visualised on a GS-800 calibrated densitometer (Bio-Rad, UK) and stored in 1% acetic acid prior to trypsin digestion for mass spectrometry analysis following the protocol of Davis et al. (2019).   Mass Spectrometry -  Trypsin digested protein samples were suspended in 20 l 0.1% formic acid and loaded into an Agilent 6550 iFunnel Q-TOF mass spectrometer combined with a Dual AJS ESI source 1290 series HPLC system (Agilent, Cheshire, U.K). A Zorbax Eclipse Plus C18 column (2.1 x 50 mm 1.8 micron) was utilised with each sample injected into an enrichment column within the system at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min using an automated micro sampler with an injection volume of 2 µl in the resuspension buffer 0.1% v/v formic acid and allowed to separate at 300 nl/min. Enrichment and separation were carried out on a polaris chip (G4240-62030, Agilent Technologies, U.K). A system of solvents was utilised over the process, solvent A (milliQ water containing 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (90% v/v acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid). Chromatography was achieved using a linear-gradient of 3-8% solvent B over 6 seconds, 8-35% solvent B over 15 minutes, 35-90% solvent B over five minutes and finally 90% solvent B for two minutes. Resulting peak spectra data was loaded onto Agilent Qualitative analysis software (Agilent technologies LDA UK Limited, UK).

### Data Protocol
MASCOT (www.matrixofscience.com) was used for analysis by carrying out an MS/MS ion search, settings were set for the enzyme trypsin – allowing 2 missed cleavages, with a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and a variable modification of oxidation (M) with a peptide charge of 2+, 3+ and 4+. Each sample was then searched against an in-house database composed of a transcript for C. daubneyi (Huson et al., 2018) available to search at https://sequenceserver.ibers.aber.ac.uk/. Each of the contigs returned were then searched within an in-house copy of the transcript and the nucleotide sequence recorded. All of the contigs were then translated using ExPasy (www.expasy.com) and the sequences submitted to BLASTp analysis and subsequently searched in the Interpro database.

### Publication Abstract
Parasite derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been proposed to play key roles in the establishment and maintenance of infection. <i>Calicophoron daubneyi</i> is a newly emerging parasite of livestock with many aspects of its underpinning biology yet to be resolved. This research is the first in-depth investigation of EVs released by adult <i>C. daubneyi.</i> EVs were successfully isolated using both differential centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and morphologically characterized though transmission electron microscopy (TEM). EV protein components were characterized using a GeLC approach allowing the elucidation of comprehensive proteomic profiles for both their soluble protein cargo and surface membrane bound proteins yielding a total of 378 soluble proteins identified. Notably, EVs contained Sigma-class GST and cathepsin L and B proteases, which have previously been described in immune modulation and successful establishment of parasitic flatworm infections. SEC purified <i>C. daubneyi</i> EVs were observed to modulate rumen bacterial populations by likely increasing microbial species diversity <i>via</i> antimicrobial activity. This data indicates EVs released from adult <i>C. daubneyi</i> have a role in establishment within the rumen through the regulation of microbial populations offering new routes to control rumen fluke infection and to develop molecular strategies to improve rumen efficiency.

### Keywords
Helminth, Extracellular vesicles, Proteome, Gel-based proteomics, Calicophoron daubneyi

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), Aberystwyth University, Edward Llwyd Z2.01.
Aberystwyth University

### Submitter
Nathan Allen

### Lab Head
Dr Russ M Morphew
Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), Aberystwyth University, Edward Llwyd Z2.01.


