### Accession
PXD014422

### Title
Proteome analysis of PC12 cells reveals alterations in translation regulation and actin signalling induced by clozapine

### Description
Although antipsychotics are routinely used in the treatment of schizophrenia for last decades, their precise mechanism of action is still unclear. In this study we investigated changes in PC12 cells’ proteome under the influence of clozapine, risperidone and haloperidol to identify protein pathways regulated by the antipsychotics. Analysis of the protein profiles in two time points: after 12 and 24 h of incubation with drugs revealed significant alterations in 510 proteins. Further canonical pathway analysis determined signal transduction pathways and biological processes regulatednby drug treatment. Interestingly, all tested drugs have caused changes in PC12 proteome which correspond to inhibition of cytokines: tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-β1), what can be linked to the immunological and viral hypothesis of schizophrenia. We found, that the 12-hour incubation with clozapine caused up-regulation of protein kinase A signalling and translation machinery. After 24 h of treatment with clozapine, the inhibition of the actin cytoskeleton signalling and Rho proteins signalling was revealed. Obtained results suggests that mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and 2 (mTORC2) play a central role in the signal transduction of clozapine.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion, iTRAQ labelling and peptide fractionation by IEF For the 8-plex iTRAQ labelling (Applied Biosystems), 25 μg of protein mixtures from two biological replicates were pooled. Protein digestion and peptide labelling was performed on spin columns with a 30-kDa membrane cutoff (Vivacon500, Sartorius Stedim) according to the iFASP procedure (isobaric mass tagging with filter-aided sample preparation) [20] with some modifications. A labelling scheme is shown in Supporting Information. Salts and excess reagents were removed from combined filtrates by solid phase extraction on C18 Extraction Disk Cartridges (Empore 7 mm dia./3 ml vol., Sigma). In order to minimize the precursor co-isolation occurrence, peptides were separated by IEF into 34 fractions on 24 cm linear pH 3-10 Immobiline DryStrips (GE Healthcare). Peptides were extracted from the gels, vacuum-dried and purified on C18 StageTips [21]. Detailed procedure is presented in Supporting information. LC-MS/MS of labelled peptides Each fraction was analysed in two technical replicates by LC-MS/MS with an UltiMate 3000RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific) coupled via a Digital PicoView 550 nanospray source (New Objective) to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were injected into a precolumn (AcclaimPepMap100 C18, 2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm, 100 Å) using 4% ACN with 0.05% TFA as the mobile phase and further separated on an analytical column (AcclaimPepMapRLSC C18, 50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å) with a 4–44% ACN gradient in the presence of 0.05% formic acid for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode using a top ten method at 33% of normalized collision energy (NCE) and 30 s of dynamic exclusion. Full scan MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6. The MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 5e4. The maximum ion accumulation time for the full MS and the MS/MS scans was 100 ms. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer platform (v. 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used for identification and preliminary quantification of proteins. The data obtained from both technical replicates were searched together against the Swiss Prot_201506 database with taxonomic restriction to Rodentia (26,322 sequences) using an in-house Mascot server (v. 2.5.0, Matrix Science) with the following parameters: digestion by trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages; iTRAQ 8-plex (K, N-terminus) and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for the precursor and the fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. The FDR for peptides was calculated by a target–decoy approach and was set to 1%. Percolator algorithm was used to assess the reliability of protein identification. During the quantitative analysis, a "quan value correction" was used, related to the incomplete purity of the individual markers. Quantitative information was only obtained from unique peptides with the co-isolation below 50%. A quantitative analysis combining all results was carried out in the Scaffold Q+  (version 4.4.7, Proteome Software Inc.). Threshold of 95% probability were used for peptide and protein identifications. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [22]. In addition, protein identification required at least two identified peptides. Proteins that shared the assigned peptides with other entries and could not be differentiated were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Channels were corrected in all samples according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker [23]. Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels from IS (113) were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using averages to multiplicatively normalize data.

### Publication Abstract
Although antipsychotics are routinely used in the treatment of schizophrenia for the last decades, their precise mechanism of action is still unclear. In this study, we investigated changes in the PC12 cells' proteome under the influence of clozapine, risperidone, and haloperidol to identify protein pathways regulated by antipsychotics. Analysis of the protein profiles in two time points: after 12 and 24&#xa0;h of incubation with drugs revealed significant alterations in 510 proteins. Further canonical pathway analysis revealed an inhibition of ciliary trophic factor signaling after treatment with haloperidol and showed a decrease in acute phase response signaling in the risperidone group. Interestingly, all tested drugs have caused changes in PC12 proteome which correspond to inhibition of cytokines: tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1). We also found that the 12-h incubation with clozapine caused up-regulation of protein kinase A signaling and translation machinery. After 24&#xa0;h of treatment with clozapine, the inhibition of the actin cytoskeleton signaling and Rho proteins signaling was revealed. The obtained results suggest that the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and 2 (mTORC2) play a central role in the signal transduction of clozapine.

### Keywords
Translation, Proteome, Clozapine, Actin signalling, Mtor

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Urszula Jankowska

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kędracka-Krok
Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


