### Accession
PXD011752

### Title
SERPA: Autoantibody profiling in POAG

### Description
Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide. An early diagnosis of the disease is crucial for treatment success. Mechanisms behind glaucoma pathogenesis are not completely understood, but disease related alterations in the serological autoantibody profile indicate an immunologic component. These changes in immunoreactivity may serve as potential biomarkers. Therefore, a serological proteome analysis (SERPA) approach was used to identify novel autoantibody biomarker candidates in primary open angle glaucoma.  Autoantibodies in individual sera samples of glaucoma patients and control were analysed by serological proteome analysis (SERPA) using porcine trabecular meshwork (TM) tissue lysates as antigen source. Immunoblot spot intensities were computed by “Delta2D” (Decodon) and spots of interest were matched with preparative 2DE gels and identified by mass spectrometry to identify the potential autoantigens.

### Sample Protocol
TM tissue lysates were analysed by 2D – PAGE. Spots of interest from three identical 2D gels were excised and pooled. Gel pieces were destained, reduced and alkylated before tryptic digestion of the proteins. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were cleaned up using C18 Resin ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore). The LC-system consisted of a Rheos Allegro pump (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and a PAL HTC autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). The system comprised of a 30 x 0.5 mm BioBasic C18 column (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was LC-MS grade water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was LC-MS grade acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The gradient was run for 90 min per gel spot as follows; 0 - 50 min: 10 - 35 % B, 50 - 70 min: 35-55 % B, 70 - 75 min: 55 - 90 % B, 75 - 80 min: 90 % B, 80 - 83 min: 90 - 10 % B und 83 - 90 min: 10 % B. Continuum mass spectra data were acquired on an ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap-XL MS (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in a data-dependent mode of acquisition to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400 and a target automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 1.0 × 106 ions. The lock mass option was enabled in MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) m/z 445.120025 ions were used for internal recalibration in real time. The five most intense precursor ions were sequentially isolated for fragmentation in the LTQ with a collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation, the normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 35% with activation time of 30 ms with repeat count of 10 and the dynamic exclusion segment was disabled. The resulting fragment ions were recorded in the LTQ.

### Data Protocol
The acquired continuum MS spectra were analysed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.1.0.263; Thermo scientific). The tandem MS spectra were searched against Uniprot database (combined Homo sapiens and Sus scrofa, date:20.04.2018) using settings with peptide mass tolerance of ± 50 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of ± 0.5 Da and peptide charge state 1+ - 4+, using MASCOT server version 2.2.7. FDR for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification, while protein oxidation of methionine were defined as dynamic modifications, enzyme: trypsin and maximum number of missed cleavages: 1.

### Publication Abstract
Glaucoma is an optic neurological disorder and the leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide, with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) as its most prevalent form. An early diagnosis of the disease is crucial to prevent loss of vision. Mechanisms behind glaucoma pathogenesis are not completely understood, but disease related alterations in the serological autoantibody profile indicate an immunologic component. These changes in immunoreactivity may serve as potential biomarkers for glaucoma diagnostics. We aimed to identify novel disease related autoantibodies targeting antigens in the trabecular meshwork as biomarkers to support early detection of POAG. We used serological proteome analysis (SERPA) for initial autoantibody profiling in a discovery sample set. The identified autoantibodies were validated by protein microarray analysis in a larger cohort with 60 POAG patients and 45 control subjects. In this study, we discovered CALD1, PGAM1, and VDAC2 as new biomarker candidates. With the use of artificial neural networks, the panel of these candidates and the already known markers HSPD1 and VIM was able to classify subjects into POAG patients and non-glaucomatous controls with a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 93%. These results suggest the benefit of these potential autoantibody biomarkers for utilization in glaucoma diagnostics.

### Keywords
Autoantibodies; serpa; immunoproteomics; glaucoma; poag

### Affiliations
Department of ophthalmology, experimental and translational ophthalmology, University medical center of the Johannes Gutenberg - University Mainz
Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg - Universität Mainz

### Submitter
Vanessa Beutgen

### Lab Head
Dr Franz H. Grus
Department of ophthalmology, experimental and translational ophthalmology, University medical center of the Johannes Gutenberg - University Mainz


