### Accession
PXD011805

### Title
Mycobacterium smegtatis phosphoproteomics LC-MS/MS

### Description
Protein phosphatase PstP is conserved throughout the Actinobacteria in a genetic locus related to cell wall synthesis and cell division. In many Actinobacteria it is the sole annotated serine threonine protein phosphatase to counter the activity of multiple serine threonine protein kinases. We used transcriptional knockdown, electron microscopy and comparative phosphoproteomics to investigate the putative dual functions of PstP as a specific regulator of cell division and as a global regulator of protein phosphorylation. pstP knockdown in Mycobacterium smegmatis led to thickening of the cell wall and septum, changes in cell morphology, and eventual cell lysis. Comparative phosphoproteomics in the early stages of PstP depletion showed hyperphosphorylation of protein kinases and their substrates, confirming PstP as a negative regulator of kinase activity and global serine and threonine phosphorylation. Analysis of the 838 phosphorylation sites that changed significantly, suggested that PstP may have broad specificity, with preference for phosphothreonine, phosphosites near acidic residues, near the protein termini, and within membrane associated proteins. Increased phosphorylation of the activation loop of protein kinase B (PknB) and of the essential PknB substrate CwlM offer possible explanations for the essentiality of pstP and the cell wall defects when PstP was depleted.

### Sample Protocol
Protein quantification of Mycobacteria extracts was performed using Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein extracts were then reduced and alkylated in a buffer containing 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA), for  30min at room temperature. Following reduction and alkylation, the proteins in the bacterial extracts were precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method as described in Mirza et al., 2007.  The protein pellets were dissolved in 20 mM HEPES-Trypsin-LysC (1:100) and digested for 16-17hrs.  The tryptic peptides concentration was determined using Qubit. 95% of the peptide was used for phosphoproteomics analysis and 5% for mycobacteria proteome analysis. The peptides were dried by using speed vacuum concentrator and then resuspended in 80% acetonitrile, 5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For the phosphoproteomics analysis,  phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere (10µm or 5 µm, 500 mg; 5020-75010 GL Sciences Inc. Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptides were resuspended in in a buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0,1 % TFA prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification of Mycobacteria extracts was performed using Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein extracts were then reduced and alkylated in a buffer containing 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA), for  30min at room temperature. Following reduction and alkylation, the proteins in the bacterial extracts were precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method as described in Mirza et al., 2007.  The protein pellets were dissolved in 20 mM HEPES-Trypsin-LysC (1:100) and digested for 16-17hrs.   The tryptic peptides concentration was determined using Qubit. 95% of the peptide was used for phosphoproteomics analysis and 5% for mycobacteria proteome analysis. The peptides were dried by using speed vacuum concentrator and then resuspended in 80% acetonitrile, 5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For the phosphoproteomics analysis,  phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere (10µm or 5 µm, 500 mg; 5020-75010 GL Sciences Inc. Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Dried peptides were resuspended in in a buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0,1 % TFA prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase PstP is conserved throughout the Actinobacteria in a genetic locus related to cell wall synthesis and cell division. In many Actinobacteria it is the sole annotated serine threonine protein phosphatase to counter the activity of multiple serine threonine protein kinases. We used transcriptional knockdown, electron microscopy and comparative phosphoproteomics to investigate the putative dual functions of PstP as a specific regulator of cell division and as a global regulator of protein phosphorylation. Comparative phosphoproteomics in the early stages of PstP depletion showed hyperphosphorylation of protein kinases and their substrates, confirming PstP as a negative regulator of kinase activity and global serine and threonine phosphorylation. Analysis of the 838 phosphorylation sites that changed significantly, suggested that PstP may regulate diverse phosphoproteins, preferentially at phosphothreonine near acidic residues, near the protein termini, and within membrane associated proteins. Increased phosphorylation of the activation loop of protein kinase B (PknB) and of the essential PknB substrate CwlM offer possible explanations for the requirement for pstP for growth and for cell wall defects when PstP was depleted.

### Keywords
Bacterial protein phosphatase, Bacterial signal transduction, Phosphoproteomics, Mycobacteria, Cell division, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Actinobacteria

### Affiliations
University of Leicester, Department of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation and Molecular and Cell Biology, United Kingdom
University of Leicester

### Submitter
Helen O'Hare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Helen O'Hare
University of Leicester, Department of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation and Molecular and Cell Biology, United Kingdom


