### Accession
PXD009160

### Title
BXD Mouse Aging Liver Proteomics

### Description
This is a SWATH proteomic survey of ~330 BXD cohorts, including some biological and technical injection replicates, across an aging time course, with individuals from ~6 to ~24 months of age.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were sacrificed (but not overnight fasted) in the morning with an injection of avertin anesthetic followed by hepatic vein blood draw and cold PBS perfusion. Livers were collected ~2 minutes after sacrifice, gall bladders were removed, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. At a later date, livers were removed from the tubes, homogenized in liquid nitrogen, and roughly 30 mg of pulverized liver powder was taken for each individual for protein preparation. Cells were lysed with RIPA-M buffer followed by 8M urea. Protein was precipitated with acetone, and then proteins were treated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide for ~45 minutes each, followed by digested into peptides with 22 hours of modified trypsin treatment in 1.5M urea. After digestion, peptides were cleaned with C18 and quantified. Samples were then injected into the mass spectrometer in the order listed in the supplemental table (which closely matches the "Run###" ids—which were entered by hand). Additional metadata, including exact run order, time of injection, and other notes (e.g. samples which failed injection) are included in the spreadsheet "000_Sample_Label_Metadata.xlsx".

### Data Protocol
The samples here are the raw files. For the processed data, files were converted from Wiff to mzXML using ProteoWizard and then processed using the OpenSWATH pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse population, Grp, Liver, Proteomics, Aging, Swath, Bxd

### Affiliations
Department of Biology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Evan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich, Switzerland


