### Accession
PXD013307

### Title
Metabolic remodeling during biofilm development of Bacillus subtilis

### Description
Biofilms  are  structured communities of  tightly  associated  cells  that  constitute thepredominant  state  of  bacterial  growth  in  naturaland human-madeenvironments.  Although  the core genetic circuitry that controls biofilm formation in model bacteria such as Bacillus subtilishas been  well  characterized,  little  is  known  about  the  role  that  metabolism  plays  in  this  complex developmental process. Here, weperformed a time-resolved analysisof the metabolic changes associated   with   pellicle   biofilm   formation   and   development   inB.   subtilisby   combining metabolomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic analyses. We report a surprisingly widespread and dynamic  remodeling  of  metabolism  affecting central  carbon metabolism,  primary  biosynthetic pathways,   fermentation   pathways,   and   secondary   metabolism. Most   of   these   metabolic alterations  were hithertounrecognized  as  biofilm-associated.For  example,  we  observed increased activity of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle during early biofilm growth, a shift from fatty acid biosynthesis to fatty acid degradation, reorganization of iron metabolism and transport, and a  switch  from  acetate   to  acetoin fermentation. Close  agreement  between  metabolomic, transcriptomic,  and  proteomic  measurements  indicated  that  remodeling  of  metabolism  during biofilm development was generally controlled at the transcriptional level. Our resultsalsoprovide insights into the transcription factors and regulatory networks involved in thiscomplexmetabolic remodeling.   Following   upon   these   results,   we   demonstrate   that   acetoin   production   via acetolactate synthase is essential for robust biofilm growthand has the dual role of conservingredox balance and maintaining extracellularpH.This study represents a comprehensive systems-level investigation of the  metabolic remodeling occurring during B. subtilisbiofilm development that will serve as a useful roadmap for future studies on biofilm physiology.

### Sample Protocol
The lysis method used on B. subtilis pellet was modified from previously described. Each sample was suspended in 300 µL guanidine HCl (6 M) and heated for 2 cycles of 5 min at 100°C, then 5 min of cooling at ambient temperature. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein was precipitated in 90% methanol and pelleted (5,000 x g, 15 min). The supernatants were discarded, and protein pellets were suspended in 8 M urea with 100 mM tris (pH = 8), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine) (TCEP), and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA). Lysates were diluted to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM tris (pH = 8). Trypsin (Promega) was added (1:50::enzyme:protein) and incubated overnight at ambient temperature.  Ratios were based off of protein concentrations (8hr - .5 mg, 12hr - .7 mg, 16hr – 1.0 mg, 20hr – 1 mg, 24hr – 1 mg, 28hr 1.5 mg, 32hr – 2 mg). An additional aliquot of trypsin (1:100::enzyme:protein) was added in the morning for an hour. Peptides were isolated and desalted with StrataX column (Phenomenex Strata-X Polymeric Reversed Phase 10 mg/mL). Desalting columns were equilibrated with 1 mL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 1 mL of 0.2% formic acid. Samples were acidified with TFA and loaded onto the equilibrated Strata X columns, which were then washed with 1 mL 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were eluted into clean tubes with 650 µL 40% ACN followed by 550 µL 70% ACN, dried, and reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid. Peptide concentration was measured prior to MS analysis using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16).  Searches were performed against a target decoy database of Bacillus subtilis proteins including isoforms (Uniprot, downloaded 23 August 2017). The precursor search tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and the product mass tolerance was set to 0.4 Da. Quantitation was performed as label-free (LFQ) with an LFQ min ration of 1. A match between runs was used to quantify peptides with a label min ration count of 1. Search parameters included fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, variable modification for oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide spectral match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were both set to 1%. Normalization is embedded in the MaxQuant LFQ logarithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Biofilm modeling, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
University of Wisconsin Madison

### Submitter
Edna Angelica Trujillo

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Amador-Noguez
Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA


