### Accession
PXD022074

### Title
Brain death associated activation of Calpain-Talin axis in donor kidneys underlies podocyte matrix degradation and graft dysfunction in kidney transplantation

### Description
Deceased kidney donation after brain death (DBD) is the main source of transplants, yet these grafts yield inferior transplant outcomes when compared to living donation. In brain death, cerebral injury contributes to systemic biological dysregulation, causing significant cellular stress in donor kidneys that adversely impacts the quality of grafts. Here, we hypothesized that proteolytic processes in DBD kidneys might lead to podocyte damage with subsequent development of post-transplant dysfunction.  Using protein topography and migration analysis platform (PROTOMAP), we mapped degradation profiles of cytoskeletal proteins in DBD kidneys. Cytoskeletal proteolytic degradation was further studied by Immunoblotting on a separate cohort of deceased and living donor kidney biopsies.  To investigate potential mechanism of kidney cytoskeletal protein degradation, in-vitro human podocytes and ex-vivo precision-cut human kidney slices were employed. We found novel proteolytic profiles of key podocyte cytoskeletal proteins in donor kidneys associated with suboptimal posttransplant function. These were unique to brain-death and were not observed in circulatory-death or living-donor kidneys. Talin-specific protein degradation in DBD kidneys indicated Calpain-1 activation may have a key role in proteolytic processes observed in the dysfunctional kidneys.  Investigation of the underlying mechanism suggests that Transforming-Growth Factor-β (TGFβ) induces Calpain-1 activation, leading to brain-death specific podocyte degradation patterns and dysregulation of actin cytoskeleton; events that were prevented, in-vitro, by Calpain inhibition.  Conclusion Our data demonstrate that podocyte protein degradation impacts the quality of DBD kidneys, propose a role of TGFβ mediated Calpain-1 proteolytic processing of cytoskeletal Talin-1, suggesting therapeutic opportunities to prevent kidney dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Deceased donor kidney biopsies were collected ex situ from the upper pole of the kidney cortex during back table preparation using a 23mm needle biopsy gun.  The biopsies were then divided in two, with one half stored in RNAlater, then liquid nitrogen and the other stored in formalin. All donor kidney biopsies were precured with identical protocols to minimize pre-analytical variability and technical precautions were taken to eliminate ex-vivo sample proteolysis. RNA later part of kidney biopsies were homogenised in RIPA buffer (89900, Thermo Scientific, Illinois, USA) with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1861280, Thermo Scientific, Illinois, USA) using a bead beater (Biorad, Hertfordshire, UK) at 6500rpm for three cycles of 40 seconds with intermediate cooling on wet ice between cycles.  Biopsy protein concentration was determined using a Pierce Bicinchoninic Acid protein assay kit (23227 Thermo Scientific, Illinois, USA). Remaining lysates were aliquoted and stored at -80°C until analysis.   Kidney biopsies from the QUOD biobank were prepared and analysed by PROTOMAP as previously described. In brief, PROTOMAP analysis was used to compare the profiles between two experimental cohorts; suboptimal and good outcomes.  Five biopsies per clinical outcome (SO vs GO, n=5 each) were pooled with a final protein concentration of 60μg.  Pools were denatured and reduced in standard Laemmli buffer with DTT and divided into two equal aliquots and separated by SDS-PAGE (NOVEX, Invitrogen 4-12% gradient, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gels were stained with Coomassie instant blue and each pooled sample lane cut into 22 horizontal slices, generating 44 samples overall.  The gel pieces were de-stained and dehydrated in 200μL of acetonitrile for 5 minutes.  Proteins were reduced by the addition of 30μL of 10mM DTT for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 30μL 50mM iodoacetic acid (IAA) for 30 minutes.  The gel pieces were then dehydrated with 200μL Acetonitrile (CAN). Samples were then resuspended in 30μL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 20ng/μL trypsin and incubated overnight at 37֯°C with gentle mixing.  Peptides were extracted from the gel matrix using 50μL extraction buffer I (50% CAN, 5% formic acid (FA)) followed by 50μL extraction buffer II (85% CAN, 5% FA).  Extracted fractions were then collected, pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation.   Desalted peptides were resuspended in 30μL of buffer (98% Milli-Q-H2O, 2% CAN, 0.1% FA) and analysed by nano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously.

### Data Protocol
The PROTOMAP method incorporates the protein migration patterns on SDS-PAGE electrophoresis with peptide sequence coverage and spectral counts acquired by LC-MS/MS analysis, allowing the results to be visualised as peptographs for every identified protein To do this, the raw MS data was converted to Mascot generic files using msconvert (Proteowizard, version 2).  Briefly, MS/MS spectra data were searched using Mascot v2.5.1 against the UniProt Homo sapiens reference proteome (version 2017).  Mascot results were then exported as DTASelect files with a false discovery rate threshold of 1% and analysed using the PROTOMAP perl scripts obtained from http://www.scripps.edu/cravatt/protomap/.

### Publication Abstract
In brain death, cerebral injury contributes to systemic biological dysregulation, causing significant cellular stress in donor kidneys adversely impacting the quality of grafts. Here, we hypothesized that donation after brain death (DBD) kidneys undergo proteolytic processes that may deem grafts susceptible to posttransplant dysfunction. Using mass spectrometry and immunoblotting, we mapped degradation profiles of cytoskeletal proteins in deceased and living donor kidney biopsies. We found that key cytoskeletal proteins in DBD kidneys were proteolytically cleaved, generating peptide fragments, predominantly in grafts with suboptimal posttransplant function. Interestingly, &#x3b1;-actinin-4 and talin-1 proteolytic fragments were detected in brain death but not in circulatory death or living donor kidneys with similar donor characteristics. As talin-1 is a specific proteolytic target of calpain-1, we investigated a potential trigger of calpain activation and talin-1 degradation using human ex vivo precision-cut kidney slices and in vitro podocytes. Notably, we showed that activation of calpain-1 by transforming growth factor-&#x3b2; generated proteolytic fragments of talin-1 that matched the degradation fragments detected in DBD preimplantation kidneys, also causing dysregulation of the actin cytoskeleton in human podocytes; events that were reversed by calpain-1 inhibition. Our data provide initial evidence that brain death donor kidneys are more susceptible to cytoskeletal protein degradation. Correlation to posttransplant outcomes may be established by future studies.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Allograft dysfunction, Kidney cytoskeleton, Podocytes, Donation after brain death (dbd), Kidney transplantation

### Affiliations
Research and Development, NHS Blood and Transplant  Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, and Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Kaisar
Research and Development, NHS Blood and Transplant  Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, and Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford


