### Accession
PXD009379

### Title
Metabolic reprogramming of Vibrio cholerae impaired in respiratory NADH oxidation is accompanied with increased copper sensitivity

### Description
The electrogenic, sodium ion translocating NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQR) from Vibrio cholerae is frequent in pathogenic bacteria and a potential target for antibiotics. NQR couples the oxidation of NADH to the formation of a sodium motive force (SMF) and therefore drives important processes such as flagellar rotation, substrate uptake, and energy-dissipating cation-proton antiport. We performed a quantitative proteome analysis of V. cholerae O395N1 in comparison to its variant lacking the NQR using minimal medium with glucose as carbon source. We found 84 proteins (≥ regulation factor 2) to be changed in abundance. The loss of NQR resulted in a decrease in abundance of enzymes of the oxidative branch of the TCA cycle and an increase in abundance of virulence factors AcfC and TcpA. Most unexpected, copper resistance proteins CopA, CopG and CueR were decreased in the nqr deletion strain. As a consequence, the mutant exhibited diminished resistance to copper when compared to the reference strain, as confirmed in growth studies using either glucose or mixed amino acids as carbon sources. We propose that the observed adaptations of the nqr deletion strain represent a coordinated response which counteracts a drop in transmembrane voltage that challenges V. cholerae in its different habitats.   The dataset also includes raw data and MaxQuant analyses of the treatment of the V. cholerae reference strain and the nqr deletion strain with different catecholamines (WT_B - WT_D and nqr_B - nqr_D). These data will be published in a forthcoming paper.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics experiments were performed in triplicates. The V. cholerae reference (O395N1) or nqr deletion strain were inoculated in 15 ml phosphate-buffered M9 with glucose at a starting OD of 0.05, and cells were grown for 5-6 h until an OD600 of 0.2 - 0.3 was reached. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and cell pellets were resuspended in 2 % SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), 20 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) and 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and incubated for 10 min at 95 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 30 min at 13700 rpm the supernatant was removed and proteins were precipitated using chloroform-methanol (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, and protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). 25 µg protein were alkylated at cysteines using iodoacetamide and subsequently digested with endoprotease LysC and trypsin overnight at 30°C and 37°C, respectively. Peptides were concentrated and desalted on C18 stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and dried under vacuum. Samples were dissolved in 0.1 % TFA and  subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were directly injected to an EASY-Spray analytical column (2 μm, 100 Å PepMapRSLC C18, 25 cm × 75 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at constant temperature of 35 °C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 235 min gradient with the following profile: 2 % - 10 % solvent B in 100 min, 10 % - 22 % solvent B in 80 min, 22 % - 45 % solvent B in 55 min, 45 % - 90 % solvent B in 5 min, 15 min isocratic at 90 % solvent B, followed by 90 % - 2 % solvent B in 1 min and reequilibration at 2 % solvent B for 40 min. Solvents used were 0.5 % acetic acid (solvent A) and 0.5 % acetic acid in acetonitrile/H2O (80/20, v/v, solvent B). The Q Exactive Plus was operated under the control of XCalibur 3.0.63 software. MS spectra (m/z = 300 1600) were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000 (m/z = 200) using a maximum injection time (MIT) of 50 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 x 106. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was performed using lock-mass ions from ambient air as described in Olsen et al. (2005). Data dependent MS/MS spectra were generated for the 10 most abundant peptide precursors in the Orbitrap using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a resolution of 17500, a normalized collision energy of 25 and an intensity threshold of 1 x 105. Only ions with charge states from +2 to +5 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 Da. For each MS/MS scan, the AGC was set at 5 x 105 and the MIT was 50 ms. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s within a 5 ppm mass window to avoid repeated fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014) version 1.5.3.8 using standard settings for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins. For LFQ the match between runs option was enabled. For protein identification in MaxQuant raw spectra were searched against V. cholerae protein sequence database (UP000000249_Vibrio_cholerae_O395) downloaded from UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2017) Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR thresholds were set to 0.01. Statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed using Perseus version 1.5.2.4 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Proteins were considered for LFQ if they were identified by at least two peptides. Normalized LFQ values from MaxQuant were log2 transformed. Missing values were replaced from normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Volcano plots were used for pairwise comparison of V. cholerae reference strain (referred to as wt) versus ∆nqr mutant. A p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered as significant change in protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The electrogenic, sodium ion-translocating NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQR) from <i>Vibrio cholerae</i> is frequent in pathogenic bacteria and a potential target for antibiotics. NQR couples the oxidation of NADH to the formation of a sodium motive force (SMF) and therefore drives important processes, such as flagellar rotation, substrate uptake, and energy-dissipating cation-proton antiport. We performed a quantitative proteome analysis of <i>V. cholerae</i> O395N1 compared to its variant lacking the NQR using minimal medium with glucose as the carbon source. We found 84 proteins (regulation factor of &#x2265;2) to be changed in abundance. The loss of NQR resulted in a decrease in the abundance of enzymes of the oxidative branch of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and an increase in abundance of virulence factors AcfC and TcpA. Most unexpected, the copper resistance proteins CopA, CopG, and CueR were decreased in the <i>nqr</i> deletion strain. As a consequence, the mutant exhibited diminished resistance to copper compared to the reference strain, as confirmed in growth studies using either glucose or mixed amino acids as carbon sources. We propose that the observed adaptations of the <i>nqr</i> deletion strain represent a coordinated response which counteracts a drop in transmembrane voltage that challenges <i>V. cholerae</i> in its different habitats.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The importance of the central metabolism for bacterial virulence has raised interest in studying catabolic enzymes not present in the host, such as NQR, as putative targets for antibiotics. <i>Vibrio cholerae</i> lacking the NQR, which is studied here, is a model to estimate the impact of specific NQR inhibitors on the phenotype of a pathogen. Our comparative proteomic study provides a framework to evaluate the chances of success of compounds directed against NQR with respect to their bacteriostatic or bactericidal action.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Vibrio cholerae, Na+- translocating nadh:quinone oxidoreductase, Comparative proteomics, Copper tolerance, Sodium bioenergetics, Nqr

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Microbiology, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Pfannstiel

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Steuber
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Microbiology, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany


