### Accession
PXD029956

### Title
Comparative Analysis of T Cell Spatial Proteomics and the Influence of HIV Expression

### Description
As systems biology approaches to virology have become more tractable, it has become possible to analyze highly studied viruses such as HIV in new, unbiased ways, including spatial proteomics. We have employed here a differential centrifugation protocol to fractionate an inducible model of HIV-expression in Jurkat T cells for proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry. Using these proteomics data, we evaluated the merits of several reported machine learning pipelines for classification of the spatial proteome and identification of protein translocations. From these analyses we found that classifier performance was organelle-dependent, with Bayesian t-augmented Gaussian mixture modeling outperforming support vector machine (SVM) learning for mitochondrial and ER proteins, but underperforming on cytosolic, nuclear, and plasma membrane proteins by QSep analysis. We also observed a generally higher performance for protein translocation identification using a Bayesian model, BANDLE, on SVM-classified data. Comparative BANDLE analysis of WT and ΔNef models also identified known Nef-dependent interactors such as TCR signaling and coatomer complex. Lastly, we found that SVM classification showed higher consistency and was less sensitive to HIV-dependent noise in our data. These findings illustrate important considerations for future studies of the spatial proteome following viral infection or expression where their generalizability can be further assessed.

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion for mass spectrometry Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 30°C for 60 min and cysteines were subsequently alkylated (carbamidomethylated) with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min Proteins were then precipitated with 9 volumes of methanol, pelleted and resuspended in 1M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Following precipitation, protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay. A total of 0.2 mg of protein was subjected to overnight digestion with 8.0 µg of mass spec grade Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega). Following digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) and subsequently 150 ug peptides were desalted using AssayMap C18 cartridges mounted on an Agilent AssayMap BRAVO liquid handling system, C18 cartridges were first conditioned with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), followed by 0.1% FA. The samples were then loaded onto the conditioned C18 cartridge, washed with 0.1% FA, and eluted with 60% MeCN, 0.1% FA. Finally, the organic solvent was removed in a SpeedVac concentrator prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   TMT Labeling Peptide concentration was determined using a Nanodrop, and a total of 15 µg of peptide was then used for TMT labeling, each replicate serving as a multiplex. Briefly, dried peptide sample was resuspended in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with one of the TMT10-plex reagents (ThermoFisher) solubilized in 100% anhydrous ACN. Reactions were quenched using a 5% hydroxylamine solution at 1-2 μl per 20 μl TMT reagent. The multiplexed samples were then pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. The labeled peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA. After sonication for 1min, the sample was desalted manually using SepPak; the column was first conditioned with 100% ACN, followed by 0.1% FA. Sample was loaded, then washed with 0.1% FA and eluted in a new vial with 60% ACN, 0.1% FA. Finally, the organic solvent was removed using a SpeedVac concentrator prior to fractionation.  High pH Reverse-Phase Fractionation Dried samples were reconstituted in 20mM ammonium formate (pH ~10) and fractionated using a Waters ACQUITY CSH C18 1.7 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column mounted on a MClass Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters corp., Milford, MA) at a flow rate of 40 μl/min with buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10) and buffer B (100% ACN). Absorbance values at 215 nm and 280 nm were measured on a Waters UV/Vis spectrophotometer, using a flowcell with a 10 mm path length. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 5% B to 25% B in 62.5 min followed by a linear increase to 60% B in 4.5 min and 70% in 3 min and maintained for 7 min before increasing to 5% in 1 min Twenty-four fractions were collected and pooled in a non-contiguous manner into twelve total fractions. Pooled fractions were dried to completeness in a SpeedVac concentrator.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against a concatenated database containing Uniprot human and HIV-1 proteins (downloaded 02/03/20) and reverse decoy sequences using the Sequest algorithm; the database contained 20,367 total entries. Mass tolerance was specified at 50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragments. Static modifications of TMT 10-plex tags on lysine and peptide n-termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.02146 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) were specified in the search parameters. Data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein level through Percolator using the target-decoy strategy. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted from MS3 spectra within Proteome Discoverer to perform quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
As systems biology approaches to virology have become more tractable, highly studied viruses such as HIV can now be analyzed in new unbiased ways, including spatial proteomics. We employed here a differential centrifugation protocol to fractionate Jurkat T cells for proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry; these cells contain inducible HIV-1 genomes, enabling us to look for changes in the spatial proteome induced by viral gene expression. Using these proteomics data, we evaluated the merits of several reported machine learning pipelines for classification of the spatial proteome and identification of protein translocations. From these analyses, we found that classifier performance in this system was organelle dependent, with Bayesian t-augmented Gaussian mixture modeling outperforming support vector machine learning for mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum proteins but underperforming on cytosolic, nuclear, and plasma membrane proteins by QSep analysis. We also observed a generally higher performance for protein translocation identification using a Bayesian model, Bayesian analysis of differential localization experiments, on row-normalized data. Comparative Bayesian analysis of differential localization experiment analysis of cells induced to express the WT viral genome versus cells induced to express a genome unable to express the accessory protein Nef identified known Nef-dependent interactors such as T-cell receptor signaling components and coatomer complex. Finally, we found that support vector machine classification showed higher consistency and was less sensitive to HIV-dependent noise. These findings illustrate important considerations for studies of the spatial proteome following viral infection or viral gene expression and provide a reference for future studies of HIV-gene-dropout viruses.

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Spatial proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology
Krogan lab

### Submitter
Alicia Richards

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology


