### Accession
PXD019918

### Title
A 7-month e-vapor aerosol inhalation toxicology study in C57BL/6 mice [Lung data]

### Description
A 7-month inhalation study in C57BL/6 mice was conducted to evaluate long-term respiratory toxicity of e-vapor aerosols compared to cigarette smoke and to assess the impact of smoking cessation or switching to an e-vapor product after 3 months of exposure to 3R4F cigarette smoke (CS). In this study, we performed a chronic inhalation (4 h/day, 5 d/week, up to 7 months) study in C57BL/6 mice using a commercial (MarkTen®) e-vapor product and a combustible reference cigarette (3R4F) using a Switching and Cessation study design. A commercial e-vapor product (MarkTen® device [version 2.6.8]; “Test Red”) was supplied by Altria Client Services LLC (Richmond, VA, USA). The Test Red formulation was composed of aerosol formers (propylene glycol [PG] and vegetable glycerol [VG]), ~4% nicotine by weight, and flavors (non-menthol). The 3R4F commercial reference cigarettes were purchased from the University of Kentucky (Lexington, KY). HEPA filtered air at the testing facility (Battelle, West Jefferson, OH) was used as Sham Control. General procedures for animal care and housing met the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) recommendations and requirements stated in the “Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” [National Research Council (NRC)] and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Female C57BL/6 mice were received from Charles River Kingston (Stone Ridge, NY). Test atmosphere was generated from smoking machines and delivered to the mice through a nose-only exposure system. The modified Cooperation Centre for Scientific Research Relative to Tobacco (CORESTA) Reference Method 81 regimen (55/30/5: a 55 ± 0.3 mL puff volume, a puff every 30 seconds, a 5-second puff duration) was used to generate e-vapor aerosol for 130 puffs/cartridge. Mainstream smoke from 3R4F cigarette was generated using a modified Health Canada Intense regimen (55/30/2: a 55 ± 0.3 mL puff volume, a puff every 30 seconds, a 2-second puff duration, and a near-square puff profile) for 8 puffs/cigarette. Female C57BL/6 mice (~10 weeks old) were randomly assigned based on body weight to one of five exposure groups: Sham Control, 3R4F CS, Test Red, Switching, and Cessation. Mice were exposed to 3R4F CS (550 µg/L TPM) or e-vapor aerosols (Test Red; 1100 µg/L TPM) via nose-only inhalation up to 4 h/day, 5 d/week for up to 7 months. After the first 3 months of exposure, groups of 3R4F CS mice were subjected to exposures of: (1) Test Red aerosol (“Switching”) or (2) filtered air (“Cessation”), while a group of mice continued to be exposed to 3R4F CS. Here, the protein expression data for lung tissue assessed by iTRAQ®-based quantitative proteomics is reported.

### Sample Protocol
Alternate cryoslices of the lung were homogenized, followed by extraction and processing using the iTRAQ® 8-plex labeling procedure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). iTRAQ® analysis sets were assigned to consist of one sample replicate from each of exposure groups, with eight separate iTRAQ® sets corresponding to the eight replicates. Also, one pooled reference mix combining all samples was included in each iTRAQ® set.  The samples were analyzed in random order by using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected online to a Q Exactive™ mass analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample was injected twice, with two different analytical methods (one fast and another sensitive) on the same column, as previously described  (Kelstrup et al. 2014). The outputs of both mass spectrometry runs were combined as merged mass lists and interrogated against the mouse reference proteome set (UniProt, canonical isoforms only) by using Proteome Discoverer, version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SequestHT implemented in Proteome Discoverer was used as the search tool, and iTRAQ® reporter-ion intensities were determined from Proteome Discoverer. The Percolator node of Proteome Discoverer was used to estimate peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p-values (q-values).

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ peptide-level quantification data were exported and further processed in the R statistical environment (R Development Core Team, 2007). The quantification data were filtered for a q-value < 0.01 and for “unique” quantification results as defined in Proteome Discoverer. Global variance stabilizing normalization was performed with the corresponding Bioconductor package in R (Huber et al. 2002; Hultin-Rosenberg et al. 2013). Each iTRAQ reporter-ion set was normalized to its median, and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantification values (Herbrich et al. 2013).   For detecting differentially abundant proteins, a linear model was fitted for each group comparison, and p-values were calculated from moderated t-statistics with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al. 2004). The Benjamini–Hochberg (B–H) FDR method was then used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered as being differentially abundant.  References  Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, et al. (2004) Bioconductor: open software development for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome biology 5(10):R80  Herbrich SM, Cole RN, West Jr KP, et al. (2013) Statistical inference from multiple iTRAQ experiments without using common reference standards. Journal of proteome research 12(2):594-604  Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sültmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M (2002) Variance stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 18(suppl_1):S96-S104 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/18.suppl_1.S96 Hultin-Rosenberg L, Forshed J, Branca RM, Lehtiö J, Johansson HJ (2013) Defining, comparing, and improving iTRAQ quantification in mass spectrometry proteomics data. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 12(7):2021-2031  Kelstrup CD, Jersie-Christensen RR, Batth TS, et al. (2014) Rapid and deep proteomes by faster sequencing on a benchtop quadrupole ultra-high-field Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Journal of proteome research 13(12):6187-6195  Lee KM, Hoeng J, Harbo S, et al. (2018) Biological changes in C57BL/6 mice following 3 weeks of inhalation exposure to cigarette smoke or e-vapor aerosols. Inhal Toxicol 30(13-14):553-567 doi:10.1080/08958378.2019.1576807 Phillips B, Esposito M, Verbeeck J, et al. (2015) Toxicity of aerosols of nicotine and pyruvic acid (separate and combined) in Sprague-Dawley rats in a 28-day OECD 412 inhalation study and assessment of systems toxicology. Inhal Toxicol

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Lung, Itraq, Systems toxicology

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchatel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchatel, Switzerland


