### Accession
PXD021004

### Title
HUMAN BLOOD SERUM PROTEOME CHANGES AFTER 6 HOURS OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION AT NIGHT

### Description
The aim of this study was to discover significantly changed proteins in human blood serum as a result of 6 h sleep loss at night. Eight females were reqruited. . Peripheral venous whole blood sampling was performed at 04:00, after 6 h of sleep and after 6 h of sleep deprivation (SD). Serum from each subject was depleted before protein digestion by trypsin and iTRAQ labeling. Labled peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The study lasted 48 hours. The first 24 h included the “control night”, where the individuals slept from 22:00 until next morning at 7:00, except carefully blood sampling at 4:00. During the second 24 h, the sleep deprivation was performed from 22:00 until 4:00 in the morning. During the 6 hours of sleep deprivation, the subjects maintained the awake status by reading or watching TV (not activating programs). Both nights at 22:00 the lights were off. The blood samples were taken both the control night and the sleep deprivation night at the same time point, 4:00 a.m. in the morning. Venous whole blood samples were collected in the supine position and the participant laid down minimum 15 minutes before sampling [78]. The subjects were their own control.  Blood samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 1500 rpm (subject 1-5) or 2700 rpm (subject 6-8) immediately after sampling (from Subjects 1-5) or 30 min after sampling (subject 6-8). Serum (from subject 1-5) was pipetted into glass tubes and covered with parafilm. The samples were then placed in a rack on the bench at room temperature to clot overnight (defined as six hours or more). Serum was then centrifuged again and pipetted into Eppendorf tubes with approx. 0.5-1 ml each and stored at - 80 ºC [79]. Upon observation of the incomplete separation, samples were further centrifuged for ten minutes at 1500 rpm. Blood samples from the second set (subject 6-8) were placed 30 minutes on the bench before the samples were centrifuged at 2,700 rpm. Serum was then pipetted into two Eppendorf tubes with ca. 0.5-1 ml each and frozen immediately at -20 º C, and later stored in - 80 º C within 12 h. The minor variation in preanalytical protocols was due to updated recommendations from The Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE).  LC-MS/MS analyses Fifty mix mode fractions from each iTRAQ experiment were analyzed on an LTQ-OrbitrapVelos Elite connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3000RS LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractions were dissolved in 1% FA and trapped on the pre-column (Dionex, AcclaimPepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 µm i.d, 3 µm C18 beads) in buffer A (2% ACN, 0,1% FA) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min for 5 minutes before separation by reverse phase chromatography (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm x 75 µm i.d., 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow of 280 nL/min. The mix mode fractions were run on three slightly different nano LC gradients. The first fifteen fractions were run on a LC gradient consisted of a gradient starting at 5% buffer B (90%ACN, 0.1% FA) ramping to 12% buffer B over 55 minutes (5-60 min). Further the gradient was ramped to 30% buffer B in 30 minutes (60-90min), increased to 90% B in 10 minutes (90-100 min), held for 5 minutes (100-105 min) followed by ramping to 5% buffer B for 3 minutes (105-108) and equilibration of the column in 12 minutes (108-120). Fraction 16-35 were separated on the following LC gradient; 0-5.0 minutes 5% buffer B, 5.0-5.5 minutes 8% buffer B, 5.5-60 minutes 20% buffer, 60-90 minutes 35% buffer B. The last fractions (36-50) were separated on the following gradient: 0-5.0 minutes 5% buffer B, 5.0-5.5 minutes 8% buffer B, 5.5-90 minutes 40% buffer. The last part of the nano LC gradient is similar for all three gradients. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap-MS with resolution R = 120,000 at m/z 400. The 10 most intense eluting peptides above 1000 counts and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated in the linear ion trap. Fragmentation in the Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) cell was performed with a normalized collision energy of 40%, and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap-MS at a resolution of 15000.  Data analysis and statistics  The iTRAQ MS/MS data was searched against the Uniprot human database [82] using SearchGUI (v1.14.4) [83], using the search engines OMSSA [84]  and X!Tandem [85]. The search parameters were precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, product mass tolerance 0.6 Da and maximum two missed cleavages. Fixed modifications used were iTRAQ (K and n-term) and methylthio (C) and variable modifications used were oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ (Y). The SearchGUI output was post-processed in PeptideShaker [http://peptide-shaker.googlecode.com] using an FDR-level of 1%, and the results further processed by an in-house script to extract the intensities of the iTRAQ reporters (114, 115, 116, 117). The intensities were normalized to 1 and converted to log2 values. Finally, the quantitative data for the subjects was compared by a paired two-tailed t-test.

### Data Protocol
Abundant protein depletion and concentration 20 µl of serum from each subject was depleted using a human Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS Hu-14) 4.6mm x 50 mm LC column (Agilent Technologies) as previously described, using a Dionex 3000-series LC system [80].    Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling The entire depleted protein sample was reduced, cysteine blocked, trypsin digested (1:20, trypsin:protein, w/w), iTRAQ labeled (4-plex) and combined according to the protocol using the chemicals provided (AB Sciex, USA).   Mix-mode fractionation iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated into 50 fractions using a mix-mode chromatography utilizing a SielcPromix column (MP-10.250.0530, 1.0 × 250 mm, 5 μm, 300Å, Sielc Technologies, Prospect Heights, Illinois), using an Agilent 1260 series LC system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) as previously described [81]. The fractions from the 10 first minutes of the gradient were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human blood serum, Stress and cancer, Proteomics, Cellular pathological associations, Sleep deprivation

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, University of BErgen
Department of Safety, Chemistry and Biomedical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Engineering and Science, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Kronstad, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Even Birkeland

### Lab Head
Dr Alvhild Alette Bjørkum
Department of Safety, Chemistry and Biomedical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Engineering and Science, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Kronstad, Bergen, Norway


