### Accession
PXD008798

### Title
Lrpprc deficiency in brown adipocytes diminishes cold-induced thermogenesis but improves systemic metabolism

### Description
Insufficient mitochondrial quantity in brown adipose tissue (BAT) causes defective thermogenesis and positive energy balance, which is coupled with the development of obesity. Whether disturbance of mitochondrial quality affects BAT function remains unknown. Here, we describe that the brown adipocyte-specific Leucine-rich PPR motif-containing protein knockout mice (LrpprcBKO) exhibited mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) proteome imbalance and a complete loss of the -adrenergic-stimulated thermogenesis at room temperature (RT), due to specific reduction of mtDNA-encoded genes. However, the LrpprcBKO mice were lean at normal chow and were protected against high-fat-diet-induced metabolic abnormalities, such as obesity, insulin resistance, adipose inflammation, hepatic steatosis, and hypertriglyceridemia. The beige adipocytes in inguinal white adipose tissue were expanded in LrpprcBKO mice at RT, but not at thermoneutrality. However, BAT thermogenic defects and metabolic benefits were present in LrpprcBKO mice regardless of ambient temperatures. Collectively, our results reveal that a thermogenesis-incapable BAT with mitochondrial ETC proteome imbalance can improve systemic metabolism, suggesting BAT’s contributions to thermoregulation and systemic metabolism can be uncoupled.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria Isolation: Freshly dissected BAT tissue from about 8-week-old male and female mice was homogenized in a Dounce homogenizer with 5ml ice-cold mitochondria isolation buffer (210mM Mannitol, 70mM Sucrose, 1mM EGTA, 5mM HEPES pH7.5, 0.5% BSA). The homogenates were filtered through cheesecloth to remove residual particulates and intact mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation using a previously described protocol (Methods Enzymol 1979;55:65-78). The mitochondrial pellet was resuspended in 25L of isolation buffer and protein was quantitated using the Bradford assay. Mass spectrometry:  Purified BAT mitochondria from 10-12-week old male mice housed at RT or thermoneutrality (n=3 for each genotype/condition) were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitors.  Mitochondria were lysed by probe sonication on ice, and proteins reduced by the addition of 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37C, followed cysteine alkylation by the addition of 15 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 45 min in the dark.  The reaction was then quenched by the addition of 15 mM DTT for 15 minutes at RT.  Proteins were first digested by the addition of endoproteinase LysC (Wako LC) at a 1:50 substrate:enzyme and incubated for 2h at RT.  Next, samples were further digested by the addition of trypsin (Promega) at 1:100 substrate:enzyme, and incubated overnight at 37C.  Protein digests were then acidified by the addition of 0.5% triflororacetic acid, and samples desalted on C18 stage tips (Rainin). Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile, and approximately 1μg of digested mitochondria proteins was loaded onto a 75μm ID column packed with 25cm of Reprosil C18 1.9μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1200 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The gradient was from 5% to 33% acetonitrile over 103 minutes.  All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection, while the most abundant ions were fragmented by HCD and detected in the ion trap, with a 3s cycle time between MS1 spectra. All data were searched against the Mus musculus uniprot database (downloaded July 22, 2016).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation, were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm, and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008).  Proteome changes of each ETC complex were calculated by averaging log2 values of fold change of all identified proteins within individual ETC complex.

### Publication Abstract
Cold-induced thermogenesis in endotherms demands adaptive thermogenesis fueled by mitochondrial respiration and Ucp1-mediated uncoupling in multilocular brown adipocytes (BAs). However, dietary regulation of thermogenesis in BAs isn't fully understood. Here, we describe that the deficiency of Leucine-rich pentatricopeptide repeat containing-protein (Lrpprc) in BAs reduces mtDNA-encoded ETC gene expression, causes ETC proteome imbalance, and abolishes the mitochondria-fueled thermogenesis. BA-specific Lrpprc knockout mice are cold resistant in a 4&#xb0;C cold-tolerance test in the presence of food, which is accompanied by the activation of transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and proteome turnover in BAs. ATF4 activation genetically by BA-specific ATF4 overexpression or physiologically by a low-protein diet feeding can improve cold tolerance in wild-type and Ucp1 knockout mice. Furthermore, ATF4 activation in BAs improves systemic metabolism in obesogenic environment regardless of Ucp1's action. Therefore, our study reveals a diet-dependent but Ucp1-independent thermogenic mechanism in BAs that is relevant to systemic thermoregulation and energy homeostasis.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Lcms

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA


