### Accession
PXD028910

### Title
Campylobacter gene regulation in C. jejuni

### Description
The pathogenic bacterium Campylobacter jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial foodborne gastroenteritis worldwide yet it does not grow in the aerobic environment. The paralogues RrpA and RrpB which are members of MarR family of DNA binding proteins have been shown to be important for the survival of C. jejuni under aerobic and redox stress. We report that RrpA is a positive regulator of mdaB, encoding a flavin-dependent quinone reductase. MdaB confers protection to the cell from redox stress mediated by structurally diverse quinones. RrpB negatively regulates the expression of nfrA (Cj1555c), a flavin reductase. NfrA reduces riboflavin at a much higher rate than flavin mononucleotide (FMN),suggesting exogenous free flavins are the natural substrate. Enzymatic activity of MdaB and NfrA towards their substrates revealed both reductases preferred NADPH as an electron donor. DNA-binding and post translational modification analyses showed that the mechanism of RrpA and RrpB DNA binding is likely a cysteine-based redox switch. Complete genome sequences analysis indicated that MdaB is predominant in Campylobacter spp. and the related Helicobacter spp., whilst NfrA is more often found in C. jejuni strains. Quinones and flavins are antimicrobial redox cycling agents secreted by a wide range of cell-types that can form damaging superoxide by one-electron reactions. We propose that MdaB and NfrA production allows a two-electron reduction mechanism to the less toxic quinol forms. These enzymes thus aid the survival and persistence of C. jejuni in the face of toxic compounds from competing microbes.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant (1 µg) RrpAhis6 was treated with 50µM 2-hydro-1,4-napthoquinone, RrpBhis6 was treated with 50 µM flavanone, and both proteins were treated with 100 µM H202 for 30 mins at room temperature. Samples were lyophilized and sent for liquid chromatography

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific; v2.2) (Figure 1). The raw data file was processed and searched using the Sequest search algorithm (Eng et al; PMID 24226387) against a bespoke database containing the RrpA and RrpB protein sequences obtained from Uniprot. The protein gene identifier was provided in the sample submission form as Cj1546 and Cj1556 (RrpA & RrpB respectively) with the sequence obtained from Uniprot. Modifications included methionine oxidation (+16 Da) and cysteine dioxidation (+32 Da), trioxidation (+48 Da), dehydroalanine (-34 Da) and sulphur dioxide (+64 Da).

### Publication Abstract
The paralogues RrpA and RrpB, which are members of the MarR family of DNA binding proteins, are important for the survival of the global bacterial foodborne pathogen Campylobacter jejuni under redox stress. We report that RrpA is a positive regulator of <i>mdaB</i>, encoding a flavin-dependent quinone reductase that contributes to the protection from redox stress mediated by structurally diverse quinones, while RrpB negatively regulates the expression of <i>cj1555c</i> (renamed <i>nfrA</i> for NADPH-flavin reductase A), encoding a flavin reductase. NfrA reduces riboflavin at a greater rate than its derivatives, suggesting that exogenous free flavins are the natural substrate. MdaB and NfrA both prefer NADPH as an electron donor. Cysteine substitution and posttranslational modification analyses indicated that RrpA and RrpB employ a cysteine-based redox switch. Complete genome sequence analyses revealed that <i>mdaB</i> is frequently found in Campylobacter and related <i>Helicobacter</i> spp., while <i>nfrA</i> is predominant in C. jejuni strains. Quinones and flavins are redox cycling agents secreted by a wide range of cell types that can form damaging superoxide by one-electron reactions. We propose a model for stress adaptation where MdaB and NfrA facilitate a two-electron reduction mechanism to the less toxic hydroquinones, thus aiding survival and persistence of this major pathogen. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Changes in cellular redox potential result in alteration in the oxidation state of intracellular metabolites and enzymes; consequently, cells make adjustments that favor growth and survival. The work we present here answers some of the many questions that have remained elusive over the years of investigation into the enigmatic microaerophile bacterium Campylobacter jejuni. We employed molecular approaches to understand the regulation mechanisms and functional analyses to reveal the roles of two novel quinone and flavin reductases; both serve as major pools of cellular redox-active molecules. This work extends our knowledge on bacterial redox sensing mechanisms and the significance of hemostasis.

### Keywords
Redox cycling, Rrpb, Rrpa

### Affiliations
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine keppel street London WC!E 7HT United Kingdom
King's College London

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Fauzy Nasher
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine keppel street London WC!E 7HT United Kingdom


