### Accession
PXD024716

### Title
Proteomic Organellar Mapping Identifies Modulation of Peroxisomes by HIV-1

### Description
The interaction between HIV-1 and the host cell has been studied at many levels, but cell-wide organellar changes caused by the virus have not been defined. Here, we aimed to detail perturbations to the host cell spatial proteome following HIV protein expression. Subcellular fractionation followed by mass spectrometric analysis of Jurkat T cells, in which HIV-expression was uniformly induced, identified thousands of cytoplasmic and membrane-bound proteins and enable their placement within a multi-dimensional analytic space based on the 7 fractions. Spatial proteomic data were analyzed via a support vector machine bagging classifier to assess the movement of proteins between compartments. The proteins were also examined for absolute movement within 7-dimensional Euclidean space. We found that while some proteins moved between organelles, others remained classified within the same organelle but moved as a group relative to other organelles. The expression of HIV-1 affected the distribution of peroxisomal proteins, causing them to move closer to proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes, but only when the viral protein Nef was expressed. These data identify Nef-dependent changes in peroxisomes as a novel perturbation of the host cell by HIV-1.

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion for mass spectrometry Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 30°C for 60 min and cysteines were subsequently alkylated (carbamidomethylated) with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were then precipitated with 9 volumes of methanol, spun down and resuspended in 1M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Following precipitation, protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay. A total of 0.2 mg of protein was subjected to overnight digestion with 8.0 µg of mass spec grade Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega). Following digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) and subsequently 150 ug peptides were desalted using AssayMap C18 cartridges mounted on an Agilent AssayMap BRAVO liquid handling system, C18 cartridges were first conditioned with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), followed by 0.1% FA. Sample was then loaded onto the conditioned C18 cartridge, washed with 0.1% FA, and eluted with 60% MeCN, 0.1% FA. Finally, the organic solvent was removed in a SpeedVac concentrator prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   TMT Labeling Peptide concentration was determined using a Nanodrop, and a total of 15 µg of peptide was then used for TMT labeling, each replicate serving as a multiplex. Briefly, dried peptide sample was resuspended in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with one of the TMT10-plex reagents (ThermoFisher) solubilized in 100% anhydrous ACN. Reactions were quenched using a 5% hydroxylamine solution at 1-2 μl per 20 μl TMT reagent. The 10 samples (or however many in a multiplex) were then pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. The labeled peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA. After sonication for 1min, sample was desalted manually using SepPak, column was first conditioned with 100% acetonitrile (ACN), followed by 0.1% FA. Sample was loaded, then washed with 0.1% FA and eluted in a new vial with 60% ACN, 0.1% FA. Finally, the organic solvent was removed using a SpeedVac concentrator prior to fractionation.  High pH Reverse-Phase Fractionation Dried samples were reconstituted in 20mM ammonium formate (pH ~10) and fractionated using a Waters Acquity CSH C18 1.7 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column mounted on a MClass Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters corp., Milford, MA) at a flow rate of 40 μl/min with buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10) and buffer B (100% ACN). Absorbance values at 215 nm and 280 nm were measured on Waters UV/Vis spectrophotometer, using a flowcell with a 10 mm path length. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 5% B to 25% B in 62.5 min followed by a linear increase to 60% B in 4.5 min and 70% in 3 min. and kept there for 7 min before ramping to 5% in 1 min. Twenty-four fractions were collected and pooled in a non-contiguous manner into twelve total fractions. Pooled fractions were dried to completeness in a SpeedVac concentrator. Twelve total fractions per multiplex gives twelve by six total MS runs, 72 runs at three hours each.  LC-MS3 Analysis Dried samples were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source (Thermo). Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (25 cm x 75 um packed with Waters BEH 1.7 um particles) and separated over a 120-min linear gradient of 2-28% solvent B at a flow rate of 300nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode. Parameter settings were set as follows: FT MS1 resolution (120 000) with AGC target of 1e6, ITMS2 isolation window (0.4 m/z), IT MS2 max. inject time (120 ms), IT MS2 AGC (2E4), IT MS2 CID energy (35%), SPS ion count (up to 10), FT MS3 isolation window (0.4 m/z), FT MS3 max. inject time (150 ms), FT MS3 resolution (50 000) with AGC target of 1e5. A TOP10 method was used where each FT MS1 scan was used to select up to 10 precursors for interrogation by CID MS2 with readout in the ion trap. Each MS2 was used to select precursors (SPS ions) for the MS3 scan which measured reporter ion abundance.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were searched with the MaxQuant software39 (version 1.5.7.5) using the Andromeda search engine40. Searches were performed against a UniProt human canonical database appended with HIV-1NL4-3 protein sequences. Reporter ion MS3 was selected for searches, with 10plex TMT as a fixed modification and a reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Trypsin was selected, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. A minimum of 7 amino acids was required for peptide identification. The fixed modification specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT and variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus. Peptides and proteins groups were both filtered to a 1% FDR. Protein groups were filtered for "Only identified by site", "Reverse", and "Contaminant”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Organelle mapping, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA
Krogan lab

### Submitter
Alicia Richards

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA


