### Accession
PXD010132

### Title
20S proteasome digestion of HeLa cell extracts

### Description
The 20S proteasome is responsible for the catalytic activity of all proteasome complexes. Structural constraints mean that only unfolded, extended polypeptide chains may enter the catalytic core of the 20S proteasome. Here we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the 20S CP substrates in-vitro. We revealed that the 20S CP substrates are highly structually disordered. The 20S proteasome substrate group, termed 20S-IDPome are characterized by having significantly more protein binding partners, more post-translational modification sites and are highly enriched for RNA binding proteins. Remarkably, we found that low complexity proteins with prion-like domain which interact with GR or PR di-peptide repeats are the most preferential 20S proteasome substrates. Our finding suggests roles of the 20S proteasome in gene transcription and formation of phase-separated granules.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were collected and nuclear enriched. The nuclear enriched fraction was subjected to heat treatment. Heat soluble fractions were incubated with either purified 20S Proteasomes or Deg buffer (as control). Digested peptides were obtained and subjected to solid phase extraction. These peptides were identified by MS. Biological replicates of both 20S degraded and control samples were carried out.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software. The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using PEAKS 7.0. Data was searched against the humansequences and appended with 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. No enzyme was defined for digestion, and variable modification was set to oxidation of methionines. Search results were then imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Proteins were then grouped based on shared peptides and Identifications were filtered such that the global false discovery rate was maximum of 1%. Data was normalized based on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense, unique peptides per protein. Principal Component Analysis and 2 dimensional hierarchical clustering were used to assess global integrity of the data and search for outlier samples. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of arithmetic means of the case versus control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomal degradation is the main route of regulated proteostasis. The 20S proteasome is the core particle (CP) responsible for the catalytic activity of all proteasome complexes. Structural constraints mean that only unfolded, extended polypeptide chains may enter the catalytic core of the 20S proteasome. It has been previously shown that the 20S CP is active in degradation of certain intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) lacking structural constrains. Here, a comprehensive analysis of the 20S CP substrates in vitro is conducted. It is revealed that the 20S CP substrates are highly disordered. However, not all the IDPs are 20S CP substrates. The group of the IDPs that are 20S CP substrates, termed 20S-IDPome are characterized by having significantly more protein binding partners, more posttranslational modification sites, and are highly enriched for RNA binding proteins. The vast majority of them are involved in splicing, mRNA processing, and translation. Remarkably, it is found that low complexity proteins with prion-like domain (PrLD), which interact with GR or PR di-peptide repeats, are the most preferential 20S CP substrates. The finding suggests roles of the 20S CP in gene transcription and formation of phase-separated granules.

### Keywords
Heat soluble proteins, 20s proteasome digestion

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Genetics Weizmann Institute of Science
Postdoctoral fellow

### Submitter
Nadav Myers

### Lab Head
Dr Yosef Shaul
Department of Molecular Genetics Weizmann Institute of Science


