### Accession
PXD034193

### Title
Protein composition of Toxoplasma endocytic and exocytic structures by proximity-dependent biotinylation

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is a widely prevalent parasite of animals and humans that causes a broad spectrum of conditions ranging from asymptomatic or mild cold-like infections to abortion, severe ocular disease, encephalitis, and sometimes death. It is a member of the phylum Apicomplexa that also includes such significant human pathogens as Plasmodium spp. and Cryptosporidium spp. causing malaria and diarrheal disease, respectively. The toxoplasma cell has a multilayered pellicle: under the plasma membrane lies the inner membrane complex (IMC) comprised of flat membrane sacks supported by cortical microtubules and a meshwork of cytoskeletal filaments. The IMC acts as a mechanical barrier for membrane vesicles trafficking to and from the plasma membrane, necessitating the existence of dedicated cites for endo- and exocytosis where the IMC is interrupted. One such site is located at the apical end of the cell where the contents of the apical secretory organelles is exocytosed upon invasion. However, endocytosis in Toxoplasma and other apicomplexans is poorly understood, although conspicuous invaginations of the plasma membrane observed microscopically have been dubbed the micropore and postulated to be involved in endocytosis. We found that the endocytic markers including the subunits α and μ of the AP2 adaptor complex, dynamin-related protein C (DrpC), an Eps15 homology domain-containing protein, and the kelch-domain protein K13 localise to distinct persistent foci in the pellicle of Toxoplasma. Another type of persistent punctate structures found in the IMC are the enigmatic apical annuli whose function is completely unknown. We have discovered a new component of the annuli which is a putative LMBR1 family region protein embedded into the plasma membrane. Our experiments indicate that this protein – and annuli by extension – has a role in exocytosis. To better understand the molecular composition of these endocytic and exocytic structures and gain an insight into their function, we genetically fused them with a promiscuous bacterial biotin-ligase BirA* and used them as baits in proximity-dependent biotin identification experiments (BioID). We employed TMT10plex labelling and MS3-level tandem mass spectrometry with synchronous precursor selection (SPS-MS3) to achieve accurate quantification of multiple samples. Several hundred proteins have been identified and quantified in three biological replicates for every bait and the parental cell line control. Proteins significantly enriched in the BirA*-tagged cells relative to the control have been identified using linear modelling with LIMMA.

### Sample Protocol
Toxoplasma gondii cell lines derived from strain RH with were maintained in a culture of human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF) following a standard routine. To induce the biotinylation of the proximal proteins by the BirA* enzyme genetically fused to the BioID baits, the toxoplasma cells were grown with HFF monolayers in ED1 media containing 150 μM biotin for 24 hours before parasite egress. The parental cell line was used as a negative control for background biotinylation. Three biological replicates were set up for each sample. About 2e9 tachyzoites per sample were harvested and purified from the culture. The protein extracts were prepared by lysing the cells in the RIPA buffer. Aliquots of the protein extracts equivalent to approximately 5 mg total protein were incubated with Pierce™ Streptavidin Magnetic Beads overnight at +4°C to capture biotinylated proteins. The captured proteins were treated to reduce and alkylate thiols of cysteine side chains and digested in situ with 2 µg trypsin at 37°C overnight. The tryptic peptides released into the supernatant were collected and quantified by Pierce Quantitative Fluorescent Peptide Assay. Aliquots of 5-10 µg peptides were labelled with 270 µg TMT11plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s procedure with minor modifications. The TMT-tagged peptide samples were mixed into three 10plexes such that every 10plex contained triplicates of two BioID bait cell lines and a triplicate of the parental cell line control. The tenth TMT channel in each 10plex was used for the apical annuli BioID bait. The TMT pools were analysed in a 2-hour run by nanoflow low-pH RP-LC hyphenated online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with an SPS-MS3 method for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) was performed against annotated protein sequences of Homo sapience (93,609 entries retrieved from UniProt on 09.04.2018), Bos taurus (24,148 entries retrieved from UniProt on 17.04.2017), and Toxoplasma gondii strain ME49 (8,322 entries retrieved from ToxoDB.org release 36 on 19.02.2018). Common contaminant proteins – e.g., human keratins, bovine serum albumin, porcine trypsin – from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, 123 entries, adapted from https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) were added to the database, as well as the sequence of the BirA* used to generate the BioID bait proteins by gene fusion using Mascot search engine v2.6.2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. The dynamic modifications were TMT6plex at the peptide N-terminus and side chains of lysine, serine, and threonine, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and biotinylation of the peptide N-terminus or lysine side chain. Percolator v3.02.1 was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) of PSMs. TMT10plex reporter ion intensity quantitation was performed by Proteome Discoverer’s “Reporter Ion Quantifier” node using the Most Confident Centroid method and 20 ppm mass tolerance for peak integration. PSM to peptide to protein aggregation was done by Proteome Discovered. Protein-level data containing only full TMT10plex quantitation data and Medium or High FDR level were exported and analysed in the R software for statistical data analysis using packages tidyverse v1.2.1 for data import, management, and manipulation, Bioconductor packages MSnbase v2.10.1 for managing quantitative proteomics data, biobroom v1.16.0 for converting Bioconductor objects into tidy data frames, and limma v3.40.6 for linear modelling and statistical data evaluation.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites have immense impacts on humanity, but their basic cellular processes are often poorly understood. Where endocytosis occurs in these cells, how conserved this process is with other eukaryotes, and what the functions of endocytosis are across this phylum are major unanswered questions. Using the apicomplexan model Toxoplasma, we identified the molecular composition and behavior of unusual, fixed endocytic structures. Here, stable complexes of endocytic proteins differ markedly from the dynamic assembly/disassembly of these machineries in other eukaryotes. We identify that these endocytic structures correspond to the 'micropore' that has been observed throughout the Apicomplexa. Moreover, conserved molecular adaptation of this structure is seen in apicomplexans including the kelch-domain protein K13 that is central to malarial drug-resistance. We determine that a dominant function of endocytosis in Toxoplasma is plasma membrane homeostasis, rather than parasite nutrition, and that these specialized endocytic structures originated early in infrakingdom Alveolata likely in response to the complex cell pellicle that defines this medically and ecologically important ancient eukaryotic lineage.

### Keywords
Protozoa, Apicomplexa, Pellicle, K13, Exocytosis, Protist, Bioid, Apical annuli, Endocytosis, Toxoplasma gondii, Sps-ms3, Membrane, Tmt, Inner membrane complex

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Konstantin Barylyuk

### Lab Head
Dr Ross F. Waller
Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK


