### Accession
PXD039552

### Title
Inter-Laboratory Variability in the Madin-Darby Canine Kidney Cell ProteomeInter-Laboratory Variability in the Madin-Darby Canine Kidney Cell Proteome

### Description
Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells are widely used to study epithelial cell functionality. Their low endogenous drug transporter protein levels make them an amenable system to investigate trans-epithelial permeation and drug transporter protein activity after their transfection. MDCK cells display diverse phenotypic traits and as such laboratory-to-laboratory variability in drug permeability assessments are observed. Consequently, In Vitro-In Vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) approaches using permeability and/or transporter activity data require calibration. A comprehensive proteomic quantification of eleven filter-grown parental or mock-transfected MDCK monolayers from eight different pharmaceutical laboratories using the Total Protein Approach (TPA) is provided. TPA enabled estimations of key morphometric parameters such as monolayer cellularity and volume. Overall, metabolic liability to xenobiotics is likely to be limited for MDCK cell due to the low expression of required enzymes. SLC16A1 (MCT1) was the highest abundance SLC transporter linked to xenobiotic activity, while ABCC4 (MRP4) was the highest abundant ABC transporter. Our data supports existing findings that Claudin-2 levels may be linked to tight junction modulation, thus impacting trans-epithelial resistance. This unique database provides data on more than 8000 proteins copy number and concentrations, thus allowing an in-depth appraisal of the control monolayers used in each laboratory.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Sanple Preparation (FASP) with consecutive digestion

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant for spectra searches and TPA for (absolute) protein quatification

### Publication Abstract
Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells are widely used to study epithelial cell functionality. Their low endogenous drug transporter protein levels make them an amenable system to investigate transepithelial permeation and drug transporter protein activity after their transfection. MDCK cells display diverse phenotypic traits, and as such, laboratory-to-laboratory variability in drug permeability assessments is observed. Consequently, in vitro-in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) approaches using permeability and/or transporter activity data require calibration. A comprehensive proteomic quantification of 11 filter-grown parental or mock-transfected MDCK monolayers from 8 different pharmaceutical laboratories using the total protein approach (TPA) is provided. The TPA enables estimations of key morphometric parameters such as monolayer cellularity and volume. Overall, metabolic liability to xenobiotics is likely to be limited for MDCK cells due to the low expression of required enzymes. <i>SLC</i>16A1 (MCT1) was the highest abundant SLC transporter linked to xenobiotic activity, while <i>ABC</i>C4 (MRP4) was the highest abundant ABC transporter. Our data supports existing findings that claudin-2 levels may be linked to tight junction modulation, thus impacting trans-epithelial resistance. This unique database provides data on more than 8000 protein copy numbers and concentrations, thus allowing an in-depth appraisal of the control monolayers used in each laboratory.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomics; total protein analysis (tpa); mdck; epithelial proteome; adme protein abundances

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemisrty
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemisrty


