### Accession
PXD046963

### Title
KDM5-mediated transcriptional activation of ribosomal protein genes alters translation efficiency to regulate mitochondrial metabolism

### Description
Genes encoding the KDM5 family of transcriptional regulators are disrupted in individuals with intellectual disability (ID). To understand the link between KDM5 and ID, we generated five Drosophila strains harboring missense alleles analogous to those observed in patients. These alleles showed effects on neuroanatomical development, cognition, and other behaviors, in addition to a transcriptional signature that included the downregulation of many ribosomal protein genes. A similar transcriptional profile was observed in KDM5C knockout human glutamatergic neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), suggesting a conserved role for KDM5 proteins in regulating ribosomal protein genes. Quantifying changes to the translatome caused by reduced KDM5 in Drosophila neurons, we find that the translation of mRNAs required for mitochondrial activity was particularly affected. Altered mitochondrial activity was confirmed through metabolomic studies that revealed decreased citric acid cycle activity. KDM5 therefore plays a key role in maintaining mitochondrial function that, when altered, could contribute to cognitive and behavioral phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested directly on streptavidin beads. 5 mM DTT and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8) were added to the solution and left on the bench for about 1 hour for disulfide bond reduction. Samples were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Afterward, 500 ng of trypsin was added to the samples, which were digested at 37oC for 18 h. The peptide solution was dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Sample desalting  Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were desalted using a 96-well plate filter (Orochem) packed with 1 mg of Oasis HLB C-18 resin (Waters). Briefly, the samples were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the HLB resin, which was previously equilibrated using 100 µl of the same buffer. After washing with 100 µl of 0.1% TFA, the samples were eluted with a buffer containing 70 µl of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS Acquisition and Analysis  Samples were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto a Dionex RSLC Ultimate 300 (Thermo Scientific), coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed with a two-column system, consisting of a C-18 trap cartridge (300 µm ID, 5 mm length) and a picofrit analytical column (75 µm ID, 25 cm length) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin. Peptides were separated using a 90 min gradient from 4-30% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire spectra in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, the full MS scan was set to 300-1200 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x10e5. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap using the top speed mode (2 secs), an AGC target of 1x10e4 and an HCD collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4, Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST search engine and the UniProt database of Drosophila melanogaster. The search for total proteome included variable modification of N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 pm for precursor ions and 0.2 Da for product ions. Peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Following the search, data was processed as described by Aguilan et al. Briefly, proteins were log2 transformed, normalized by the average value of each sample and missing values were imputed using a normal distribution 2 standard deviations lower than the mean. Statistical regulation was assessed using heteroscedastic T-test (if p-value < 0.05).  Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Kdm5, Translation, Ribosome, Neuron, Transcription, Ipscs, Histone demethylase, Kdm5c, Ribo-seq

### Affiliations
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, United States

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Sidoli
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, United States


