### Accession
PXD031322

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of oxaliplatin induced peripheral neurotoxicity

### Description
We performed a data independent acquisition (DIA) -based quantitative proteomics strategy to investigate the global proteome alteration in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) tissues from mice injected with oxaliplatin for different periods.

### Sample Protocol
DRG tissue samples were homogenized in lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 75 mM sodium chloride, protease inhibitor cocktail, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Then, the homogenate was further processed with ultrasonication and centrifuged to remove the debris. protein concentration was determined by the BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein digestion was performed using the modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation procedure. Briefly, the lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 50 min. The reduced proteins were alkylated with 40 Mm iodoacetamide for 40 min in darkness. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a concentration of 40 mM for 30 min. The lysate solution was exchanged to 50 Mm NH4HCO3 buffer by centrifugation with the 10 kDa centrifugal filter (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) before trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added at 1:30 trypsin-to-protein ratio (w/w) for incubation at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were collected by centrifugation and dried with a Savant SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and quantified by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before LC MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
DIA-NN (v1.7.12) was employed to perform label-free quantification. Swiss-Prot FASTA database for mouse (17042 sequence entries, released in January 2021) was downloaded from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/). The spectral library was established by searching five raw files of GPF-DIA against the FASTA database in DIA-NN. The output file “lib.tsv” was used as the spectral library. And then, the “report.tsv” files generated by DIA-NN was used for the downstream analysis. Protein expression matrix was generated for quantification using “Precursor.quantity” intensities by “diann” package in R framework (v4.1.0). Proteins identified with two or more unique peptides and three intensity values in at least one group were used for quantification. Next, the expression matrix was subjected to quantile normalization by R package “preprocessCore”. Missing values were imputed with the minimum value across the proteome data. The intensity values were log2-transformed for quantification and bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Oxaliplatin (OXA)-induced peripheral neurotoxicity (OIPN) is a high-incidence and dose-dependent adverse reaction during OXA treatment. Its underlying mechanisms remain unclear, and no effective treatment or prevention therapies are currently available. Here, we employed a data independent acquisition (DIA)-based quantitative proteomic strategy to investigate the global proteome alterations in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) tissues from mice injected with OXA for different periods. We identified 1128 differentially regulated proteins that were divided into six subclusters according to their alteration trends. Interestingly, these proteins were involved in cellular processes such as cell cycle, ribosomal stress, metabolism, and ion transport. In addition, OXA administration induced abundance changes of ion channels and proteins associated with mitochondrial function and reactive oxygen species production. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of diroximel fumarate (DRF), an FDA-approved oral fumarate drug for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis. Our findings showed that DRF could effectively ameliorate symptoms of OIPN and reduce the level of oxidative stress in mice. Taken together, our study systematically mapped the proteome alteration associated with the neural toxicity of OXA, and the findings could be leveraged to better understand the mechanisms of OIPN and to develop more effect treatment therapies. SIGNIFICANCE: Oxaliplatin (OXA)-induced peripheral neurotoxicity (OIPN) is a high-incidence and dose-dependent adverse reaction with unclear mechanism. Here we employed a data independent acquisition (DIA)-based quantitative proteomic strategy to explore the proteome changes in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) tissues from mice treated by OXA. The findings provided novel insights regarding the mechanisms of OIPN. For example, our data showed that OXA induced a broad disturbance in metabolism, particularly in glycolysis and amino acid metabolism. Additionally, we observed abundance changes of many ion channels and proteins associated with mitochondrial function and reactive oxygen species production. Furthermore, this study provided the first evidence for the possibility of repositioning diroximel fumarate (DRF) for treating OIPN.

### Keywords
Oxaliplatin, Quantitative proteomics, Ros, Metabolism, Peripheral neurotoxicity

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
Tianjin university

### Submitter
Linlin YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
School of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China


