### Accession
PXD014173

### Title
K48 ubiquitin selectively targets oxidized proteins in vivo

### Description
Ubiquitin is a highly conserved eukaryotic protein responsible for regulating a variety of functions when conjugated to target proteins. Ubiquitin is essential, accumulates during the stress response, and is the canonical signal for protein degradation by the proteasome. Still, the function of ubiquitin in response to oxidative stress, particularly in the removal of oxidized proteins remains elusive because of the number of potential targets and different roles that polyubiquitin chains can play.  Since polyubiquitin chains linked by K48 ubiquitin are the most abundant and canonical signal for protein degradation, we investigated the roles of K48 ubiquitin in the degradation of oxidized proteins. Combining protein oxidation, linkage-specific ubiquitination screens, and quantitative proteomics, we found K48 ubiquitin accumulated in a bimodal fashion, at both the early and late phase of response. We further showed that a fraction of oxidized proteins are conjugated with K48 ubiquitin in vivo. Using quantitative proteomics we identified ~750 ubiquitinated proteins and ~400 oxidized proteins that were differentially modified during the stress response, and around half the proteins were both oxidized and ubiquitinated. These proteins were highly abundant and function in translation and energy metabolism. Finally, we showed that the ubiquitination system is required for degradation of oxidized proteins, suggesting that oxidized proteins that rapidly accumulate during stress are ubiquitinated, and degraded during the later recovery phase. This temporal disconnect may be necessary for reprogramming protein dynamics, restoring proteostasis, and resuming cell growth.

### Sample Protocol
Cell disruption was performed by glass beads agitation at 4 C in standard buffer 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), 1x Protease inhibitor cocktail set I (EMD Millipore). Iodoacetamide was added to inhibit a wide class of deubiquitinating enzymes. The extract was centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 30 min at 4 C and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). Mass spectrometry: Protein denaturation was achieved by 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) addition to 100 µg of protein at final concentration of 50 %. Cysteine residues were reduced by 15 mM DTT for 45 min at 55 C and alkylated by 55 mM IAM in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to reach 5 % of TFE.  Trypsin was added to a final concentration of 1:50 w/w enzyme:protein and mixture were incubated for 16 h at 37 C. Reaction was stopped with 1 % (v/v) formic acid (FA), desalted using HyperSep Spin Tip C18 (Thermo), lyophilized and resuspended in 5 % acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % FA. Ubiquitinated proteins were isolated from cell lysate by TUBE2 (Tandem Ubiquitin Binding Entities - LifeSensors) affinity purification according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 1 mg of protein was incubated with TUBE-agarose beads for 2 h at 4 C under agitation.  The beads were washed 5 times before elution. To covalently label oxidized proteins, 280 µg of total protein were diluted in 100 mM MES-buffered saline pH 4.7, and EZ-link hydrazide-biotin (Thermo) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM.  Samples were incubated at room temperature for one hour. Unreacted biotin-hydrazide was removed and buffer was exchanged by dialysis (Slide-A-Lyzer MINI dialysis devices, 10K MWCO, Thermo) into dialysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl) overnight. To isolate biotinylated proteins, dialyzed lysate was incubated with T1 Streptavidin Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at 4C with agitation followed by three washes in TBS-T buffer. For mass spectrometry analysis, samples were eluted in elution buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) at room temperature twice for 20 minutes with agitation. Samples were digested for 3 hours with 2 µg of trypsin/LysC (Promega) at 37C.  Samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0 such that [urea] = 0.72 M and were allowed to continue digesting at 37C overnight. Tryptic digestion was halted by adding 1% (v/v) FA. Samples were lyophilized to ~20 µl, re-suspended in 150 µl buffer C (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.01% formic acid), and washed using a HyperSep C18 Spin Tip (Thermo). The eluted sample was again lyophilized and resuspended in buffer C.

### Data Protocol
The output RAW data was processed using the MaxQuant suite {Cox, 2008 #1819} to detect, assign, sequence and quantify the proteins abundance assisted by Andromeda search engine. The data was searched against the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (Uniprot). Protein identification was performed at 20 ppm tolerance at the FT-mass analyzer and 6 ppm at the IT-MS, with a posterior global false discovery rate at 1 % based on the reverse sequence of the FASTA file (Uniprot). Two trypsin missed cleavages sites were allowed, oxidation of methionine was searched as variable post-translational modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. Only proteins with more than one peptide were considered for further analysis and for the core dataset (oxidation/ubiquitinated/expression), a given protein had to be present in all biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
<b><i>Aims:</i></b> Ubiquitin is a highly conserved protein modifier that heavily accumulates during the oxidative stress response. Here, we investigated the role of the ubiquitination system, particularly at the linkage level, in the degradation of oxidized proteins. The function of ubiquitin in the removal of oxidized proteins remains elusive because of the wide range of potential targets and different roles that polyubiquitin chains play. Therefore, we describe in detail the dynamics of the K48 ubiquitin response as the canonical signal for protein degradation. We identified ubiquitin targets and defined the relationship between protein ubiquitination and oxidation during the stress response. <b><i>Results:</i></b> Combining oxidized protein isolation, linkage-specific ubiquitination screens, and quantitative proteomics, we found that K48 ubiquitin accumulated at both the early and late phases of the stress response. We further showed that a fraction of oxidized proteins are conjugated with K48 ubiquitin. We identified &#x223c;750 ubiquitinated proteins and &#x223c;400 oxidized proteins that were modified during oxidative stress, and around half of which contain both modifications. These proteins were highly abundant and function in translation and energy metabolism. <b><i>Innovation and Conclusion:</i></b> Our work showed for the first time that K48 ubiquitin modifies a large fraction of oxidized proteins, demonstrating that oxidized proteins can be targeted by the ubiquitin/proteasome system. We suggest that oxidized proteins that rapidly accumulate during stress are subsequently ubiquitinated and degraded during the late phase of the response. This delay between oxidation and ubiquitination may be necessary for reprogramming protein dynamics, restoring proteostasis, and resuming cell growth.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, K48 ubiquitin, Oxidation

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Duke University, USA
Duke University

### Submitter
Gustavo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Gustavo Silva
Department of Biology, Duke University, USA


