### Accession
PXD022360

### Title
Leveraging Parameter Dependencies in High-Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion-Mobility Spectrometry and Size-exclusion Chromatography for Proteome-wide Crosslinking Mass Spectrometry_CLMS dataset

### Description
Ion mobility spectrometry shows great promise to tackle analytically challenging research questions by adding another separation dimension to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. The understanding of how analyte properties influence ion mobility has increased through recent studies but no clear rationale for the design of customized experimental settings has emerged. Here, we leverage machine learning to deepen our understanding of field asymmetric-waveform ion-mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) for the analysis of crosslinked peptides. Knowing that predominantly m/z, then size and charge state of an analyte influences the separation, we found ideal compensation voltages correlating with size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) fraction number. The effect of this relationship on analytical depth can be substantial as exploiting it allowed us to almost double unique residue pair detections in a proteome-wide crosslinking experiment. Other applications involving liquid- and gas-phase separation may also benefit from considering such parameter dependencies.

### Sample Protocol
For this study, we used human serum albumin, equine myoglobin, ovotransferrin from chicken, and leporine creatine kinase. We obtained these substances from Sigma and Roche. To prepare the samples, we used 8M urea or 6M urea/2M thiourea for denaturation and during digestion. Other chemicals and reagents we used include ammonium bicarbonate and DSS/BS3/DSSO crosslinker. We conducted the analysis using TopS 2-2.5s cycle, 120k MS1 res, 50k MS2 res, decision-tree-based MS2 for BS3/DSS, and stepped NCEs for DSSO.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR is used to analyze the data and identified the peptides and proteins. Results are exported to mzidentml.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Ppi, Faims, Chromatography, Clms

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin, Bioanalytics, Prof. Juri Rappsilber

### Submitter
Ludwig Sinn 

### Lab Head
 Prof. Dr. Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin, Bioanalytics, Prof. Juri Rappsilber


