### Accession
PXD007137

### Title
Ceritinib Functional Proteomics

### Description
To elucidate the mechanism of action (MoA) of ceritinib’s antiproliferative activity in these cells, we applied a systems approach combining both chemical and phosphoproteomics to gain a global view of ceritinib’s target profile and network-wide phosphorylation changes following ceritinib treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Drug affinity chromatography experiments were conducted essentially as described previously.37 Briefly, c-ceritinib or ampicillin was immobilized on NHS-activated Sepharose for Fast Flow resin (GE Healthcare) and blocked with ethanolamine overnight. H650, H23, H3122 cells and patient samples were lyzed and total cell lysate containing 5 mg of protein were added to the affinity matrix for 2 hours. Competition experiments were conducted by incubating total cell lysates with 20 M ceritinib for 30 minutes prior to affinity chromatography. A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (U3000, Dionex) interfaced with an electrospray ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing following chemical proteomic experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (5 mm x 300 μm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 m ID, 2 m particle size, 100 Å pore size, Pepmap 100, Dionex). The LC method was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 50% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nL/min. Five tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. MS/MS scans were performed using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks  For global phosphoproteomics (biological duplicate), cells were labeled using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) (Invitrogen)42 according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, H650 cells were grown in RPMI (+10% dialyzed FBS) containing 13C6, 15N4-Arginine and 13C6-Lysine or standard RPMI (+10% FBS) for 10 days. Incorporation of heavy label was confirmed by LC-MS/MS (> 99%). For phosphotyrosine proteomics experiments (biological and technical duplicates), cells were lyzed using 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M Urea, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM -glycerophosphate. Tyrosine phoshopeptides were enriched using the PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine Mouse mAb (P-Tyr-100) Kit (Cell Signaling #5636) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For SILAC-based experiments, samples were lyzed, digested, fractionated (SCX) into 12 concatenated fractions and global phosphopeptide enrichment was done using PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel (Sigma) according to manufacturer’s instructions. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) coupled to an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo) was used for tandem mass spectrometry phosphopeptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm, 100 Å) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex). The gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nL/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan. MS/MS scans were performed using 60 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
Mascot searches were performed against the UniProt human database downloaded March 2015. Two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed, the precursor mass tolerance was 1.1 Da. MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.8 Da. Dynamic modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys) and oxidation (Met). A minimum of two exclusive unique spectrum counts was required for protein identification. Mascot search results were summarized in Scaffold 4.4.5 and imported into R for bioinformatic analysis.  Data were searched by MaxQuant v1.2.2.543–45 using the UniProt human database (downloaded 11/2014). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. For SILAC based experiments, 13C6, 15N4-Arginine and 13C6-Lysine were included as fixed modifications. Data was normalized using iterative rank order normalization (IRON)46 and imported into R for bioinformatic analysis. Phosphopeptide identification and quantification (XIC) was confirmed using Skyline47

### Publication Abstract
Targeted drugs are effective when they directly inhibit strong disease drivers, but only a small fraction of diseases feature defined actionable drivers. Alternatively, network-based approaches can uncover new therapeutic opportunities. Applying an integrated phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics strategy, here we describe the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor ceritinib as having activity across several ALK-negative lung cancer cell lines and identify new targets and network-wide signaling effects. Combining pharmacological inhibitors and RNA interference revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving the noncanonical targets IGF1R, FAK1, RSK1 and RSK2. Mutating the downstream signaling hub YB1 protected cells from ceritinib. Consistent with YB1 signaling being known to cause taxol resistance, combination of ceritinib with paclitaxel displayed strong synergy, particularly in cells expressing high FAK autophosphorylation, which we show to be prevalent in lung cancer. Together, we present a systems chemical biology platform for elucidating multikinase inhibitor polypharmacology mechanisms, subsequent design of synergistic drug combinations, and identification of mechanistic biomarker candidates.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
Brent Kuenzi

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix
Moffitt Cancer Center


