### Accession
PXD037629

### Title
Specific milk composition in miR-30b-transgenic mice associated to offspring early gut maturation with lasting consequences on their growth

### Description
Milk composition is complex and includes numerous components essential for the offspring growth and development. Besides a high abundance of the miR-30b microRNA, milk produced by the transgenic mouse model of miR-30b-mammary deregulation displays significant changes in its fatty acid profils. Moreover, wild-type adopted pups fed with this milk present an early growth defect. Therefore, the consequences of miR-30b milk feeding on neonate gut development, a prime target of suckled milk, were investigated, along with further characterization of changes in milk composition.  A broad characterization of the duodenum of wild-type pups fed with miR-30b milk was performed, using histological, transcriptomic, proteomic and intestinal permeability analyses. Milk of miR-30b foster dams was extensively analyzed using proteomic, metabolomic and lipidomic approaches and hormonal immunoassays.  Pups fed with miR-30b milk showed a maturation of their gut tissue, presenting an earlier reduction in paracellular and transcellular permeability at postnatal day 5. MiR-30b milk displayed significant changes in its total lipid content, ceramides and sphingomyelin concentrations, an overabundance in nine proteins and an increase in insulin and leptin levels.  These molecules were associated with neonatal gut integrity and maturation, notably by acting on tight junctions. Their significant changes in miR-30b milk could be clearly involved in the early intestinal closure phenotype of the pups, in connection with the observed early growth defect. Further investigations are now needed to determine their specific mode of action, with the aim to modulate infant diet in regard with a benefic effect on growth and health.

### Sample Protocol
For the collection of milk samples, the pups were removed (4h beforehand) and oxytocin (150 µl per female at a dose of 10 IU/ml) was administered via intraperitoneal injection. All samples were collected at mid-lactation (LD-15), then frozen, for each individual, as aliquots of 20 to 100 µl of whole milk, and aliquots of 150 to 500 µl of milk diluted at a ratio of one volume of H2O for 3 volumes of milk, and skimmed by centrifugation at 4000 rpm, at 4°C for 15 minutes. Whole and skimmed milk samples were then stored at -80°C until use. Total protein content of skimmed milk was measured using the Quick Bradford kit (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer's recommendations, from aliquots of 20 µl of milk diluted 1:10, for 4 individual samples per group at LD-15. Each sample was diluted to 1 µg/µl to a final volume of 50 µL in a buffer composed of 6M Urea, 1M ThioUrea 1M, 1X cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche), in Tris-HCl 10 mM pH 7.2. Samples in solution were subjected to an initial disulfide bridge reduction step using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 minutes. Then alkylation of free cysteines was performed with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 1 h in the dark. Digestion was performed with 0.5 µg lysC (3H) then 0.5 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C, then stopped by adding 0.1% TFA. Then, the peptides were purified on C18 SPE cartridges (Strata X 30 mg / 1 mL (Phenomex)) and eluted with 500 μL of 40% ACN / 0.1% TFA. Peptide extracts were dried with speed-vac and then recovered in 80 µl of chromatographic loading buffer (2% ACN + 0.1% FA). Aliquots of each sample was taken up in different volumes of chromatographic loading buffer (2% ACN + 0.08% formic acid (FA)) to obtain a solution at 0.1 μg/μL for mass spectrometry analysis. 4 µL of each diluted sample (400 ng) were injected into an U3000 nanoRSLC  coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient of 1-45% (80% ACN / 0.1% FA) for 120 min, 98% for 5 min and 1% for 10 min. Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 with the following machine setup in CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) mode: (1) full MS scan in Orbitrap (scan range [m/z] = 400–1500) and (2) MS/MS using CID (35% collision energy) in Ion Trap (AGC target = 4.0 × 103, max. injection time = 300 ms, data type = centroid). Analyzed charge states were set to 2–4, the dynamic exclusion to 60 s and the intensity threshold was fixed at 5.0 × 103.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using X!Tandem Piledriver (version 2015.04.01.1), X!Tandem Pipeline (version 3.4.2) and the Mus musculus Uniprot/SwissProt database (version january2017; 35,208 entries). Data filtering was achieved according to a peptide E-value < 0.01, protein log (E-value) <−4 and a minimum of two identified peptides per protein. For duodenal and milk proteomics analysis, a principal component analysis of the data was performed using R software v3.2.4 (R Development Core Team, 2018, http://www.R-project.org) with the ade4 package, followed by a differential expression analysis between proteomic spectra counts according to the WT or miR-30b milk with the Limma package , after normalization by a voom transformation of the data (mean-variance modelling at the observational level). In Limma, the lmFit function was used to fit row-wise linear models and fold changes were estimated using an empirical Bayes shrinkage procedure. The p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method, and those with an adjusted p-value < 0.1 were considered to be significant.  Growth curves data statistical analysis were performed using R software v3.2.5 with a linear mixed-effects model fit by REML and autoregressive correlation structure of order 1, considering maternal milk, time, sex, sex:time and milk:time as fixed effects and animals as random effects. P-value < 0.05 were considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Milk composition, Early maturation, Mir-30b, Gut barrier, Mice

### Affiliations
INRAE
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, GABI, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France

### Submitter
Céline Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Sandrine Le Guillou
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, GABI, 78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France


