### Accession
PXD004128

### Title
Phosphoproteome Analysis In Developing Wheat Grains Under Different Nitrogen Conditions

### Description
Wheat (Triticum aestivum), one of the most important cereal crops, it provides many kinds of food for humans and animals, in this study, we performed the first comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis to study the regulatory mechanism of bread quality formation under different nitrogen fertilizer. Totally, 2470 phosphotides, represented 1372 proteins were identified in our study. and 411 proteins showed significant differences.

### Sample Protocol
Chinese winter wheat cultivar“Zhongmai175”(Triticum aestivum L.) was grown in experimentalfields of the China Agricultural University Research Center, Wuqiao, Hebei Province (116°37'23″E, 37°16'02″N), during the 2014-2015 growing season. Two different treatment conditions were applied. Each treatment included three biological replicates, and each plot was 25 m2. Extracted protein mixtures were directly reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, as described previously. The enrichment for the phosphopeptide procedure was performed according to Wu et al.,with some minor modifications.

### Data Protocol
The enriched phosphopeptides were separated on a self-packed C18 reversed-phase column (75μm inner diameter, 150 mm length) (ColumnTechnology Innovation CTI, Fremont, CA) that was directly connected with a nanoelectrospray ion source in an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, America). In this study, MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) was used to calculate the post-translational modification (PTM) scores and PTM localization probabilities. Potential phosphorylation residues were then grouped into three categories depending on their PTM localization probabilities. An FDR of 1% was used to identify phosphorylation residues. Spectra without residue-determining ions were used to identify phosphopeptides with undetermined residues

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen (N) is a macronutrient important for plant growth and development. It also strongly influences starch and protein synthesis, closely related to grain yield and quality. We performed the first comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of developing wheat grains in response to high-N fertilizer. Physiological and biochemical analyses showed that application of high-N fertilizer resulted in significant increases in leaf length and area, chlorophyll content, the activity of key enzymes in leaves such as nitrate reductase (NR), and in grains such as sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS), sucrose synthase (SuSy), and ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase). This enhanced enzyme activity led to significant improvements in starch content, grain yield, and ultimately, bread making quality. Comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of developing grains under the application of high-N fertilizer performed 15 and 25 days post-anthesis identified 2470 phosphosites among 1372 phosphoproteins, of which 411 unique proteins displayed significant changes in phosphorylation level (&gt;2-fold or &lt;0.5-fold). These phosphoproteins are involved mainly in signaling transduction, starch synthesis, energy metabolism. Pro-Q diamond staining and Western blotting confirmed our phosphoproteomic results. We propose a putative pathway to elucidate the important roles of the central phosphoproteins regulating grain starch and protein synthesis. Our results provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms of protein phosphorylation modifications involved in grain development, yield and quality formation.

### Keywords
Wheat seeds  nitrogen  lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Capital normal university
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing China

### Submitter
Shoumin Zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing China


