### Accession
PXD011926

### Title
Lztr1 loss leads to Noonan syndrome-like vascular defects by dysregulating vesicular trafficking

### Description
Mutations in LZTR1, an adaptor for cullin 3 (CUL3) ubiquitin ligase complex, are associated with glioma, hepatocarcinoma, paediatric cancers, Schwannomatosis, and Noonan syndrome (NS). NS is a poorly understood and complex disease. The variety of NS phenotypes makes it challenging to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which mutations in LZTR1 drive human disease.  Using an Lztr1 knockout model, we assessed the effect of Lztr1 loss on endothelial function. Moreover, the molecular alterations mediated by Lztr1 loss were evaluated by mass-spectrometry (MS)-based ubiquitome and proteome analysis. These analyses demonstrated that Lztr1 loss affects vesicular trafficking. We identified the ESCRT III member CHMP1B as a substrate for the LZTR1/CUL3 ubiquitin complex and could show that disease-related LZTR1 mutations abolish the interaction with CHMP1B. LZTR1-mediated ubiquitination of CHMP1B facilitates its interaction with IST1 that affects the dynamics of fusion and fission of endosomal vesicles. Dysregulation of vesicular trafficking triggered by Lztr1 loss leads to up-regulation of VEGF signaling due to endosomal accumulation and activation of VEGFR2. This novel molecular mechanism provides a fundamental explanation for the role of LZTR1 in endothelial function and justify the use of anti-VEGF therapies for the treatment of NS patients.

### Sample Protocol
accumulation and activation of VEGFR2. This novel molecular mechanism provides a fundamental explanation for the role of LZTR1 in endothelial function and justify the use of anti-VEGF therapies for the treatment of NS patients.  Methods   wt-LZTR1 or LZTR1-indel HeLa cells (1 dish/replicate, 3 replicates/condition) were washed twice with PBS and scraped in 10 ml urea lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature. 12 mg of total protein per sample was used for further analysis. Proteins in each sample were reduced by incubating with 4.5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Alkylation of the proteins was done by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and the proteins were digested with 48 µg lysyl endopeptidase (1:250 w/w, Wako) for 4 hours at room temperature. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 120 µg trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) overnight at 37 ˚C. Immunocapture of GG-modified peptides was then performed using the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), lyophilized for two days and re-dissolved in the immunoprecipitation buffer. Aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of digested protein material were taken for shotgun proteomics analysis. Peptides were incubated with the antibody-bead slurry for 2 hours on a rotator at 4˚C. GG-modified peptides were eluted in 100 µl 0.15% TFA and desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). Purified GG-modified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at -20˚C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Purified GG-modified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spertra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser.  From the aliquots for shotgun proteomics analysis, approximately 3 µg of peptides was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo), using a similar chromatographic setup as described above. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 20 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (300-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 20 most intense ions above a threshold value of 500 were isolated for fragmentation by CID at a normalized collision energy of 35% in the linear ion trap (LTQ), after filling the trap at a target value of 5000 for maximum 15 ms (rapid scan rate mode).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Two different searches were performed to analyze the spectra from the GG-enriched samples and the shotgun samples separately. In both searches spectra were interrogated against all human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,172 human protein sequences, downloaded from www.uniprot.org) with a mass tolerance for precursor ions of 4.5 ppm, and a mass tolerance for fragment ions of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da for the GG-enriched and the shotgun samples, respectively. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of three missed cleavages for the GG-enriched samples and a maximum of two missed cleavages for the shotgun samples. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification in both searches and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 30 and for the GG-enriched samples, GlyGly modification of lysine residues was set as an additional variable modification. In both searches, matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a matching time window of 1 minute. From the shotgun analysis, only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 4,220 human proteins (listed in the protein groups table), while from the GG-enriched samples 8,381 potential ubiquitin sites (listed in the GlyGly (K) Sites table) were identified. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the GlyGly (K)Sites table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed as well as potential contaminants. The site table was expanded, intensities for each sample were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median intensity, and replicate samples were grouped. Sites with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare site intensities in Lztr1 WT and Lztr1 KO samples and reveal significantly regulated ubiquitin sites. A similar data analysis workflow was applied to analyze the shotgun data in Perseus after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. This allowed to verify if for significantly regulated ubiquitin sites the expression levels of the parent protein were not changing between Lztr1 WT and Lztr1 KO cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Hela cells, Vegf, Noonan syndrome, Chmp1b, Lztr1, Vesicular trafficking

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium  Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Anna A Sablina
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, Leuven, Belgium  Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium


