### Accession
PXD018035

### Title
ULK1-dependent phosphorylation of RIPK1 within the intermediate domain

### Description
Mass-spectrometric analysis of an in vitro kinase assay using recombinant active ULK1 (Sigma-Aldrich, SRP5096) as kinase and GST-RIPK1(250-475) as substrate

### Sample Protocol
samples were separated by a 4-12% polyacrylamide gel. After Coomassie brilliant blue staining, the protein containing bands were excised and processed as described elsewhere (Poschmann et al., 2014). Briefly, bands were destained, washed, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (Serva) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography. For peptide separation over a 55 minute LC-gradient with 300 ml/min an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 mm particle size from Thermo Scientific) was used. MS analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nano electrospray ionization source. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV. Survey scans were carried out over a mass range from 200-2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). The target value for the automatic gain control was 3,000,000 and the maximum fill time 50 ms. The 20 most intense peptide ions (excluding singly charged ions) were selected for fragmentation. Peptide fragments were analyzed using a maximal fill time of 50 ms and automatic gain control target value of 100,000 and a resolution of 17,500 (at 200 m/z). Already fragmented ions were excluded for fragmentation for 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched using Mascot 2.4 within Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 against the SwissProt homo sapiens proteome dataset (release 2016_06, 20200 sequences). Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was set as fixed modification and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and methionine oxidation were considered as variable modifications as well as tryptic cleavage specificity (cleavage behind K and R) with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Predefined values were used for other parameters including a false discovery rate of 1% on peptide level, a main search precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and mass tolerance of 10 mmu for fragment spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy, apoptosis, and necroptosis are stress responses governing the ultimate fate of a cell. However, the crosstalk between these cellular stress responses is not entirely understood. Especially, it is not clear whether the autophagy-initiating kinase ULK1 and the cell-death-regulating kinase RIPK1 are involved in this potential crosstalk. Here, we identify RIPK1 as a substrate of ULK1. ULK1-dependent phosphorylation of RIPK1 reduces complex IIb/necrosome assembly and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced cell death, whereas deprivation of ULK1 enhances TNF-induced cell death. We observe that ULK1 phosphorylates multiple sites of RIPK1, but it appears that especially phosphorylation of S357 within the intermediate domain of RIPK1 mediates this cell-death-inhibiting effect. We propose that ULK1 is a regulator of RIPK1-mediated cell death.

### Keywords
Ulk1, Ripk1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Institute of Molecular Medicine I
University Hospital Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Björn Stork

### Lab Head
Dr Björn Stork
Institute of Molecular Medicine I, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf


