### Accession
PXD041648

### Title
MicroRNA137-loaded lipid nanoparticles regulate synaptic proteins in the prefrontal cortex

### Description
Genome-wide association studies indicate allele variants in MIR137, the host gene of microRNA-137 (miR137), confer an increased risk of schizophrenia (SCZ). Expression of miR137 and its targets, many of which regulate synaptic functioning, are also associated with an increased risk of SCZ. As a result, miR137 represents an attractive target aimed at correcting the molecular basis for synaptic dysfunction in individuals with high genetic risk for SCZ. Advancements in nanotechnology utilize lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) to transport and deliver therapeutic RNA. However, there remains a gap in using LNPs to regulate gene and protein expression in the brain. To study the delivery of nucleic acids by LNPs to the brain, we found that LNPs released miR137 cargo and inhibited synaptic target transcripts in neuronal cultures. Biodistribution of LNPs loaded with firefly luciferase mRNA remained localized to the mouse prefrontal cortex (PFC) injection site without circulating to off-target organs. LNPs encapsulating Cre mRNA preferentially co-expressed in neuronal over microglial or astrocytic cells. Using quantitative proteomics, we found miR137 modulated glutamatergic synaptic protein networks that are commonly dysregulated in SCZ. These studies support engineering the next generation of brain-specific LNPs to deliver personalized RNA therapeutics and improve symptoms of central nervous system disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: Male and female C57BL/6J or Ai9 mice (strain #007909) (Jackson Labs; Bar Harbor, ME) were maintained on a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle with lights on at 7 am. Food and water were available ad libitum. All protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Oregon Health & Science University and the Veterans Affairs Portland Health Care System Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were deeply anesthetized with 3% vaporized isoflurane in oxygen (1L/min) until sedated and sacrificed using rapid cervical dislocation and brains were rapidly extracted, flash frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C for further processing.  Injections: Mice were deeply anesthetized with 3% vaporized isoflurane in oxygen (1L/min) until sedated and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus. For the duration of the surgery, isoflurane was maintained at 1%, and mice were kept warm on a heating pad. Carprofen (0.11mL/25g body weight) and dexium (0.01mL/1g body weight) were injected subcutaneously before the surgery. Lidoject (0.2mL/incision) was administered at the surgery site before making an incision. Mice were injected with LNPs containing Firefly luciferase mRNA (L-7602, Trilink Biotechnologies), mmu-miR137-3p (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA), or Cre mRNA (L-7211,Trilink Biotechnologies; San Diego, CA) at three locations within the mPFC bilaterally (+/−0.4 ML, +1.94 AP, 1.0, 1.6 and 2.6 depth below brain surface; 0.5 microliter nanoparticle per injection site), at a rate of 100 nanoliter per min.  Proteomics sample preparation: Mass spectrometry was performed by the OHSU Proteomics Shared Resource. Whole brain mouse tissue samples were flash frozen 72h after treatment (PBS n=6, blank LNP n=6, miR137-LNP n=6; 3 males/3 females/group). The brain tissue was cut at 300 micron on a cryostat and 1 mm bilateral prefrontal cortex (Ted Pella; Redding, CA) samples were homogenized in 200 microliter of 5% SDS, 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer using Bioruptor Pico and heated to 95C for 5 min. Samples were cooled and centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000g and supernatant transferred to an Eppendorf lobind tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA assay. 50 microgram/sample was digested using trypsin (1:16, trypsin: protein) overnight using S-Trap micro cartridge (Protifi Inc; Farmingdale, NY), after reduction with dithiothreitol, and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Peptides were eluted from the S-Trap using 40 microliter each of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid, pooled, and dried in a speedvac. Each sample was suspended in 100 microliters of HPLC water, and a peptide assay was done using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA).  TMT labeling and mass spectrometric analysis: Peptide samples (15 microgram/sample) were dissolved in 20 microliter of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, and TMT 18-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA) were dissolved at a concentration of 9.6 microgram/microliter in anhydrous ACN. Each sample was labeled by adding 12 microliter (115 microgram) of an individual TMT reagent, followed by shaking at room temperature for 1 hr. Two microliters of each labeled sample in each group were pooled, 2 microliters of 5% hydroxylamine added, the samples incubated for 15 min, dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 33.8 microliters of 5% formic acid, and 2 micrograms of peptides analyzed by a single 40-min LC-MS/MS method using an Orbitrap Fusion. This run was performed to normalize the total reporter ion intensity of each multiplexed sample. The remaining unmixed samples were then combined in adjusted volumes to yield equal summed reporter ion intensities during the subsequent 2D liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis (2DLC/MS).

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis: The combined samples (45.6 micrograms) were dried by vacuum centrifugation, TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 40 microliters of 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 9 and separated by 2D nano RP liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (2D-LC/MS) using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC and Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). TMT labeled peptides were eluted from the first dimension high pH column using sequential injections of 20 microliter volumes of 17%, 20-35%, 40%, 50%, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at a 3 μl/min flow rate (20 fractions total). Eluted peptides were diluted at a tee with a mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 24 microliter/min flow rate. Peptides were delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100 micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 micron trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC 2-micron C18 75-micron x 25-cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 5-25% ACN gradient over 100 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nanoliter/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated using the instrument’s EasySpray NanoSource, survey scans performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the instrument’s ion-routing multipole.  Proteomic data analysis: The protein sequences searched were canonical mouse reference FASTA sequences (21,968 proteins) downloaded December 26, 2022 from www.UniProt.org. Common contaminants (175 sequences) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 44,286 sequences.  The 20-fraction TMT 18-plex sample produced 20 instrument files that were processed with the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMTpro reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra. There were 334,353 linked MS2/MS3 scans acquired. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMTpro labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues).  Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using an interactive GUI application to set thresholds in delta-mass histograms and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function score histograms where incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The 115,725 filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein per plex. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups (indistinguishable peptide sets), and protein families (highly homologous peptide sets) were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides (final grouped protein context) for each protein.  The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein expression using the Bioconductor package edgeR within Jupyter notebooks. Further investigation of comparing proteomic distributions across biological groups determined two outlier samples (PBS, miR137-LNP). A Grubb’s test was used to determine putative sample outliers based on the relative protein abundance levels of house-keeping genes (Beta tubulin, GAPDH, DJ-1, actin). Subsequent data was interpreted with the removal of these two samples from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Genome-wide association studies indicate that allele variants in MIR137, the host gene of microRNA137 (miR137), confer an increased risk of schizophrenia (SCZ). Aberrant expression of miR137 and its targets, many of which regulate synaptic functioning, are also associated with an increased risk of SCZ. Thus, miR137 represents an attractive target aimed at correcting the molecular basis for synaptic dysfunction in individuals with high genetic risk for SCZ. Advancements in nanotechnology utilize lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) to transport and deliver therapeutic RNA. However, there remains a gap in using LNPs to regulate gene and protein expression in the brain. To study the delivery of nucleic acids by LNPs to the brain, we found that LNPs released miR137 cargo and inhibited target transcripts of interest in neuroblastoma cells. Biodistribution of LNPs loaded with firefly luciferase mRNA remained localized to the mouse prefrontal cortex (PFC) injection site without circulating to off-target organs. LNPs encapsulating Cre mRNA preferentially co-expressed in neuronal over microglial or astrocytic cells. Using quantitative proteomics, we found miR137 modulated glutamatergic synaptic protein networks that are commonly dysregulated in SCZ. These studies support engineering the next generation of brain-specific LNPs to deliver RNA therapeutics and improve symptoms of central nervous system disorders.

### Keywords
Microrna, Quantitative proteomics, Synaptic proteins, Schizophrenia, Isobaric labeling, Prefrontal cortex, Personalized medicine, Mass spectrometry, Lipid nanoparticle

### Affiliations
OHSU
Research Service (R&D22)  VA Portland Health Care System  3710 SW US Veterans Hospital Rd.  Portland, OR 97239 USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Janowsky, Ph.D.
Research Service (R&D22)  VA Portland Health Care System  3710 SW US Veterans Hospital Rd.  Portland, OR 97239 USA


