### Accession
PXD008778

### Title
p140Cap interactome in breast cancer cells

### Description
Even though neuronal and cancer cells have quite different purposes in the body, there is growing evidence that metastatic cancer cells implement signaling mechanisms found in homeostasis of synaptic growth/plasticity. Recent studies have highlight some remarkable similarities in both form and function of these two unique cell type. The p140Cap adaptor protein is an example of a mo-lecular hub that controls cancer cell migration and invasion through regulating protein complexes at cellular adhesions. Moreover, p140Cap in neurons is likely very important for normal brain function-ing, as it works as scaffold in postsynaptic signal transmission complexes and regulates F-actin re-modelling, which results in neuron dendritic spines synaptic plasticity It recruits and regulates signaling molecules both in breast cancer cells and in healthy neuronal synapses.

### Sample Protocol
The TUBO cells are a transplantable primary breast cancer NeuT cell model from the BALB/c background. Upon infection with empty or p140Cap retroviruses, we generated NeuT-TUBO (as mock cells), and p140-TUBO cells, as described in Grasso et al., 2017. NeuT-TUBO cells were cultured in DMEM 20% FBS. p140Cap antibodies were cross-linked to Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) as described in (Alfieri et al., 2017). p140Cap Mab-coupled Dynabeads were incubated with cell extracts from NeuT-TUBO and p140-TUBO cellCells, grown at 80 % confluency and extracted with Lysis buffer. Beads were washed five times with cold lysis buffer, then resus-pended in 60 µl of 2% SDS-PAGE sample buffer in reducing con-ditions and incubated at 70°C for 10 min. Proteins were in-gel digested using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Alfieri et al., 2017). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (Ul-tiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant, version 1.5.8.3(25). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy, May 2017 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.. The matching between runs option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
The p140Cap adaptor protein is a scaffold molecule physiologically expressed in few epithelial tissues, such as the mammary gland, and in differentiated neurons. While the role of p140Cap in mammary gland epithelia is not still understood, we already know that a significant subset of breast cancers express p140Cap. In the subgroup of ERBB2-amplified breast cancers, a high p140Cap status predicts a significantly lower probability of developing a distant event and a clear difference in survival. p140Cap is causal in dampening ERBB2-positive tumor cell progression, impairing tumor onset and growth, and counteracting epithelial mesenchymal transition, resulting in decreased metastasis formation. Since only a few p140Cap interacting proteins have been identified in breast cancer and the molecular complexes and pathways underlying the cancer function of p140Cap are largely unknown, we generated a p140Cap interactome from ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells, identifying cancer specific components and those shared with the synaptic interactome. We identified 373 interacting proteins in cancer cells, including those with functions relevant to cell adhesion, protein homeostasis, regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis, which are frequently deregulated in cancer. Within the interactome, we identified 15 communities (clusters) with topology-functional relationships. In neurons, where p140Cap is key in regulating synaptogenesis, synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity, it establishes an extensive interactome with proteins that cluster to sub complexes located in the postsynaptic density. p140Cap interactors converge on key synaptic processes, including synaptic transmission, actin cytoskeleton remodeling and cell-cell junction organization. Comparing the breast cancer to the synaptic interactome, we found 39 overlapping proteins, a relatively small overlap. However, cell adhesion and remodeling of actin cytoskeleton clearly emerge as common terms in the shared subset. Thus, the functional signature of the two interactomes is primarily determined by organ/tissue and functional specificity, while the overlap provides a list of shared functional terms, which might be linked to both cancer and neurological functions.

### Keywords
P140cap, Nanolc-ms/ms, Breast cancer, Co-ip

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


