### Accession
PXD017480

### Title
Enriched vascular proteomics reveals insights to the role of peroxidase and serine proteases during infection with Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) in Washington navel.

### Description
The dataset for this project was to identify significantly changing proteins in the vasculature of Washington Navel (Citrus sinensis (L) Osbeck) during Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) infection. The navel trees were graft-inoculated with the Hacienda Heights, CA CLas strain (HHCA) and then sampled ten months after graft inoculation.

### Sample Protocol
Citrus vascular sap was enriched using a previously described centrifugation method. Briefly, stems were collected from 15-month-old greenhouse plants and the outer bark was manually removed from the branch. The inner part of the bark was briefly rinsed with deionized water and dried with Kimwipes to enrich for phloem sap. The bark was cut into about 1 cm pieces using a razor blade and placed into a 0.65 mL Eppendorf tube with a small hole in the bottom. The tube was then placed into a 1.7 mL Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at room temperature. Sap extracts were then flash frozen and stored at -80C until analysis. Sap samples were resuspended in 2x Laemmli buffer and quantified using the Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   A total of 85 ug of protein per sample was subjected to one-dimensional SDS-PAGE using a 8-16% precise protein gradient gel for 1cm into the resolving gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The entire sample lane was excised and cut into equal pieces. In-gel reduction was performed by adding 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ambic) for 30 minutes at 56C. Alkylation was performed by adding 55mM iodoacetamide in 50mM of ambic for 20 minutes in the dark with shaking. In-gel tryptic digestions was performed using 300 ng of trypsin in 50 mM ambic (34). The digested peptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator and then solubilized in 120 uL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Peptides were submitted to the Genomics Center Proteomics Core at University of California, Davis for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS. The LC-MS/MS system configuration consisted of a CTC Pal autosampler (LEAP Technologies) and Paradigm HPLC device (Michrom BioResources) coupled to a QExactive hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a CaptiveSpray ionization source (Michrom BioResources). Reversed phase LC was performed by injecting 60 μl of each digested peptide sample onto a Zorbax300SB-C18 trap column (5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm; Agilent Technologies) and desalted online. The peptides were then eluted from the trap and separated on a reverse phase Michrom Magic C18AQ (200 μm × 150 mm) capillary column at a flow rate of 2 μl/min using a 120-min gradient (2–35% buffer B 85 min, 35–80% buffer B 25 min, 2% buffer B 10 min; buffer A = 0.01% formic acid in H2O, buffer B = 100% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with 60-s dynamic exclusion enacted on m/z observed twice within 30 s. A standard Top10 acquisition method was used with one survey MS scan followed by MS/MS scans on the 10 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were imported into MaxQuant v1.5.1.0 for label-free intensity-based quantification. The database search engine Andromeda was used to search MS/MS spectra against the C. clementina and C. sinensis databases downloaded from Phytozome and the Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) proteome database downloaded from Uniprot with a tolerance level of 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Protein N-terminal acetylation and Methionine oxidation, and NQ deamidation were set as variable modifications. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set as five and contaminants were included. The ‘match between runs’ feature was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The FDR for protein level and peptide spectrum match (PSM) was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was 6, minimum razor and unique peptides was changed to 0, and minimum unique peptides was set to 1. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to 2. The other MaxQuant settings were left as default. The total peptide intensities for each replicate were summed and a normalization factor was calculated for each sample. This normalization factor was applied based on the least overall proteome change. Peptide ratios between samples were then calculated to obtain a pair-wise protein ratio matrix between samples, which was subsequently used to rescale the cumulative intensity in each sample and provides the label-free intensity (LFQ) value. The MaxQuant output file “Protein Groups” was imported into Perseus 1.5.5.3. Potential contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins identified only by modified peptides were excluded. The LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Proteins not consistently identified in at least 2 out of the four replicates in at least one group were discarded. Missing values were substituted with values from a normal distribution of the obtained intensities using default settings (width 0.5, downshift 1.8). Differentially changing proteins were identified using a two-tailed Student’s t-test, p<0.05, with a permutation-based FDR OF 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Huanglongbing, Enriched vascular sap, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Serine proteases, Peroxidase, Clas, Hlb

### Affiliations
Department Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Jessica Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Gitta Coaker
Department Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis


