### Accession
PXD000690

### Title
Altered microbiota-host mutualism and bloom of Atopobium define severe pediatric Crohn's disease

### Description
Microbial dysbiosis has been identified in adult inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients.  However, microbial composition and functional interplay between host genetics and microorganisms in early IBD onset remain poorly defined. Here, we identified and demonstrated the causal effect of Atopobium parvulum and the gut microbiota in pediatric IBD. Microbiota and proteomic profiling revealed that the abundance of A. parvulum, a potent H2S producer, was associated with increased disease severity and a concurrent reduction in the expression of the host H2S detoxification pathway. In the Il10-/- mouse model of inflammation, A. parvulum induced severe pancolitis that was dependent on the presence of the gut microbiota. In addition, we demonstrated that administration of bismuth, an H2S scavenger, prevented A. parvulum-induced colitis. Our findings identified Atopobium parvulum as a major mediator of inflammation severity, and revealed an alteration of the balance between the production and detoxification of H2S in the gastrointestinal tract.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsies were lysed in 4% SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) supplemented with proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and homogenized with a Pellet pestle. The lysates were sonicated 3 times with 10 s pulses each with at least 30 s on ice between each pulse. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay. The proteins were processed using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation Method (FASP) as previously described with some modifications [4]. Colon tissue lysates (45 µg of proteins) and heavy SILAC-labeled cell lysates (15 µg from each HuH-7, HEK-293 and HCT-116 cells) were mixed at a 1:1 weight ratio and transferred into the filter. The samples were centrifuged (16,000xg, 10 min), followed by two washes of 200 µL 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples were then reduced by incubation in 200 µL of 8 M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) supplemented with 20 mM dithiothreitol. After centrifugation, samples were subjected to alkylation by adding 200 µL of 8 M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, containing 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at room temperature protected from light). Samples were washed using 200 µL 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 (twice) to remove excess SDS. To further dilute urea, two washes of 200 µL 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 were performed. For the trypsin digest, samples were incubated in 200 µL of 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, containing 5 µg of Trypsin (TPCK Treated, Worthington) on a shaker (250 rpm) at 37°C overnight. Finally, 200 µL of 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 was added to elute the peptides by centrifugation (twice). Peptides were fractionated, using an in-house constructed SCX column with five pH fractions (pH 4.0, 6.0, 8.0, 10.0, 12.0). The buffer composition was 20 mM boric acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid, and 20 mM acetic acid, with the pH adjusted by using 1 M NaOH). Finally, the fractionated samples were desalted using in-house C18 desalting cartridges and dried in a speed-vac prior to LC-MS analysis. All resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS). The HPLC-ESI-MS/MS consisted of an automated ekspert™ nanoLC 400 system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled with an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-electrospray interface operated in positive ion mode. Briefly, each peptide mixture was reconstituted in 20 µL of 0.5% (v/v) formic acid and 12 µL was loaded on a 200 μm × 50 mm fritted fused silica pre-column packed in-house with reverse phase Magic C18AQ resins (5 μm; 200 Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The separation of peptides was performed on an analytical column (75 µm × 10 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (3 μm; 120 Å pore size; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 120 min gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v) (JT Baker, Phillipsburg NJ, USA) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nL/min. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV and the temperature of heated capillary was 300°C. The instrument method consisted of one full MS scan from 400 to 2000 m/z followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 20 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, and a repeat duration of 90 s. The full mass was scanned in an Orbitrap analyzer with R = 60,000 (defined at m/z 400), and the subsequent MS/MS analyses were performed in LTQ analyzer. To improve the mass accuracy, all the measurements in the Orbitrap mass analyzer were performed with on-the-fly internal recalibration (“Lock Mass”). The charge state rejection function was enabled with charge states “unassigned” and “single” states rejected. All data were recorded with Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed and analyzed by MaxQuant, Version 1.1.1.36 against the decoy Uniport-human database (86,749 entries), including commonly observed contaminants. The following parameters were used: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, with methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and heavy proline set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. SILAC double labeling (light: K0R0; heavy: K8R10) was set as the search parameter in order to assess the conversion efficiency. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set at 1% and a minimum length of six amino acids was used for peptide identification. The peptides file was imported into Persus (version 1.2.0.17) to extract the lysine- and arginine-containing peptides, respectively.  The protein-group file was imported into Persus (version 1.3.0.4) for data statistical analysis and a Student’t- test was chosen for the protein profile with p values of less than 0.05 considered significant. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis was achieved using the DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/).

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal microbial dysbiosis is associated with Crohn's disease (CD). However, the mechanisms leading to the chronic mucosal inflammation that characterizes this disease remain unclear. In this report, we use systems-level approaches to study the interactions between the gut microbiota and host in new-onset paediatric patients to evaluate causality and mechanisms of disease. We report an altered host proteome in CD patients indicative of impaired mitochondrial functions. In particular, mitochondrial proteins implicated in H<sub>2</sub>S detoxification are downregulated, while the relative abundance of H<sub>2</sub>S microbial producers is increased. Network correlation analysis reveals that Atopobium parvulum controls the central hub of H<sub>2</sub>S producers. A. parvulum induces pancolitis in colitis-susceptible interleukin-10-deficient mice and this phenotype requires the presence of the intestinal microbiota. Administrating the H<sub>2</sub>S scavenger bismuth mitigates A. parvulum-induced colitis in vivo. This study reveals that host-microbiota interactions are disturbed in CD and thus provides mechanistic insights into CD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Ibd, Colon

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Institute of Systems Biology University of Ottawa
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Amanda Starr

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Institute of Systems Biology University of Ottawa


