### Accession
PXD039206

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the effects of Grammatophyllum speciosum extracts on macrophage cells

### Description
Grammatophyllum speciosum is a traditional plant with beneficial functionalities for health. G. speciosum extracts can inhibit collagenase and nitric oxide without cellular toxicity in keratinocytes. The extracts have shown potential for use and formulation as cosmeceutical ingredients. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these activities remain unknown. In this dataset, we used a proteomics approach to clarify the proteins that participate in the response of RAW264.7 macrophage cells to G. speciosum extracts. Cells were divided into two experimental groups, i.e., the control and treatment groups. In turn, the treatment group included two subgroups that were treated with 20 and 100 g/mL of the extracts, respectively. The experiments were conducted using two biological replicates. The dataset was obtained from label-free proteomics using high-resolution LC-MS/MS with four technical replicates. The quality control (QC) of the proteomics dataset was carried out using chromatography at the MS1 and MS2 levels, peptide mass deviation, peptide mass cleavage, sequence length, and total peptide intensity.

### Sample Protocol
The effect of the G. speciosum extract on RAW264.7 cells was investigated. We treated the cells with two different concentrations of extract (20 and 100 g/mL) using a previously published protocol without any modification [5]. The cell pallet was collected and washed using a 1× PBS solution, with three replicates (including two biological replicates per condition). Lysis buffer was added and the cell pellet was resuspended cell pellet on ice, followed by sonication using a probe tip in 250 L of cell lysis buffer at a frequency of 20 kHz and 80% amplitude for 2 s “on” and 3 s “off” for a total of 20 s. The protein lysate was incubated at room temperature for 10 min, then transferred into 1.5 mL centrifugation tubes and centrifuged at 15,000  g for 20 min at room temperature. The supernatant was collected and aliquoted for protein determination using the BCA protein assay.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra (.raw file) were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. The setting parameters for protein identification were as follows: parent ion mass error tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment ion mass error tolerance, 0.2 Da; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, 3; digesting enzyme, trypsin (Full); one fixed modification: carboxyamidomethylation of Cys; and two variable modifications: deamidation of Gln and Asn and oxidation of Met. The peptide spectrum was matched to the Mus musculus database (UniprotKB, accession date: 1 January 2023).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Raw264.7, Lc-ms/ms, Traditional plant, Cosmeceuticals

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Mahidol University

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Sucheewin Krobthong
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


