### Accession
PXD025255

### Title
Automated method for enrichment of newly synthesized proteins based on AHA labeling

### Description
In this study, a novel high throughput method was successfully developed for the automated enrichment of newly synthesized proteins (NSPs) from complex environments, like cell culture media supplemented with fetal bovine serum (FBS). The proposed automated method allows for the robust and effective simultaneous enrichment of dozen of samples in a period of 3 hours. The enrichment method was comprehensively evaluated and validated, and was applied to the mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of the FBS-rich secretome of melanoma A375 cells treated with the immune cytokines interferon alpha (IFN-α) and gamma (IFN-γ).

### Sample Protocol
As part of a multistep approach, proteins translated in reaction to a stimulus are labeled in vivo by substituting methionine with the ‘click-able’ analog azidohomoalanine (AHA). A suitable conjugate containing an alkyne group allows the specific selection of newly synthesized proteins (NSPs) by a fast click chemistry -based reaction with AHA. Through an automated pipetting platform, the samples are loaded into cartridges for the selective binding of the NSPs by means of a bait contained in the conjugate. The enriched proteins are eluted by the reproducible, time-controlled, chemical cleavage of a selected group in the conjugate, which increases selectivity. The NSPs can be collected and digested in the same well-plate subsequently used to load the peptides into the platform for automated clean up. Peptides were analyzed by reverse phased LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF or HF-X.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed in one single search using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.3.3). Search was performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens using trypsin/P as enzyme and allowing maximum 2 miss cleavages. Analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.10.0).

### Publication Abstract
A high-throughput method was developed for the automated enrichment of newly synthesized proteins (NSPs), which are labeled metabolically by substituting methionine with the "click-able" analogue azidohomoalanine (AHA). A suitable conjugate containing a dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) group allows the specific selection of NSPs by a fast 1 h click chemistry-based reaction with AHA. Through an automated pipetting platform, the samples are loaded into streptavidin cartridges for the selective binding of the NSPs by means of a biotin bait contained in the conjugate. The enriched proteins are eluted by a reproducible chemical cleavage of the 4,4-dimethyl-2,6-dioxocyclohexylidene (Dde) group in the conjugate, which increases selectivity. The NSPs can be collected and digested in the same well plate, and the resulting peptides can be subsequently loaded for automated cleanup, followed by mass spectrometry analysis. The proposed automated method allows for the robust and effective enrichment of samples in 96-well plates in a period of 3 h. Our developed enrichment method was comprehensively evaluated and then applied to the proteomics analysis of the melanoma A375 cell secretome, after treatment with the cytokines interferon &#x3b1; (IFN-&#x3b1;) and &#x3b3; (IFN-&#x3b3;), resulting in the quantification of 283 and 263 proteins, respectively, revealing intricate tumor growth-supportive and -suppressive effects.

### Keywords
High throughput, Lc-ms, Enrichment, Newly synthesized proteins, Melanoma, Proteomics, Interferon, Aha, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Netherlaands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
David Vargas Diaz

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Professor, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Netherlaands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht University, The Netherlands


