### Accession
PXD044136

### Title
Pteromalus puparum larval saliva

### Description
proteomic identification of isoforms of PpSerpin-1 in the Pteromalus puparum larval saliva

### Sample Protocol
Wasp larvae were collected by opening host pupae 3 days after parasitism. Larvae were rinsed with PBS and electrically stimulated using an acupuncture device (Hwato, China) with a frequency of 50 Hz and a current of 2.5 mA. Secreted saliva drops at larval mothparts were transferred into PBS using pipette tips. The protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA).Fifty micrograms of protein from wasp larval saliva was digested by trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. After desalting by a C18 cartridge, the digestion product was lyophilized and redissolved in 40 µl of 0.1% formic acid solution. LC‒MS/MS was conducted on an Easy nLC HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by Q-Exactive (Thermo Finnigan, USA). The sample was loaded on a Thermo Scientific EASY column (5 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm, C18) and then separated on another Thermo Scientific EASY column (3 µm, 75 µm × 100 mm, C18). Buffer A was water with 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was 84% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The columns were first equilibrated with 95% buffer A, then from 0% to 35% buffer B in 50 min, from 35% to 100% buffer B in 5 min, and finally 100% buffer B for 5 min. The charge-to-mass ratios of peptides and fractions of peptides were collected 20 times after every full scan.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the P. puparum genome database using Mascot 2.2 in Proteome Discoverver. “Carbamidomethyl (C)” was set as a fixed modification. “Oxidation (M)” and “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” were set as variable modifications. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set as 2. FDR ≤ 0.01 was set to filter the protein identification. The same software and parameters were used for the reanalysis of P. puparum venom proteomic data. This part was conducted by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larval saliva, Serpin, Parasitoid wasp

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Zhichao Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhichao Yan
Nanjing Agricultural University


