### Accession
PXD025304

### Title
Elongation factor ELOF1 drives transcription-coupled repair  and prevents genome instability

### Description
Correct transcription is crucial for life. However, DNA damage severely impedes elongating RNA Polymerase II (Pol II), causing transcription inhibition and transcription-replication conflicts. Cells are equipped with intricate mechanisms to counteract the severe consequence of these transcription-blocking lesions (TBLs). However, the exact mechanism and factors involved remain largely unknown. Here, using a genome-wide CRISPR/cas9 screen, we identified elongation factor ELOF1 as an important new factor in the transcription stress response upon DNA damage. We show that ELOF1 has an evolutionary conserved role in Transcription-Coupled Nucleotide Excision Repair (TC-NER), where it promotes recruitment of the TC-NER factors UVSSA and TFIIH to efficiently repair TBLs and resume transcription. Additionally, ELOF1 modulates transcription to protect cells from transcription-mediated replication stress, thereby preserving genome stability. Thus, ELOF1 protects the transcription machinery from DNA damage via two distinct mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol (Sigma, D8255), alkylation with iodoacetamide (Sigma, I6125) and digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) as previously described38. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Lumos Tribid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Fisher 164564) and then separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flowrate of 250  nL/min, using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3). The false discovery rate (FDR) of both PSM and protein was set to 0.01 and the minimum ratio count was set to 1. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release June 2017), concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed using the g:Profiler website. Genes with an average SILAC ratio of >2.5 were analyzed and the top 10 biological processes affected by UV were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription-coupled dna repair, Genome instability, Elongation factor, Elof1

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, the Netherlands


