### Accession
PXD028975

### Title
Engineering Extracellular Vesicles by Three-dimensional Dynamic Culture of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) contain proteins, enzymes and metabolites that contribute to the therapeutic potential of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). However, scale-up production of hMSC EVs has become a major challenge. In current study, hMSCs were grown as 3D aggregates under wave motion to promote EV secretion (3D EVs). mRNA sequencing reveals global transcriptome alterations (e.g., upregulated Wnt, TNF, and Hippo signaling and downregulated cellular senescence) for 3D aggregates. Compared to 2D EVs, the quantity of 3D EVs was enhanced significantly with smaller size, higher miR-21 and miR-22 expression, and the altered protein cargo revealed by proteomics. 3D hMSC aggregates promote activation of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) pathway and ESCRT-independent pathway. In addition, 3D EVs rejuvenated stem cells expressing cellular senescence and modulated immune response determined by T lymphocyte and macrophage phenotype assays. In summary, this study provides a promising strategy for high-quality EV production from hMSCs with enhanced therapeutic potentials.

### Sample Protocol
The hMSC 2D and 3D EVs were isolated using ExtraPEG and then extracted for proteins. Based on protein quantification result, up to 100 µg proteins were isolated on S-trap micro column. The isolated proteins (triplicate for each group) were alkylated and digested on column based on manufacturer’s instructions. All the eluted peptides were fractionated by Pierce high pH reverse phase peptide fractionation kit into 5 fractions for each sample. Then all the samples were vacuumed dried and analyzed on the Thermo Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using SequestHT, Mascot and Amanda as search engines. Scaffold (version 5.0) was used to validate the protein and peptide identity. Peptide identity was accepted if Scaffold Local FDR algorithm demonstrated a probability greater that 99.0%. Likewise, protein identity was accepted if the probability level was greater than 99.0% and contained a minimum of two recognized peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC) derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) have shown therapeutic potential in recent studies. However, the corresponding therapeutic components are largely unknown, and scale-up production of hMSC EVs is a major challenge for translational applications. In the current study, hMSCs were grown as 3D aggregates under wave motion to promote EV secretion. Results demonstrate that 3D hMSC aggregates promote activation of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-dependent and -independent pathways. mRNA sequencing revealed global transcriptome alterations for 3D hMSC aggregates. Compared to 2D-hMSC-EVs, the quantity of 3D-hMSC-EVs was enhanced significantly (by 2-fold), with smaller sizes, higher miR-21 and miR-22 expression, and an altered protein cargo (e.g., upregulation of cytokines and anti-inflammatory factors) uncovered by proteomics analysis, possibly due to altered EV biogenesis. Functionally, 3D-hMSC-EVs rejuvenated senescent stem cells and exhibited enhanced immunomodulatory potentials. In summary, this study provides a promising strategy for scalable production of high-quality EVs from hMSCs with enhanced therapeutic potential.

### Keywords
3d aggregates, Immunomodulation, Rejuvenation, Extracellular vesicles, Human mesenchymal stem cells, Biogenesis

### Affiliations
Florida State University college of medicine
Florida State University

### Submitter
li sun

### Lab Head
Dr David Meckes
Florida State University college of medicine


