### Accession
PXD013237

### Title
Proteomic response to heat shock in males and females of a Baikal endemic amphipod Eulimnogammarus cyaneus (Dyb. 1874) (Crustacea: Amphipoda)

### Description
In this project we aimed to establish a proteome-based pipeline for a non-model Baikal endemic amphipod species Eulimnogammarus cyaneus (Dybowsky, 1874). We used next-generation transcriptome sequencing to create a database for protein identification and investigated the proteome of E. cyaneus with LC-MS with particular emphasis on sexual dimorphism and response to acute thermal stress. We were able to characterize ca. 1000 protein groups and found male- and female-specific proteins, as well as proteins specific for thermal stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation for the LC-MS analyses was performed as described previously (Bedulina et al. 2013). Four specimens of E. cyaneus were pooled for protein isolation. SDS-PAGE were performed and gels were stained with Coomassie Blue R and distained overnight with water. Each gel lane was divided into six slices. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and subjected to an in-gel digestion using trypsin as described previously (Müller et al. 2013). The resulting proteolytic peptide mixtures were eluted, dried and resolubilized with 0.1% formic acid for nano-HPLC/nano-ESI-MS/MS analyses. Peptides were separated on a nano-uHPLC (Waters) system being online coupled to an an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS analyses were performed in data-dependent mode. In brief, 5 μL from each sample was loaded and first trapped and desalted online on a reverse-phase precolumn (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 180 μm×20 mm, 5 μm, Waters). Then, the peptides were separated using a 90 min gradient on a nanoscale reverse-phase precolumn (nanoAcquity UPLC column, C18, 75 μm×150 mm, 1.7 μm, Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a nonlinear gradient of CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid (2 min, 2%; 7 min, 6%; 55 min 20%; 91 min, 40%; 94 min, 80% content of CH3CN). The mass spectrometer automatically switched between full scan MS mode (m/z 300-1600, R=60,000) and tandem MS acquisition of 6 most intense ions of charge state 2+, 3+ or 4+. Peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 2,000 counts were fragmented within the linear ion trap by CID (isolation width 3 amu, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 10 ms, activation Q 0.25). A dynamic precursor exclusion time of 2 min was applied for MS/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
The database for protein identification was constructed from de novo RNA sequencing data assembly. ca. 1 billion paired-end 100-base long Illumina reads of control and temperature-, cadmium- or phenantrene-treated animals (NCBI BioSample: SAMN10413037, SAMN10413049, SAMN10413059, SAMN10413070, SAMN10413082, SAMN10413094, SAMN10413105, SAMN10413112, SAMN10413121, SAMN10413133, SAMN10413145, SAMN10413157, SAMN10413169, SAMN10413170, SAMN10413180, SAMN10413191, SAMN10413201, SAMN10413213) were quality trimmed with the software trim_galore v0.4.1, and rRNA reads were filtered out with bowtie (Langmead and Salzberg 2012) v2.1.0 and a custom database of Gammaridea ribosomal RNA sequences. The resulting set of reads was corrected with RCorrector (Song and Florea 2015) version of Dec 18, 2017 and assembled with Trinity (Grabherr et al., 2011) v2.5.1. The resulting assembly contained 1,070,909 contigs. Then, we used the EvidentialGene pipeline (Gilbert 2019) version 2013.07.27 to predict the proteome. We used tr2aacds script and merged the 'okay' and 'alternative' sequence sets. The resulting protein database contained 167,948 sequences. Protein identification was carried out with the MaxQuant software package (Cox & Mann, 2008) v1.6 with the following parameters: Match between runs; protein FDR, site FDR and site decoy fraction set to 0.05; and all remaining parameters set to their default values. Annotation of all identified protein sequences was performed with Blast2GO (Conesa et al., 2005) v5.0. Statistical analysis of the protein intensities (normalized LFQ) was performed with custom R (R Core team, 2017) scripts deposited at https://github.com/drozdovapb/code_chunks/tree/master/proteome. First, protein groups with qualitative differences in protein abundance were identified as those for which in one group it was not identified in any sample, while in the second group at least two samples contained this protein. Second, protein groups present in all samples were subjected to quantitative analysis (experimental Bayes t-test) using the limma (Smyth, 2005) and qvalue (Dabney et al., 2010) packages.

### Publication Abstract
The ancient Lake Baikal is the largest source of liquid freshwater on Earth and home to a unique fauna. Several hundred mostly cold-adapted endemic amphipod species inhabit Baikal, an ecosystem that is already being influenced by global change. In this study, we characterized the core proteome and heat stress-induced changes in a temperature-tolerant endemic amphipod, Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, using a proteogenomic approach (PRIDE dataset PXD013237) to unravel the molecular mechanisms of the observed adverse effects. As males were previously found to be much more tolerant to thermal stress, we placed special emphasis on differences between the sexes. For both sexes, we observed adaption of energy metabolism, cytoskeleton, lipid, and carbohydrate metabolism upon heat stress. In contrast, significant differences were determined in the molecular chaperone response. Females from the control conditions possessed significantly higher levels of heat shock proteins (HSP70, HSPb1, Hsc70-3), which, in contrast to males, were not further increased in response to heat stress. The inability of females to further increase heat shock protein synthesis in response to temperature stress may be due to sex-specific processes, such as egg production, requiring a large proportion of the available energy. As ovigerous females synthesize generally higher amounts of protein, they also need higher levels of molecular chaperones for the folding of these new proteins. Thus, the higher sensitivity of females to heat shock may be due to the lack of molecular chaperone molecules to counteract the heat-induced protein denaturation.

### Keywords
Intersexual difference, Baikal, Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, Heat shock, Amphipoda

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioanalysis, University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Coburg, Friedrich-Streib-Str. 2, 96450 Coburg, Germany
Irkutsk State University

### Submitter
Polina Drozdova

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kalkhof
Institute of Bioanalysis, University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Coburg, Friedrich-Streib-Str. 2, 96450 Coburg, Germany


