### Accession
PXD009101

### Title
GAGfinder: glycosaminoglycan MS/MS fragment peak finding and elemental composition assignment

### Description
This study shows the efficacy of a new tandem mass spectrometry peak finding software, GAGfinder. GAGfinder works by iterating through all potential fragments of a given precursor composition and comparing a theoretical isotopic distribution to the peak heights found in a tandem mass spectrum. We used ten synthetic heparan sulfate oligosaccharide to test the effectiveness of the method and compare GAGfinder's performance to that of an averagine-based algorithm.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to either electron detachment dissociation (EDD) or negative electron transfer dissociation (NETD) using a Bruker solariX 12T FTMS instrument. Samples were prepared as described in Hu, et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2490-2502.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra data was converted to mzML format using either MSConvertGUI version 3.0.5084 or compassXport command line utility 3.0.13 (Bruker Daltonics, Inc.), to be input into the GAGfinder command line interface. Tunable parameters in GAGfinder include accepted sulfate loss of 1 and MS2 error window of 20 ppm. We asked GAGfinder to return all found isotopic distributions, regardless of G score.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) covalently linked to proteoglycans (PGs) are characterized by repeating disaccharide units and variable sulfation patterns along the chain. GAG length and sulfation patterns impact disease etiology, cellular signaling, and structural support for cells. We and others have demonstrated the usefulness of tandem mass spectrometry (MS<sup>2</sup>) for assigning the structures of GAG saccharides; however, manual interpretation of tandem mass spectra is time-consuming, so computational methods must be employed. In the proteomics domain, the identification of monoisotopic peaks and charge states relies on algorithms that use averagine, or the average building block of the compound class being analyzed. Although these methods perform well for protein and peptide spectra, they perform poorly on GAG tandem mass spectra, because a single average building block does not characterize the variable sulfation of GAG disaccharide units. In addition, it is necessary to assign product ion isotope patterns to interpret the tandem mass spectra of GAG saccharides. To address these problems, we developed GAGfinder, the first tandem mass spectrum peak finding algorithm developed specifically for GAGs. We define peak finding as assigning experimental isotopic peaks directly to a given product ion composition, as opposed to deconvolution or peak picking, which are terms more accurately describing the existing methods previously mentioned. GAGfinder is a targeted, brute force approach to spectrum analysis that uses precursor composition information to generate all theoretical fragments. GAGfinder also performs peak isotope composition annotation, which is typically a subsequent step for averagine-based methods. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009101.

### Keywords
Heparan sulfate, Glycosaminoglycans, Keratan sulfate, Chondroitin sulfate, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA

### Submitter
John Hogan

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA


