### Accession
PXD036578

### Title
Investigating the effects of glyphosate on the bumblebee proteome and microbiota

### Description
Glyphosate is one of the most widely used herbicides globally. It acts by inhibiting an enzyme in an aromatic amino synthesis pathway specific to plants and microbes, leading to view that glyphosate poses no risk to other organisms. However, there is growing concern that glyphosate is associated with detrimental health effects in humans, and an ever-increasing body of evidence suggests that glyphosate affects other animals including pollinating insects such as bees. Although pesticides have long been considered a contributing factor in the decline of wild bee populations most research on bees has focussed on demonstrating and understanding the effects (particularly sublethal ones) of insecticides.  To assess whether glyphosate poses a potential risk to bees we characterised the changes in survival, behaviour, digestive tract proteome and microbiome in the bumblebee Bombus terrestris after chronic exposure to field relevant doses of glyphosate alone and as part of the commercially available product RoundUp Optima+®.  Regardless of source, changes in response to herbicide exposure in important cellular and physiological processes in the digestive tract of B. terrestris were observed, with the abundances of proteins associated with oxidative stress regulation, metabolism, cellular adhesion, the extracellular matrix, and various signalling pathways being altered. Interestingly, endocytosis, oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle, and carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism were differentially altered depending on whether the exposure source was glyphosate AI or RoundUp Optima+®. In addition, RoundUp Optima+®, but not the active ingredient glyphosate, impacted fungal diversity in the digestive tract microbiota.  Our research provides new insights into the potential mode of action and consequences of glyphosate exposure at the molecular and cellular levels in bumblebees and highlights issues with current regulatory measures involving commercial formulations of pesticides where the impact of the co-formulants on non-target organisms are generally overlooked.

### Sample Protocol
Exposures of bumblebees to glyphosate active ingredient and formulation for digestive tract proteome analysis were carried out following modified OECD 245 guidelines (OECD, 2017) in 2019. Nine bees were randomly chosen from each of four origin commercial colonies (Biobest, Agralan Ltd), with three bees per origin colony allocated to one of three group isolation chambers, in a similar way to the experiment described above. Each group isolation chamber comprised 12 bees in a plastic chamber (17cm x 14.7cm x 8.5cm) with a top facing lid lined with autoclaved sand. Each isolation chamber corresponded to one of the three treatments: 40% (w/v) sucrose solution, 1ppm glyphosate (hereafter referred to as active ingredient, AI) or 1ppm Roundup Optima+® (hereafter referred to as commercial formulation, CF) dissolved in 40% (w/v) sucrose solution in feeding tubes as described above.  Eight bees were randomly selected from each group isolation chamber after the five-day exposure. Bees were administered CO2 and their digestive tracts were dissected directly below the crop to include the proventriculus to the end of the colon.  The dissected digestive tracts were lifted from the abdomen with sterilized tweezers and placed into ice-cold lysis buffer comprising 6M urea, 2M thiourea and 1 tablet of Complete™, Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Diagnostics), snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -20°C. Once all tissue samples were dissected, samples were thawed on ice and homogenised for 30 seconds each. Samples were subsequently sonicated twice for 15 seconds and centrifuged at 9000rpm for five minutes at 4°C to pellet any remaining cellular debris. The supernatants were aliquoted in to clean 1.5ml tubes and stored at -70°C.   Protein quantification was carried out using Qubit® Quant-IT™ protein assay kit on a Qubit® fluorometer version 2.0 following manufacturer guidelines. 100µg of protein was removed from each sample and processed with a 2-D clean up kit (GE HealthCare), following manufacturer guidelines, to remove biological impurities. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 50µl resuspension buffer (6M urea, 0.1M Tris HCl, pH 8.0), of which 20µl was used for protein digestion. 115µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by adding 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 20 minutes followed by 0.5M iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubating at room temperature for 15 minutes in the dark. 1µl of 1% (w/v) Protease Max (Promega) and 1µl sequence grade trypsin (Promega) were added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours.  Subsequently, 1µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample to terminate digestion and the samples were incubated at room temperature for five minutes and centrifuged at 10,800rpm for 10 minutes.  The resulting supernatants were purified using Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer guidelines and the eluted purified peptides were dried down using a speedy vacuum concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA 120) and stored at 4˚C. Peptides were resuspended in a volume of loading buffer (2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.05% (v/v) TFA) to yield a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl, sonicated for two minutes and centrifuged at 13,400 rpm for five minutes. The supernatant was used for LC MS/MS.   1µg of peptide mix for each sample was eluted onto the Q Exactive (Thermofisher Scientific, USA) high resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. An increasing acetonitrile gradient was used to separate peptides on a Biobasic C18 Picofrit™ column (200mm length, 75mm ID), using a 120-minute reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250nL/min.  All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high-resolution MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was carried out using the Orbitrap to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS. MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (www.maxquant.org) was used for protein identification and LFQ normalisation of all MS/MS data. The Andromeda search algorithm in MaxQuant was used to correlate all MS/MS data against protein reference sequences obtained from the National Centre for Biotechnology to correlate the data against the protein reference sequences derived from the B. terrestris genome (Sadd et al., 2015) obtained from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) repository (17,508 entries, downloaded September 2021).

### Data Protocol
Perseus version 1.6.1.1 was used for data visualisation and statistical analysis. Normalized LFQ intensity values were used as a measure of protein abundance. The data was filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and samples were allocated to groups corresponding to treatment. Proteins absent from any samples in at least one group were not used for further analysis. A data imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2.1 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.1 times this SD. Normalized intensity values were used for principal component analysis. A two-sample T-test was performed using a cut-off value of p≤0.05 to identify statistically significant differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins. Volcano plots were produced by plotting –Log p-values on the y-axis and Log2 fold-change values on the x-axis to visualize differences in protein abundance between treatment groups. Hierarchical clustering of SSDA proteins was performed using z-score normalised intensity values to produce a heat map of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Glyphosate is one of the most widely used herbicides globally. It acts by inhibiting an enzyme in an aromatic amino acid synthesis pathway specific to plants and microbes, leading to the view that it poses no risk to other organisms. However, there is growing concern that glyphosate is associated with health effects in humans and an ever-increasing body of evidence that suggests potential deleterious effects on other animals including pollinating insects such as bees. Although pesticides have long been considered a factor in the decline of wild bee populations, most research on bees has focussed on demonstrating and understanding the effects of insecticides. To assess whether glyphosate poses a risk to bees, we characterised changes in survival, behaviour, sucrose solution consumption, the digestive tract proteome, and the microbiota in the bumblebee Bombus terrestris after chronic exposure to field relevant doses of technical grade glyphosate or the glyphosate-based formulation, RoundUp Optima+&#xae;. Regardless of source, there were changes in response to glyphosate exposure in important cellular and physiological processes in the digestive tract of B. terrestris, with proteins associated with oxidative stress regulation, metabolism, cellular adhesion, the extracellular matrix, and various signalling pathways altered. Interestingly, proteins associated with endocytosis, oxidative phosphorylation, the TCA cycle, and carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism were differentially altered depending on whether the exposure source was glyphosate alone or RoundUp Optima+&#xae;. In addition, there were alterations to the digestive tract microbiota of bees depending on the glyphosate source No impacts on survival, behaviour, or food consumption were observed. Our research provides insights into the potential mode of action and consequences of glyphosate exposure at the molecular, cellular and organismal level in bumblebees and highlights issues with the current honeybee-centric risk assessment of pesticides and their formulations, where the impact of co-formulants on non-target organisms are generally overlooked.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Bee, Proteomics, Digestive tract, Glyphosate, Bombus

### Affiliations
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland.
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Carolan
Applied Proteomics Lab, Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Ireland.


