### Accession
PXD042103

### Title
HDL functionality is dependent on hepatocyte stress defense factors NRF1 and NRF2

### Description
High density lipoproteins (HDL) promote homeostasis and counteract stressful tissue damage that underlie cardiovascular and other diseases by mediating reverse cholesterol transport, reducing inflammation, and abrogating oxidative damage. However, metabolically stressful conditions associated with atherosclerosis can impair these effects. Hepatocytes play a major role in the genesis and maturation of circulating HDL. Liver stress elicits marked regulatory changes to circulating HDL abundance and composition, which affect its functionality. Mechanisms linking liver stress to HDL functionality are incompletely understood. In this study, we sought to determine whether stress defending transcription factors nuclear factor erythroid 2 related factor-1 (NRF1) and -2 (NRF2) promote hepatocyte production of functional HDL. Using genetically engineered mouse models briefly fed a mild metabolically stressful diet, we investigated the effect of hepatocyte-specific deletion of NRF1, NRF2, or both on circulating HDL cholesterol level, protein composition, and function. Combined deletion, but not single gene deletion, reduced HDL cholesterol content as well as the capacity of HDL to accept cholesterol efflux from cultured macrophages and to counteract tumor necrosis factor a-induced inflammatory effect on cultured endothelial cells. This coincided with substantial alteration to the circulating HDL proteome, which correlated with liver gene expression profiles of corresponding proteins. Altogether, our findings show complementary actions by hepatocyte NRF1 and NRF2 play a role in shaping HDL composition and promote production of functionally viable HDL. Consequently, our study illuminates the possibility that enhancing stress defense programming in the liver may improve atheroprotective and perhaps other health promoting actions of HDL.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples fractionated by FPLC and eluted in 150 mM NaCl buffer

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched in MaxQuant Version 1.6.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the Mus musculus canonical Swiss-Prot proteome downloaded from UniProt on July 24 2020. Two missed cleavage events were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. Peptide search tolerance was set to 4.5ppm for MS1, and MS2 fragment tolerance was set to 20ppm. Both false discovery rates at peptide-spectrum match and protein levels were set to 0.01 and peptides with minimum 7 amino acids were considered for identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High density lipoprotein; liver stress defense; cholesterol; transcription factor; immunometabolism

### Affiliations
University of Saskatchewan
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Widenmaier, PhD
University of Saskatchewan


