### Accession
PXD011759

### Title
lincomycin treatment wild type and gun1-101

### Description
Retrograde signals emanate from the DNA-containing cell organelles (plastids and mitochondria) and control the expression of a large number of nuclear genes in response to environmental and developmental cues. Previous studies on retrograde signaling mainly analyzed the regulation of nuclear gene expression at the transcriptional level. To determine the contribution of post-transcriptional regulation to plastid retrograde signaling, we combined label-free proteomics with transcriptomic analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings and studied the response in whichto interference with the plastid gene expression (PGE) pathway of retrograde signaling.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis of the wild type, gun1 and gun5 in control conditions or upon treatmented with Lin, seedlings were grown for 5 days in the dark followed by 2 days in continuous light without (control) or with 0.5 mM Lin.100 mg plant material was ground in liquid nitrogen and extracted with 200 µL SDS buffer (4% SDS, 5% glycerol in 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 and 2×protease inhibitor from Roche). After protein quantification, 100 µg of total protein was digested (Microcon®-30 kDa filter units, Merck Millipore) by trypsin overnight at 37oC in a 1:25 ratio to the total protein (i.e., 4 µg trypsin for 100 µg protein). The peptides were eluted from the column, cleaned up with a SepPack column (Finisterre C18 SPE Column, Teknokroma).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was done with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.8.3) and unique peptides were used for quantification. Post-data analysis and statistical analysis were downe with the Perseus software. For statistical analysis, proteins that could be detected in at least in two biological replicates of one genotype in at least one condition were kept for further analysis. This resulted in 5558 proteins used for downstream analysis and the missing values (i.e., proteins that could not be detected in some samples/replicates) were imputed within the sample with a width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 using the Perseus software to enable statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Retrograde signals emanate from the DNA-containing cell organelles (plastids and mitochondria) and control the expression of a large number of nuclear genes in response to environmental and developmental cues. Previous studies on retrograde signaling have mainly analyzed the regulation of nuclear gene expression at the transcript level. To determine the contribution of translational and posttranslational regulation to plastid retrograde signaling, we combined label-free proteomics with transcriptomic analysis of Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) seedlings and studied their response to interference with the plastid gene expression pathway of retrograde signaling. By comparing the proteomes of the <i>genomes uncoupled1</i> (<i>gun1</i>) and <i>gun5</i> mutants with the wild type, we show that <i>GUN1</i> is critical in the maintenance of plastid protein homeostasis (proteostasis) when plastid translation is blocked. Combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the wild type and <i>gun1</i>, we identified 181 highly translationally or posttranslationally regulated (HiToP) genes. We demonstrate that HiToP photosynthesis-associated nuclear genes (PhANGs) are largely regulated by translational repression, while HiToP ribosomal protein genes are regulated posttranslationally, likely at the level of protein stability without the involvement of GUN1. Our findings suggest distinct posttranscriptional control mechanisms of nuclear gene expression in response to plastid-derived retrograde signals. They also reveal a role for GUN1 in the translational regulation of several PhANGs and highlight extensive posttranslational regulation that does not necessitate GUN1. This study advances our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying intracellular communication and provides new insight into cellular responses to impaired plastid protein biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Retrograde signaling

### Affiliations
Max-Planck institute of molecular plant physiology
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Muehlenberg 1 D-14476 Potsdam-Golm Germany

### Submitter
Guo-Zhang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph Bock
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology Am Muehlenberg 1 D-14476 Potsdam-Golm Germany


