### Accession
PXD000051

### Title
Proteomic analysis of intact flagella of procyclic Trypanosoma brucei cells identifies novel flagellar proteins with unique sub-localisation and dynamics

### Description
Identification of intact flagella of procyclic Trypanosoma brucei cells by LC-MS/MS after a trypsin shaving

### Sample Protocol
The amount of protein per flagella preparation was evaluated using a Quick Start Bradford Dye Agent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). For shaving , trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Madison, WI) was added to each flagella preparation suspended in PBS with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and the mixture was incubated for 1h at 37 °C. It was then centrifuged for 5 min at maximum speed in a microfuge at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and the pellet collected in 25 μl of sterile PBS. The composition of both samples was determined using nanoLC-MS/MS. Trypsin Digestion : Supernatant and pellet were dried down in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted respectively in 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5, 8 M urea and in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced (5 mM TCEP, 30 min at room temperature) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at room temperature in the dark). For the supernatant after flagella shaving, Lys-C was added in a 1:40 (w/w) ratio and incubated for 5 h at 37 °C. Samples were diluted four times with 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5. Trypsin (Trypsin Gold Mass Spec Grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio and the incubation was carried out overnight at 37 °C. The next day, the same amount of enzyme was added and samples were further incubated for 5 h at 37 °C. For the pellet after flagella shaving, samples were dried down in a vacuum concentrator after the reduction/alkylation steps and reconstituted in methanol/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (60:40). 2 min vortex mixer and 1 min sonication under cold conditions were repeated five times. Trypsin was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio and the incubation was carried out overnight at 37 °C. The next day, the same amount of enzyme was added and samples were further incubated for 5 h at 37 °C. Digestions were stopped by adding formic acid to 5% final concentration. Digest lysates were desalted by OMIX pipette Tips C18 solid phase extraction (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), dried down and reconstituted in water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98:2:0.1). Mass Spectrometry : Tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Each sample was loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm; Dionex) at 30 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. After 3 min desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the 15 cm capillary column (75 μm diameter, PepMap C18 3 μm) equilibrated in 96% solvent A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 4% to 60% gradient of solvent B for 90 min at 300 nL/min flow rate. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap in the 300–2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 60,000 at m/z = 400. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CI! D fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 s and repeated during 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Control samples (0 to 24 h induction) and flagella-enriched fractions (48 to 72 h induction) were analyzed in 3 and 5 biological replicates respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (MQ) software (V 1.3.0.5) with Andromeda as the search engine. A MudPit analysis was done for each replicate (pellet and supernatant). The search was done against a database containing the Trypanosoma brucei proteins (TbruceiTreu927AnnotatedProteins_TriTrypDB-4.1.fasta - 9826 sequences). Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), pyroglutamylation (Nterminus/Gln/Glu, variable), and oxidation (Met, variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and seven amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was used with a maximal retention time window of 2 min. Proteins were considered as identified when found with at least two peptides in a minimum of three experiments. The “proteinGroup.txt” file of MaxQuant was further used to extract LFQ (Label Free Quantitation) intensity values and calculate, for each protein, the ratio between the control (cell debris fraction) and the experiments (flagella fraction). For each group (debris and flagella fraction) an average of all LFQ intensities was used. Proteins were considered as enriched in the flagella fraction when the ratio was larger than 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Cilia and flagella are complex organelles made of hundreds of proteins of highly variable structures and functions. Here we report the purification of intact flagella from the procyclic stage of Trypanosoma brucei using mechanical shearing. Structural preservation was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy that showed that flagella still contained typical elements such as the membrane, the axoneme, the paraflagellar rod, and the intraflagellar transport particles. It also revealed that flagella severed below the basal body, and were not contaminated by other cytoskeletal structures such as the flagellar pocket collar or the adhesion zone filament. Mass spectrometry analysis identified a total of 751 proteins with high confidence, including 88% of known flagellar components. Comparison with the cell debris fraction revealed that more than half of the flagellum markers were enriched in flagella and this enrichment criterion was taken into account to identify 212 proteins not previously reported to be associated to flagella. Nine of these were experimentally validated including a 14-3-3 protein not yet reported to be associated to flagella and eight novel proteins termed FLAM (FLAgellar Member). Remarkably, they localized to five different subdomains of the flagellum. For example, FLAM6 is restricted to the proximal half of the axoneme, no matter its length. In contrast, FLAM8 is progressively accumulating at the distal tip of growing flagella and half of it still needs to be added after cell division. A combination of RNA interference and Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching approaches demonstrated very different dynamics from one protein to the other, but also according to the stage of construction and the age of the flagellum. Structural proteins are added to the distal tip of the elongating flagellum and exhibit slow turnover whereas membrane proteins such as the arginine kinase show rapid turnover without a detectible polarity.

### Keywords
Flagellar proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur / Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit / 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 PARIS
Institut Pasteur Paris

### Submitter
Philippe Bastin

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bastin
Institut Pasteur / Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit / 28, rue du Docteur Roux 75015 PARIS


