### Accession
PXD028854

### Title
Differential proteomics between AFP-negative HCC and adjacent non-tumor liver tissue

### Description
We screened and identified novel proteins in AFP-negative HCC tissue that were differentially expressed related to levels in adjacent non-tumor liver tissue using SWATH-MS proteome technology

### Sample Protocol
1 Sample Preparation  The AFP-negative HCC tissues (AFP (−) HCC group) and adjacent non-tumorous liver tissues (control group) were cut into pieces and washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 4 °C. The samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and then homogenized on ice in 1mL of lysis buffer (50mM HEPES, 6M urea, 2M thiourea, and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail). After that, the samples were vortexed for 10s at 200rpm 20 times following centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 40 min at 4 °C to collect the supernatant (total protein solution of each sample). The protein concentration of each sample was measured using the BCA protein assay method (8), and each group was subjected to biological triplicate experiments. 2 Protein Digestion in Solution  Tissue protein solution (100μg protein) was diluted with an equal volume of 20% 2,4,6-trichloroanisaole (TCA) to purify proteins. The solution was then precipitated for 2h at −80 °C and centrifuged at 20,000× g for 30 min at 4 °C. The precipitate was suspended in 0.4mL of acetone (4 °C) via ultrasonic treatment for 5 min. The resulting mixture was continuously precipitated overnight at −80 °C and centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C, the acetone was removed, and the purified proteins were obtained. Purified proteins were dissolved in 70µL 0.2% RapiGest SF in 50mM ABC solution and then reduced and alkylated by incubation with 100 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine in 50mM ABC solution for 30 min at 60 °C and 100mM iodoacetamide in 50mM ABC solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, respectively. Digestion was performed by incubation with trypsin (Promega; enzyme-to-substrate ratio, 1:100) at 37 °C with 160 rpm shaking overnight. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid solution at a final concentration of 1% at 37 °C for 0.5 h. The digestion was transferred to an ultrafiltration tube and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the filtrate comprised the sample peptide solution at a final concentration of 1μg/μL.

### Data Protocol
4 Proteomic data acquisition Identified proteomic data were acquired on an AB 5600+ Triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) equipped with an Eksigent 400 nano-HPLC system (Eksigent, AB Sciex, USA). A nano-LC MS/MS method was built, and the main steps were as follows: an equal volume of each peptide solution was taken to obtain one pooled peptide solution. The mixed solution was loaded on a nano trap column (350 μm×0.5mm, Chrom XP C18-3μm, 120A) and washed with acetonitrile-water-formic acid (2:98:0.1, v/v/v) solution for desalting at a ﬂow rate of 2μL/min for 10 min. After desalting, peptides were separated on an analytical column (75μm × 20cm, Sunchrom C18-5μm, 120, Beijing Happy Science Scientific Co., Ltd) at a flow rate of 300nL/min, and gradient elution was performed according to the following method (preparation of phase A (ACN-H2O-FA (98:2:0.1, v/v/v)) and phase B (ACN-H2O-FA (0.1:98:2, v/v/v)): 0 min, 95% and 5%; 1 min, 91% and 9%; 95 min, 75% and 25%; 100 min, 50% and 50%; 101 min, 20% and 80%; 110 min, 20% and 80%; 111 min, 95% and 5%; 120 min, 95% and 5% phase B. The peptide elution was ionized, and then, MS data were acquired using a data dependent acquisition (DDA) model with an AB 5600+ Triple TOF mass spectrometer. In the high-resolution model, the first-order spectra were scanned in the range of 300–605m/z,600-805m/z and 800-1250m/z. The TOF MS parameters were set as follows: spray mode, nano-electrospray; GS1, 12; CUR, 30; ISDF, 2500; IHF, 150; DP, 100; CE, 10; cumulative time, 250ms; mass deviation, 50mDa. The dynamic exclusion acquisition time was set to 20 s. The charge-setting range was 2–5. Fragment ion level 2 spectra (MS2) were acquired in high sensitivity mode, with a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) ranging from 100 to 1500 and an acquisition time of 250ms per cycle.  SWATH label-free was introduced to quantify identified proteins, and the SWATH MS/MS method was established. At first, pooled peptide spectra were acquired with the nano-LC MS/MS method based on the DDA model, but the TOF MS range was set from m/z 300 to 1250. The variable window for SWATH-MS was calculated using Variable Window Calculator V 0.2 112513 (AB Sciex). The parameters were set as follows: number of windows, 60; lower m/z, 300; upper m/z, 1250; window overlap (Da), 0.5; rolling collision energy, 15. Product ion spectra were measured in the range of m/z 100 to 1500 for 40 ms with the high sensitivity model, and the resulting total cycle time was 1.42 s. SWATH-MS measurements were performed in triplicate for each sample.  5 Data processing and bioinformatics analysis DDA data were analyzed with Paragon (ProteinPilot software, AB/Sciex) against the Homo sapiens database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/?term=Homo+sapiens). The detected protein threshold (unused Protscope (conf)) of result quality was 0.05 (10%), and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was chosen. SWATH data were analyzed using PeakView SWATH Processing Micro App (AB Sciex), followed by real time global correction. The important parameters for processing SWATH data were as follows: peptide confidence threshold, 95%; FDR threshold, 1.0%; 50 ppm m/z tolerance; 15 min extraction window; shared peptides excluded for SWATH analysis. Protein peak area data were finally obtained. Protein areas were normalized, and principled component analysis (PCA) and t-tests were performed for AFP (−)-HCC vs. CK. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were considered based on a fold-change of ≥1.5 or ≤0.067 and a p-value less than 0.05. Next, DEPs were annotated based on the Gene Ontology Consortium (GO), including cellular component, biological process, and molecular functions, and their systematic information was computed based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation .

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common malignancy worldwide. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is still the only serum biomarker widely used in clinical settings. However, approximately 40% of HCC patients exhibit normal AFP levels, including very early HCC and AFP-negative HCC; for these patients, serum AFP is not applicable as a biomarker of early detection. Thus, there is an urgent need to identify novel biomarkers for patients for whom disease cannot be diagnosed early. In this study, we screened and identified novel proteins in AFP-negative HCC and evaluated the feasibility of using autoantibodies to those protein to predict hepatocarcinogenesis. First, we screened and identified differentially expressed proteins between AFP-negative HCC tissue and adjacent non-tumor liver tissue using SWATH-MS proteome technology. In total, 2,506 proteins were identified with a global false discovery rate of 1%, of which 592 proteins were expressed differentially with 175 upregulated and 417 downregulated (adjusted <i>p</i>-value &lt;0.05, fold-change FC &#x2265;1.5 or &#x2264;0.67) between the tumor and matched benign samples, including 14-3-3 zeta protein. For further serological verification, autoantibodies against 14-3-3 zeta in serum were evaluated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent, Western blotting, and indirect immunofluorescence assays. Five serial serum samples from one patient with AFP-negative HCC showed anti-14-3-3 zeta autoantibody in sera 9&#xa0;months before the diagnosis of HCC, which gradually increased with an increase in the size of the nodule. Based on these findings, we detected the prevalence of serum anti-14-3-3 zeta autoantibody in liver cirrhosis (LC) patients, which is commonly considered a premalignant liver disease of HCC. We found that the prevalence of autoantibodies against 14-3-3 zeta protein was 16.1% (15/93) in LC patient sera, which was significantly higher than that in patients with chronic hepatitis (0/75, <i>p</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.000) and normal human sera (1/60, 1.7%, <i>p</i>&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.01). Therefore, we suggest that anti-14-3-3 zeta autoantibody might be a biomarker for predicting hepatocarcinogenesis. Further follow-up and research of patients with positive autoantibodies will be continued to confirm the relationship between anti-14-3-3 zeta autoantibody and hepatocarcinogenesis.

### Keywords
Hcc, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Beijing You’ an Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing Institute of Hepatology, Beijing You’an Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China

### Submitter
Ting Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Beijing Institute of Hepatology, Beijing You’an Hospital
Beijing Institute of Hepatology, Beijing You’an Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China


