### Accession
PXD001007

### Title
Genome-wide identification and functional analysis of Apobec-1 mediated C-to-U RNA editing in mouse small intestine and liver

### Description
Background: RNA editing encompasses a post-transcriptional process in which the genomically templated sequence is enzymatically altered and introduces a modified base into the edited transcript.  Mammalian C-to-U RNA editing represents a distinct subtype of base modification, whose prototype is intestinal apolipoproteinB (apoB) mRNA, mediated by the catalytic deaminase Apobec-1.  However, the genome-wide identification, tissue-specificity and functional implications of Apobec-1 mediated C-to-U RNA editing remains incomplete. Results: Deep sequencing, data filtering and Sanger-sequence validation of intestinal and hepatic RNA from wild-type and Apobec-1 deficient mice revealed 56 novel editing sites in 54 intestinal mRNAs and 22 novel sites in 17 liver mRNAs (74-81% Sanger sequenced validated), all within 3’ untranslated regions. Eleven of 17 liver RNAs shared editing sites with intestinal RNAs, while 6 sites were unique to liver.  Changes in RNA editing led to corresponding changes in intestinal mRNA and protein levels in 11 genes.  RNA editing in vivo following tissue-specific Apobec-1 adenoviral or transgenic Apobec-1 overexpression revealed that a subset of targets identified in wild-type mice were restored in Apobec-1 deficient mouse intestine and liver following Apobec-1 rescue. We found distinctive polysome profiles for several RNA editing targets and demonstrated novel exonic editing sites in nuclear preparations from intestine (but not hepatic) apoB RNA.  RNA editing was validated using cell-free extracts from wild-type but not Apobec-1 deficient mice, demonstrating that Apobec-1 is required.  Conclusions: These studies define selective, tissue-specific targets of Apobec-1 dependent RNA editing and show the functional consequences of editing are both transcript- and tissue-specific.

### Sample Protocol
a) Total protein were extracted from (commercially purchased; Silantes, Munich) labeled, wild-type and Apobec-1–/– mouse intestine using 2% SDS, 30 mM Tris pH 8, protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche), phosphatase inhibitors (PhosStop, Roche) and benzonase (25 U/ul, Sigma).  b) Resuspension of methanol/chloroform precipitated proteins 6M/2M, 30mM Tris, pH 8 and concentration measurement using Bradford. 1:1 mixing of the unlabeled samples with the lys6-labeled SILAC standard. c) In-solution digestion with Lys-C (Wako) and separation of peptides (200µg) by Offgel fractionator (Agilent) into 12 fractions over a pH range 3-10 according to the manufacturer’s protocol with adaptations (0.3% glycerol, 0.1% ampholytes, 20 kVh), followed by lyophyllization and C18 StageTip desalting. d)  Analyzis of fractions by LC/MS2 using an EASY-nLC (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nl/min onto a 20 cm fused silica in-house packed (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) 75 μm ID column emitter and a segmented 100 min-gradient from 10 to 60% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid). Data acquisition performed by a QExactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Survey MS spectra (m/z 300–1650, 70 000 resolution at m/z 300, AGC target value of 3 000 000 charges, maximum fill time 20 ms) were followed by up to 10 MS2 scans on the most intense ions (HCD, normalized collision energy 25%, 17 500 resolution, AGC target value of 100 000, maximum fill time 120 ms, dynamic exclusion 25 s, 1 repeat count). Unassigned charge states and singly charged ions were omitted.

### Data Protocol
a) To omit analysis of chromatogram regions in which ampholytes from the offgel fractionation elute, raw files were cut individually at the 20 min mark using RecalOffline (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). b) Data analysis by the MaxQuant suite of algorithms (Version 1.3.0.5) against the Mus musculus UniProtKB protein sequence database (as of 08.05.2013, 79 342 entries, including canonical and isoform sequences) with Lys-C enzyme specificity, maximum missed cleavages of 2, 20/6 ppm precursor mass tolerance (first/second search) and oxidized methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation (variable), as well as carbamidomethylation (fixed) as modifications. 1% FDR (both peptide and protein IDs), 7 amino acid minimum peptide length and match between runs were further parameters used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intestine, Rna editing, Liver, Polysomes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Graumann
Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar


