### Accession
PXD005170

### Title
Comparative proteomics of plant biomass degradation by the ascomycete fungus Podospora anserine

### Description
The project compares the production of plant biomass degrading enzymes by Podospora anserina during growth on different feed stocks.

### Sample Protocol
Podospra anseria was grown with different feed stocks (cotton seed hulls, weheat straw and soybean hulls). The supernatants of each condition were collected on the 1st day and 3rd day of culture.  For a protein analysis by mass spectrometry 60μl supernatant of each sample were loaded in 12% Precast Gels  and stained by dye G-250. Samples were ran on a 12% Bis-Tris 1D SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad) for 2-3 cm and stained with colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific). The lane was cut into three bands, which were treated with 6.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 60 °C for reduction and 54 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min for alkylation. The proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) at 37 C. The peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA) / 5% DMSO and 30% of the sample was analyzed using a Proxeon Easy-nLC100 (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Samples were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 um, 2 cm x 100 μm) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 40 cm x 50 μm), using a gradient of 60 min at a column flow of 150 nl min-1. Trapping was performed at 8 μL/min for 10 min in solvent A (0.1 M acetic acid in water) and the gradient was as follows 7- 30% solvent B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) in 31 min, 30-100% in 3 min, 100% solvent B for 5 min, and 7% solvent B for 13 min. Nanospray was performed at 1.7 kV using a fused silica capillary that was pulled in-house and coated with gold (o.d. 360 μm; i.d. 20 μm; tip i.d. 10 μm). The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. Full scan MS spectra from m/z 350 – 1500 were acquired at a resolution of 35.000 at m/z 400 after the accumulation to a target value of 3E6. Up to ten most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalised collision energy of 25% after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS2 was acquired at a resolution of 17.500 and dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 10 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Database search was performed using a P.anserina database using  Mascot as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filter was an ion score >20. Raw files corresponding to one sample were merged into one result file.

### Publication Abstract
The coprophilic ascomycete fungus Podospora anserina was cultivated on three different plant biomasses, i.e. cotton seed hulls (CSH), soybean hulls (SBH) and acid-pretreated wheat straw (WS) for four days, and the potential of the produced enzyme mixtures was compared in the enzymatic saccharification of the corresponding lignocellulose feedstocks. The enzyme cocktail P. anserina produced after three days of growth on SBH showed superior capacity to release reducing sugars from all tested plant biomass feedstocks compared to the enzyme mixtures from CSH and WS cultures. Detailed proteomics analysis of the culture supernatants revealed that SBH contained the most diverse set of enzymes targeted on plant cell wall polymers and was particularly abundant in xylan, mannan and pectin acting enzymes. The importance of lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs) in plant biomass deconstruction was supported by identification of 20 out of 33 AA9 LPMOs in the SBH cultures. The results highlight the suitability of P. anserina as a source of plant cell wall degrading enzymes for biotechnological applications and the importance of selecting the most optimal substrate for the production of enzyme mixtures.

### Keywords
Plant biomass degradation, Xylanase, Fungal enzymes, Induction, Cellulase, Pectinase

### Affiliations
Fungal Physiology CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald P. de Vries
Fungal Physiology CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht, The Netherlands


