### Accession
PXD019561

### Title
Rat intestinal epithelial cells, LC-MS/MS

### Description
We utilized iTRAQ to detect that rat intestinal mucosa microvascular endothelial cells (RIMVECs) under IL-1α treatment (0, 2, 4, 8h).

### Sample Protocol
RIMVECs were treated with IL-1α (10 ng/ml) at 37°C incubated in a 5% CO2 atmosphere for 2, 4 and 8 h. The proteins of RIMVCEs were extracted by RIPA lysate buffer (Beyotime) and quieted by a BSA assay (Beyotime). 200 μg proteins were incubated in iTRAQ kit (AB Sciexfor) proteolysis.

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ labeled, LC-MS/MS analysis and MALDI-TOF-TOF identifications were conducted by BIOMS company. Analysis of iTRAQ mass spectrometry by a software of ProteinPilot 4.0 (AB Sciex) and the database come from http://www.uniprot.org.

### Publication Abstract
Migration of neutrophils across endothelial barriers to capture and eliminate bacteria is served as the first line of innate immunity. Bacterial virulence factors damage endothelium to produce inflammatory cytokines interacts with neutrophils. However, the mechanisms that behind endothelial-neutrophil interaction impact on the bactericidal activity remain unclear. Therefore, we aimed to find the target proteins on endothelial cells that triggered the bactericidal activity of transendothelial neutrophils. Herein, we built the infected models on rats and endothelial-neutrophil co-cultural system (Transwell) and discovered that endothelial-derived IL-1&#x3b1; promoted the survival of rats under <i>Escherichia coli</i> infection and enhanced the bactericidal activity of transendothelial neutrophils <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i>. Results further showed that IL-1&#x3b1; was inhibited by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the endothelial-neutrophil interaction. We found that LPS mainly damaged cell membrane and induced cell necrosis to interrupt neutrophil migration from endothelial barrier. Thus, we used the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) method to identify different proteins of endothelial cells. Results showed that IL-1&#x3b1; targeted cellular plasma membrane, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial envelope and triggered eleven common proteins to persistently regulate. During the early phase, IL-1&#x3b1; triggered the upregulation of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) to promote neutrophil adhesion, while oxidative phosphorylation was involved in long time regulation to induce transmigration of neutrophils against bacteria. Our results highlight the critical mechanism of endothelial-derived IL-1&#x3b1; on promoting bactericidal activity of transendothelial neutrophils and the findings of IL-1&#x3b1; triggered proteins provide the potentially important targets on the regulation of innate immunity.

### Keywords
Rat epithelial cells itraq

### Affiliations
+8615210630218
Beijing Traditional Chinese Veterinary Engineering Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine, Beijing University of Agriculture, No.7 Beinong Road, Changping, Beijing 102206, China.

### Submitter
Xiaoye Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Dong
Beijing Traditional Chinese Veterinary Engineering Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine, Beijing University of Agriculture, No.7 Beinong Road, Changping, Beijing 102206, China.


