### Accession
PXD000535

### Title
CHPP chr 1,8,20 proteome dataset using the HCC cell lines of Hep3B and MHCC97H, instrument is AB5600, part 3 of 3

### Description
The fresh cells as described above were harvested and lysed in buffer containing 8 M Urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 5 mM IAA. The total cell lysates were centrifuged with 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 degrees Celsius to remove cell debris, and 1.5 mg proteins for each cell line were followed by sequential in-solution protein digestion by Lys-C and trypsin at 37 degrees Celsius respectively. The tryptic peptides were cleaned by C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters UK Ltd, Manchester, UK). The mass spectrometer used in this dataset was Triple TOF 5600 (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). The dataset was produced with two technical replicates and 24 fractions per repeat. The database searching procedure was achieved using Mascot v2.3. The database is Swiss-prot (release 2013 -6).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We upgraded the preliminary CCPD 1.0 to CCPD 2.0 using the latest deep-profiling proteome (CCPD 2013) of three hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines, namely, Hep3B, MHCC97H, and HCCLM3 (ProteomeXchange identifiers: PXD000529, PXD000533, and PXD000535). CCPD 2.0 totally covered 63.6% (438/689) of Chr. 8-coded proteins and 62.6% (439/701) of Chr. 8-coded protein-coding genes. Interestingly, we found that the missing proteins exhibited a tendency to form a cluster region in chromosomes, such as two &#x3b2;-defensins clusters in Chr. 8, caused perhaps by their inflammation-related features. For the 41 Chr. 8-coded proteins being weakly or barely identified previously, we have performed an immunohistochemical (IHC) verification in 30 pairs of carcinoma/para-carcinoma HCC and 20 noncancerous liver tissues and confirmed their expressional evidence and occurrence proportions in tissue samples. We also verified 13 Chr. 8-coded HCC tumorigenesis-associated depleting or deficient proteins reported in CCPD 1.0 using IHC and screened 16 positive and 24 negative HCC metastatic potential-correlated proteins from large-scale label-free proteome quantitation data of CCPD 2013. Our results suggest that the selection of proper samples and the methodology to look for targeted missing proteins should be carefully considered in further verifications for the remaining Chr. 8-coded proteins.

### Keywords
Hcc cell lines, Chpp, Chromesome 1, 8, Ab5600, 20

### Affiliations
Beijing proteome research center

### Submitter
Zhang Chengpu Zhang Chengpu

### Lab Head


