### Accession
PXD024610

### Title
Species identification of silks by protein mass spectrometry

### Description
We investigate a range of methods for solubilizing modern and archaeological silks and demonstrate a protocol using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to successfully differentiate modern samples of Bombyx, Antheraea, and Samia   -produced silks matching samples to species level. We also analyzed archaeological silks from excavations at the ancient city of Palmyra, Syria, and provide evidence that these silks were produced by A. mylitta, which is the first direct evidence supporting the production and trade of Indian wild silk in antiquity.

### Sample Protocol
The concentrated fibroin solution was was digested using trypsin or chymotrypsin (1:50) in 50mM ABC for 18-20 hours at 37 ºC. For FA(10%)- trypsin digestion system, a portion of fibroin solution was taken to a separate tube, mixed with formic acid (10% to volume) and set 4hrs to overnight before trypsin digestion. Then, acetonitrile (ACN) was added to the filter unit up to 80% of volume with enzyme (1:100) and further digested for 4 more hours.  In case of chymotrypsin-trypsin digestion, the sample was first digested with chymotrypsin, then trypsin was added with ACN. Digestion process was stopped by adding formic acid to 5% of volume. The resulted peptides were vacuum dried, eluted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) for the peptide cleaning using 100µl size ZipTip (C18, Thermo), followed by the steps described below. Peptides were extracted in 80% CAN in 0.1% FA buffer, vacuum dried and resuspended in elution buffer for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed on a NanoAcquity-UPLC system (Waters) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) possessing an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptides were trapped on an in-house packed guard column (75 μm i.d. x 20 mm, Acclaim PepMap C18, 3μm, 100 Å) using solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid in water) at a pressure of 140 bar. The peptides were separated on an EASY-spray Acclaim PepMap® analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 50 mm, RSLC C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) using a linear gradient (length: 100 minutes, 3 % to 60 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), flow rate: 300 nL/min). The separated peptides were electro-sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer operating in a data-dependent mode using a CID based method. Full scan MS spectra (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 120000, AGC target 1e6, maximum injection time 250 ms) and subsequent CID MS/MS spectra (AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 100 ms) of 10 most intense peaks were acquired in the Ion Trap. CID fragmentation was performed at 35 % of normalized collision energy and the signal intensity threshold was kept at 500 counts. The CID method used performs beam-type CID fragmentation of the peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Silk has been a luxurious commodity throughout modern human history and sericulture has played an important role in ancient global trade as well as technological and cultural developments. Archaeological findings suggest that prior to domestication of the mulberry silkworm (Bombyx mori) silks were obtained from a range of silk-producing moth species with regional specificity. However, investigating the origins of sericulture is difficult as classification of silks by species-type has proved technically challenging. We therefore investigated a range of methods for solubilising modern and archaeological silks and developed a mass spectrometry-based proteomics method that was able to successfully differentiate modern Bombyx, Antheraea, and Samia-produced silks down to the species level. We subsequently analysed archaeological silk materials excavated from the ancient city of Palmyra. Solubilisation behaviour and proteomic analysis provided evidence that the Palmyra silks were constructed from wild silk derived from Antheraea mylitta, the Indian Tasar silkworm. We believe this is the first species-level biochemical evidence that supports archaeological theories about the production and trade of Indian wild silks in antiquity.

### Keywords
Wild silk, Silk, Fibroins, Nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
University of Oxford/Smithsonian Institutions

### Submitter
Boyoung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Boyoung Lee
University of Oxford/Smithsonian Institutions


