### Accession
PXD028663

### Title
Structural insights into the catalytic cycle of a bacterial multidrug ABC efflux pump

### Description
ABC (“ATP-Binding Cassette”) exporters of the type IV subfamily gather transporters involved in the efflux of many compounds and notably those capable to confer multidrug resistance like the mammalian P-glycoprotein or the bacterial transporter BmrA. They function according to an alternating access mechanism between inward-facing (IF) and outward-facing (OF) conformations, but the extent of physical separation between the two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) in different states is still unsettled. Small Angle Neutron Scattering (SANS) and hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) were used to highlight different conformational states of BmrA during its catalytic cycle. In particular, mutation of the invariant Lysine residue of the Walker-A motif (K380A) captures BmrA in an ATP-bound IF conformation prior to NBD closure. While in the transition-like state induced by vanadate, wild-type BmrA is mainly in an OF conformation, it and populates only IF conformations only in the presence of ADP/Mg. Importantly, in this post-hydrolytic step, distances between the two NBDs of BmrA appears to be more separated than in the apo state, but they remains shorter than in the widest opening found in the related MsbA transporter. Overall, our results highlight the main steps of the catalytic cycle of a homodimeric bacterial multidrug transporter and underline structural and functional commonalities as well as oddities among the type IV subfamily of ABC exporters.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS experiments were performed using an automated HDX system coupled to a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer from Waters™. The reactions were carried out by a Leap HDX PAL robot (Trajan, USA).  Labeling was initiated by diluting 5.5 µL, of typically 15 µM protein, in 104.5 µL D2O labeling buffer (5 mM Hepes pD 8, 50 mM NaCl, 0.01% LMNG). For the ATP/Vi- and ATP-incubated conditions, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Vi and 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, respectively. Prior to labeling, the samples were incubated with the respective ligands for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were labeled for 0.5, 2, 5, 15, 30 & 60 min at 20 °C. Subsequently, the reactions were quenched by adding 22 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer to 100 µL of labelled sample at 4°C. For the WT, the quenching buffer contained 0.5 M glycine pH 2.2, 4 M guanidine-HCl and pepsin with protein to pepsin ratio of 4:1 wt:wt, and digestion was done for 2 min in quenching buffer before injecting 110 µL of the quenched sample into a 100 µL loop. For K380A BmrA, the quenching buffer consisted of 0.5 M glycine pH 2.2 & 8 M guanidine-HCl and digestion was done on-line at 10°C using a pepsin column (Waters Enzymate™ BEH Pepsin Column 300Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 30 mm). In both cases, the resulting peptides were desalted for three minutes and trapped on a C18 precolumn (Waters™.UPLC BEH C18 Vanguard Pre-column) before separating them with a C18 column (Waters™ Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column) using a linear acetonitrile gradient of 5-40% in 15 min and then four alternative cycles of 5% and 95% until 25 min . The valve position was adjusted to divert the sample after 14 min of each run from C18 column to waste to avoid contaminating the mass spectrometer with detergent. Three full kinetics were run for each condition, one after the other, to get triplicates of each timepoint. Blanks with equilibration buffer (5 mM Hepes pH 8, 50 mM NaCl) were injected after each sample injection and pepsin column washed (when present) during each run with pepsin wash (1.5 M guanidine-HCl, 4% acetonitrile, 0.8% formic acid pH 2.5) to minimize the carryover. Electrospray ionization Mass spectra were acquired in positive mode in the m/z range of 50−2000 and with a scan time of 0.3 s.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of non-deuterated peptides, data was collected in MSE mode and the resulting peptides were identified using PLGS™ software (ProteinLynx Global SERVER 3.0.2 from Waters™). Deuterated peptides were identified and analysed using DynamX 3.0 software (Waters™), using the following parameters: minimum intensity of 1000, minimum products per amino acid of 0.3 and file threshold of 3 out of 7 for BmrA WT and 2 out of 5 for BmrA K380A. After manual curation, Deuteros 2.0 was used for data visualization and statistical analysis. The online web application HDX-Viewer and PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.3.0 Schrödinger, LLC) were used to represent the HDX-MS data on either, the IF model of BmrA based on PDB 3WME, or the OF structure of E504A BmrA (PDB 6R81). The program MODELLER was used to make the IF model of BmrA based on P-gp (PDB 3WME).

### Publication Abstract
ABC ("ATP-Binding Cassette") transporters of the type IV subfamily consist of exporters involved in the efflux of many compounds, notably those capable to confer multidrug resistance like the mammalian P-glycoprotein or the bacterial transporter BmrA. They function according to an alternating access mechanism between inward-facing (IF) and outward-facing (OF) conformations, but the extent of physical separation between the two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) in different states is still unsettled. Small Angle Neutron Scattering and hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry were used to highlight different conformational states of BmrA during its ATPase cycle. In particular, mutation of the conserved Lysine residue of the Walker-A motif (K380A) captures BmrA in an ATP-bound IF conformation prior to NBD closure. While in the transition-like state induced by vanadate wild-type BmrA is mainly in an OF conformation, the transporter populates only IF conformations in either the apo state or in the presence of ADP/Mg. Importantly, in this post-hydrolytic step, distances between the two NBDs of BmrA seem to be more separated than in the apo state, but they remain shorter than the widest opening found in the related MsbA transporter. Overall, our results highlight the main steps of the catalytic cycle of a homodimeric bacterial multidrug transporter and underline structural and functional commonalities as well as oddities among the type IV subfamily of ABC transporters.

### Keywords
Bmra, Multidrug resistance, Abc transporter, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange ms

### Affiliations
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France


