### Accession
PXD018104

### Title
The loss of the RNA helicase Dhx15 impairs endothelial energy metabolism, lymphatic drainage and tumor metastasis in mice

### Description
DHX15 is an ATP-dependent RNA helicase involved in pre-mRNA splicing. We have recently reported that DHX15 is a downstream substrate for Akt1, which plays a significant role in vascular biology. Therefore, we aimed to explore the regulatory function of DHX15 over the vasculature, and the endothelial cell biology in different contexts: development, metabolism, ischemia and tumor growth. Methods: Deficient DHX15 mice and zebrafish were generated using transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) and Crispr/cas9 gene edition. Lymphatic functionality was evaluated by lymphangiography and magnetic resonance imaging. Mouse-induced tumor and metastasis model were generated by injection of syngeneic LLC1 tumor cells. DHX15 gene silencing in mouse liver endothelial cells (LEC) was performed by the lentiviral transduction of shRNA (Dharmacon). The changes in the transcriptome and the proteome resulting from the shRNA transduction were investigated by RNAseq and mass spectrometry, respectively. Results: Homozygous DHX15 gene deficiency was lethal in mouse and zebrafish embryos. DHX15-/- zebrafish also showed an undeveloped parachordal line, which leads to the formation of lymphatic structures in the trunk during the development. DHX15+/- mice and zebrafish were viable, although DHX15+/- gene deficiency triggered lower vascular network density and impaired lymphatic function postnatally in mice. Whole transcriptome and proteome analysis of DHX15 silenced LEC revealed differential expression of enzymes involved in the glycolysis and the gluconeogenesis pathways. The functional validation of these results demonstrated an uncoupling of the glycolysis with the oxidation of pyruvate into the mitochondria and lower activity of the Complex I in the mitochondrial membrane, resulting in lower cellular ATP production. Noteworthy, heterozygous DHX15 deficiency partially inhibited primary tumor growth and reduced lung metastasis after injection of syngeneic LLC1 tumor cells, compared to wild-type mice

### Sample Protocol
Samples (30 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (90 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (180 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science ). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot mouse database (as in November 2016, 16831 entries) plus a list  of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). Average peak area of the 3 top unique peptides for a given protein have been calculated and normalized by the median.  To compare wt vs DHX15 silenced fold change, pvalue and ajusted pvalue was calculated with Perseus 1.5.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
DHX15 is a downstream substrate for Akt1, which is involved in key cellular processes affecting vascular biology. Here, we explored the vascular regulatory function of DHX15. Homozygous DHX15 gene deficiency was lethal in mouse and zebrafish embryos. DHX15<sup>-/-</sup> zebrafish also showed downregulation of VEGF-C and reduced formation of lymphatic structures during development. DHX15<sup>+/-</sup> mice depicted lower vascular density and impaired lymphatic function postnatally. RNAseq and proteome analysis of DHX15 silenced endothelial cells revealed differential expression of genes involved in the metabolism of ATP biosynthesis. The validation of these results demonstrated a lower activity of the Complex I in the mitochondrial membrane of endothelial cells, resulting in lower intracellular ATP production and lower oxygen consumption. After injection of syngeneic LLC1 tumor cells, DHX15<sup>+/-</sup> mice showed partially inhibited primary tumor growth and reduced lung metastasis. Our results revealed an important role of DHX15 in vascular physiology and pave a new way to explore its potential use as a therapeutical target for metastasis treatment.

### Keywords
Ltq-orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
crg
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)

### Submitter
guadalupe espadas

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)


