### Accession
PXD009813

### Title
Human salivary basic proline-rich proteins

### Description
Human basic proline-rich proteins and basic glycosylated proline-rich proteins are the most complex family of human adult salivary proteins, secreted only by the parotid gland, expressed by the polymorphic PRB1-4 genes. This study reports the results obtained for their characterization in our laboratory utilizing integrated top-down and bottom-up HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS platform. The family include 11 parent peptides/proteins and more than 6 parent glycosylated proteins. Despite the complexity, on the basis of their primary structure they result the product of the duplication of three repeats and we propose that they can be classified in two main groups, the first including the peptides called P-E, P-Ko, IB-6, Ps-1, Ps-2, P-H, P-F, P-J, and P-D, the second including the peptides called IB-1, II-2 and the glycosylated basic proline-rich proteins codified by PRB3 and PRB4 genes. A third minor hybrid group includes the proteins called IB-8a Con1- and Con1+.  Some of the proteins of the family (IB-1, II-2 and P-J) are almost always detectable in adult human saliva, while the others are expressed with different frequencies according to the phenotype. Various isoforms are detectable in the adult saliva and three of them, until now not reported (P-H S1→A, P-Ko P36→S, P-Ko A41→S), were characterized by MS/MS fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection: Unstimulated WS was collected according to a standardized protocol optimized to preserve saliva proteins from proteolytic degradation. Donors did not eat or drink at least 2 h before the collection, which was performed in the morning between 10:00 A.M. and 12:00 A.M. with a soft plastic aspirator. Saliva was transferred into a plastic tube in ice bath, and 0.2% 2,2,2-trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was immediately added in 1:1 v/v ratio. The solution was then centrifuged at 10000g for 10 min at 4 °C. The acidic supernatant was separated from the precipitate and either immediately analyzed by HPLC−ESI−MS (33 μL, corresponding to 16.5 μL of saliva) or stored at −80 °C until the analysis.  HPLC Low-Resolution ESI−IT−MS Experiments: Acid soluble fractions of salivary proteins/peptides form each sample have been analyzed by reversed-phase (RP)-HPLC-low-resolution ESI-IT-MS apparatus, constituted by a Surveyor HPLC system connected to an LCQ Advantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an ESI source. The chromatographic column was a Vydac (Hesperia, CA) C8 column with 5 μm particle diameter (150 × 2.1 mm). The eluents were the following: (eluent A) 0.056% (v/v) aqueous TFA, and (eluent B) 0.05% (v/v) TFA in acetonitrile/water 80/20. The gradient applied was linear from 0 to 55% of B in 40 min, and from 55 to 100% of B in 10 min, at a flow rate of 0.10 mL/min toward the ESI source. During the first 5 min of separation, eluate was diverted to waste to avoid instrument damage because of the high salt concentration. Mass spectra were collected every 3 ms in the m/z range 300−2000 in positive ion mode. The MS spray voltage was 5.0 kV, and the capillary temperature was 260°C. MS resolution was 6000. Deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra was performed by MagTran 1.0 software.31 Average experimental mass value (Mav) were compared with average theoretical values using PeptideMass program available on the Swiss-Prot data bank (https://www.expasy.org/proteomics).  NanoHPLC High-Resolution ESI−MS/MS Experiments: For the structural characterization, 67 saliva samples were analyzed by nanoHPLC-high resolution MS/MS with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano System HPLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The columns were a Zorbax 300SB-C8 column (3.5 μm particle diameter; 1.0 × 150 mm). Eluents were: (eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA and (eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile/water 80/20. The gradient was: 0−2 min 5% B, 2−40 min from 5% to 70% B (linear), and 40−45 min from 70% to 99% B, at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode with the resolution of 60 000. The acquisition range was from 350 to 2000 m/z, and the tuning parameters were: capillary temperature was 300 °C and the source voltage was 4.0 kV; S-Lens RF level was 60%. In data-dependent acquisition mode the five most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using collision induced dissociation (CID) or higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), with 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, isolation width of 5 m/z, and activation q of 0.25. The inject volume was 20 μL. HPLC-ESI−MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution.

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. MS/MS data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program, based on SEQUEST HT cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corporation, San Jose, CA) against the Human UniProt-KB data-bank (163,117 entries, release 2018_02). The settings were precursor mass search tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Target FDR was: 0.01 (strict), 0.05 (relaxed). The following modifications were selected: in dynamic mode oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from E or from Q residues, serine phosphorylation. Due to the difficulties of the automated software to detect with high confidence every bPRPs and their fragments, a part of the structural information below reported derives from manual interpretation of the MS/MS spectra obtained either by CID or HCD fragmentation of the naturally occurring peptides detectable along the TIC profile of the acidic soluble fraction of the adult human saliva proteome. The structural information on Ps-2 and gPRPs derives from literature. However, all the protein sequences and sites of covalent modifications identified by Proteome Discoverer software were also validated by manual inspection of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software available at the Protein Prospector Web site (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm).

### Publication Abstract
Human basic proline-rich proteins and basic glycosylated proline-rich proteins, encoded by the polymorphic PRB1-4 genes and expressed only in parotid glands, are the most complex family of adult salivary proteins. The family includes 11 parent peptides/proteins and more than 6 parent glycosylated proteins, but a high number of proteoforms with rather similar structures derive from polymorphisms and post-translational modifications. 55 new components of the family were characterized by top-down liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and tandem-mass platforms, bringing the total number of proteoforms to 109. The new components comprise the three variants P-H S<sub>1</sub> &#x2192; A, P-Ko P<sub>36</sub> &#x2192; S, and P-Ko A<sub>41</sub> &#x2192; S and several of their naturally occurring proteolytic fragments. The paper represents an updated reference for the peptides included in the heterogeneous family of proteins encoded by PRB1/PRB4. MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD009813.

### Keywords
Human, High-resolution esi−ms/ms experiments, Saliva

### Affiliations
Cagliari University
University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Barbara Manconi

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
Cagliari University


