### Accession
PXD014718

### Title
Synthetic polyclonal-derived CDR peptides as innovative strategy in glaucoma therapy

### Description
The pathogenesis of glaucoma is strongly associated with the occurrence of autoimmune-mediated loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and recently it was proven that specific antibody-derived signature peptides are significantly differentially expressed in sera of primary open angle glaucoma patients (POAG) compared to healthy controls. Synthetic antibody-derived peptides are known since several years to modulate various effector functions of the immune system and to act as antimicrobial or antiviral molecules. The present study shows for the first time that polyclonal-derived complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) significantly increased the survival rate of RGCs in an ex vivo glaucoma model (P=0.013) by using immunohistochemical staining techniques. Affinity capture experiments verified serine protease HTRA2 (mitochondrial) as high-confident retinal epitope target of CDR1 sequence motive ASGYTFTNYGLSWVR. Quantitative proteomic analysis of the CDR-treated retinal explants revealed increased expression of various anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative proteins (e.g. VDAC2 and TXN) compared to untreated controls (P<0.05) and decreased expression levels of cellular stress response markers (e.g. HSPE1 and HSP90AA1) were observed. Mitochondrial dysfunction, protein ubiquitination pathway and oxidative phosphorylation were annotated as the most significantly affected signaling pathways and can possibly be traced back to the CDR-induced inhibition or modulation of the master regulator HTRA2. These findings emphasize the great potential of synthetic polyclonal-derived CDR peptides as therapeutic agents in future glaucoma therapy and provide an excellent basis for affinity-based biomarker discovery purposes.

### Sample Protocol
For the identification of the CDR-specific interaction partners the eluate fractions were subjected for further in-solution trypsin digestion as described elsewhere. In brief, the eluate fractions were dissolved in 30 µl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and sonicated for 5 min on ice. Subsequently, 6 µl of 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ABC were added and incubated for 30 min at 56° C. Next, 6 µl of 200mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ABC were added and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight with 0.2 mg/ml trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) in 50 mM ABC 10 % acetonitrile (ACN) at 37° C. Next day, the digestion was quenched with 10 µl of 0.1 % formic acid (FA), evaporated in the SpeedVac for 30 min at 30° C to dryness and stored at  20° C. To unravel the CDR-induced proteomic changes in the retinal explants, in-gel trypsin digestion for mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics was performed. CDR-treated and untreated retinal explants (N=3 per group) were transferred into 2 ml screw cap microtubes and subsequently frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen explants were filled with 400 µl T-PER buffer and 1.4/2.8 mm ceramic balls were added. Protein extraction was performed using the Precellys® 24 homogenizer and homogenates were exchanged in 200 µl PBS by using an Amicon 3 kDa centrifugal filter device. Total protein amounts of the retinal explants were determined by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and Multiscan Ascent photometer. Up to 40 µg of protein lysate per explant were separated under reduced conditions on 10-well NuPAGE 12 % Bis-Tris minigels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) by using NuPAGE™ MOPS SDS Running Buffer 20X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) in accordance to the supplier’s protocol. 1-DE SDS PAGE was run at 150 V for 1.5 h at 4 °C and subsequently stained by using Novex Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s introduction. Gels were destained overnight and scanned using an Epson Perfection V600 Photo Scanner (Seiko Epson Corporation, Suma, Nagano, Japan) at 700 dpi. Each lane was subdivided into 17 slices and subjected to further in-gel trypsin digestion as described in previous publications. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis the tryptic peptides of the in-solution or in-gel digest were purified by SOLAµ™ HRP SPE spin plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant generated output data (“proteins.txt”) was performed by using software program Perseus version 1.5.5.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried). At first, intensities of the detected proteins were log2 transformed prior to further analysis. Data matrix was filtered for contaminants, reversed hits, “only identified by site” and for a minimum number of 3 valid values in at least in one study group. Missing intensity values were imputed by random numbers received from the normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). For the identification of CDR-specific interaction partners (see section 2.3) only missing values of the control bead group were imputed in accordance to previous publication. Afterwards, two-sided t-test statistics with P values < 0.05 was applied in order to identify significant changed protein species. For the illustration of the heat map the log2 transformed protein abundances were standardized by z-score. Further statistical analyses and graphical presentation of data were performed by using Statistica version 13 (Statsoft, Tulsa, USA) or excel 2013 functions. Functional annotation and pathway analyses were performed with web-based biological database STRING version 10.5 (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software version 1 04 (IPA, Ingenuity QIAGEN Redwood City, USA; www.qiagen.com/ingenuity), as described in detail in previous publications.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenesis of glaucoma is strongly associated with the occurrence of autoimmune-mediated loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and additionally, recent evidence shows that specific antibody-derived signature peptides are significantly differentially expressed in sera of primary-open angle glaucoma patients (POAG) compared to healthy controls. Synthetically antibody-derived peptides can modulate various effector functions of the immune system and act as antimicrobial or antiviral molecules. In an ex vivo adolescent glaucoma model, this study, for the first time, demonstrates that polyclonal-derived complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) can significantly increase the survival rate of RGCs (<i>p</i> = 0.013). We subsequently performed affinity capture experiments that verified the mitochondrial serine protease HTRA2 (gene name: <i>HTRA2</i>) as a high-affinity retinal epitope target of CDR1 sequence motif <i>ASGYTFTNYGLSWVR.</i> Quantitative proteomic analysis of the CDR-treated retinal explants revealed increased expression of various anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidative proteins (e.g., VDAC2 and TXN) compared to untreated controls (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) as well as decreased expression levels of cellular stress response markers (e.g., HSPE1 and HSP90AA1). Mitochondrial dysfunction, the protein ubiquitination pathway and oxidative phosphorylation were annotated as the most significantly affected signaling pathways and possibly can be traced back to the CDR-induced inhibition or modulation of the master regulator HTRA2. These findings emphasize the great potential of synthetic polyclonal-derived CDR peptides as therapeutic agents in future glaucoma therapy and provide an excellent basis for affinity-based biomarker discovery purposes.

### Keywords
Glaucoma; autoimmunity; synthetic cdr peptides; neuroprotection; htra2; sus scrofa domesticus

### Affiliations
Universitätsmedizin Mainz
Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Care Center in Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Carsten Schmelter
Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Care Center in Mainz, Germany


