### Accession
PXD010460

### Title
Fam49/CYRI interacts with Rac1 and locally suppresses protrusions

### Description
Actin-based protrusions driving cell migration are reinforced through positive feedback, but it is unclear how the cell restricts the eventual size of protrusions, or limits positive signals to allow them to split or retract.  We have identified an evolutionarily conserved regulator of the protrusion machinery, which we name CYRI (CYFIP-related Rac interactor).  CYRI binds specifically to activated Rac1 via a common motif that is also found in CYFIP, the Domain of Unknown Function DUF1394; we demonstrate that DUF1394 as a new class of Rac1 binding module.  CYRI-depleted cells have broad, Scar/WAVE-enriched lamellipodia and display an enhanced duration and extent of pseudopod extension in response to optogenetic Rac1 activation. Conversely, CYRI overexpression suppresses recruitment of active Scar/WAVE complex to the cell edge and results in short-lived, unproductive protrusions.  CYRI dynamically inhibits Scar/WAVE induced actin to focus positive protrusion signals and regulate pseudopod complexity.  It therefore behaves like a “local inhibitor” predicted and described in widely accepted mathematical models, but not previously identified in living cells.  CYRI is important for processes requiring polarity and plasticity of protrusions, including directional chemotactic migration and polarization of epithelial cysts.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected in PBS and lysed by adding ice-cold 3x lysis/crosslinking buffer (1x buffer: 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 3% formaldehyde, 0.2% Triton X-100). After 5 min with gentle agitation at 4 °C, formaldehyde was quenched for 10min on ice using 1.75 M Tris pH 8.0. Samples were centrifuged at 22000g for 4 min at 4 °C. Pellet was successively washed and resuspended with 1 mL of ice cold quenching buffer (0.4 M Tris pH 8.0, 0.2% Triton X-100), wash buffer A (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2% Triton X-100) and wash buffer B (100 mM HEPES pH  7.4, 2 mM MgCl2), with 3 min centrifugation step between washes. Final resuspension was performed using 1mL of ice-cold RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.15% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT) and incubated 1h at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Supernatants were mixed with pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) following manufacturer’s protocol. Beads were washed 3 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH  8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA followed by 1 wash with 10 mM Tris. Samples were eluted after incubation with 2x SDS loading buffer and heating 10 min at 70°C before loading on a SDS-PAGE.  Experiments were performed in triplicate. The entire lane of the SDS gel was excised and gel pieces were washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% acetonitrile. Proteins in the gel bands were then reduced using dithiothreitol (10mM at 54°C for 30 minutes) and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (55mM at room temperature for 45 minutes). Gel pieces were washed again with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 50% acetonitrile; and finally dehydrated using acetonitrile before drying in a SpeedVac.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine, querying dictyBase (12,764 entries) plus an in-house database containing common proteomic contaminants and the sequence of GFP-NAP1 constructs used in the experiment. Combined databases were searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set in MaxQuant to 1 %.  Common contaminant and reverse hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For label-free quantification, proteins were quantified according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant. Significantly enriched proteins were selected using a two-sides Welch-test analysis with a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Actin-based protrusions are reinforced through positive feedback, but it is unclear what restricts their size, or limits positive signals when they retract or split. We identify an evolutionarily conserved regulator of actin-based protrusion: CYRI (CYFIP-related Rac interactor) also known as Fam49 (family of unknown function 49). CYRI binds activated Rac1 via a domain of unknown function (DUF1394) shared with CYFIP, defining DUF1394 as a Rac1-binding module. CYRI-depleted cells have broad lamellipodia enriched in Scar/WAVE, but reduced protrusion-retraction dynamics. Pseudopods induced by optogenetic Rac1 activation in CYRI-depleted cells are larger and longer lived. Conversely, CYRI overexpression suppresses recruitment of active Scar/WAVE to the cell edge, resulting in short-lived, unproductive protrusions. CYRI thus focuses protrusion signals and regulates pseudopod complexity by inhibiting Scar/WAVE-induced actin polymerization. It thus behaves like a 'local inhibitor' as predicted in widely accepted mathematical models, but not previously identified in cells. CYRI therefore regulates chemotaxis, cell migration and epithelial polarization by controlling the polarity and plasticity of protrusions.

### Keywords
Scar/wave complex, Lamellipodia, Gfp-trap with formaldehyde crosslinking, Cyfip-related rac interactor, Dictiostelium discoideus, Cell migration

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


