### Accession
PXD046530

### Title
Multi-omic diagnostics of prostate cancer in the presence of benign prostatic hyperplasia

### Description
There is an unmet need for improved diagnostic testing and risk prediction for cases of prostate cancer (PCa) to improve care and reduce overtreatment of indolent disease. Here we have analysed the serum proteome and lipidome of 262 study participants by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, including participants with a diagnosis of PCa, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), or otherwise healthy volunteers, with the aim of improving biomarker specificity. Although a two-class machine learning model was able to separate PCa from controls with sensitivity of 0.82 and specificity of 0.95, adding BPH resulted in a statistically significant decline in specificity for prostate cancer to 0.76, with half of BPH cases being misclassified by the model as PCa. A small number of biomarkers differentiating between BPH and prostate cancer were identified, including proteins in MAP Kinase pathways, as well as in lipids containing oleic acid; these may offer a route to greater specificity. These results highlight, however, that whilst there are opportunities for machine learning, these will only be achieved by use of appropriate training sets that include confounding comorbidities, especially when calculating the specificity of a test.

### Sample Protocol
Sera samples were prepared by diluting 10 uL of serum with 46 uL of 0.1% RapiGest, containing alcohol dehydrogenas (ADH; 2 ng/uL)as internal standard in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were incubated at 80 degrees celsius for 45 minutes to denature proteins, before incubating at 60 degrees celsius with 100 mM DTT for reduction. Alkylation using iodoacetamide (200 mM) was then performed, with the samples left in the dark for 30 mins. Overnight digestion was then conducted using trypsin (1:60, w:w) at 37 degrees celsius. Following digestion, TFA was added and the samples incubated at 37 degrees celsisus for 45 mins, prior to centrifuging at 18,000 g for 25 mins. Samples were diluted 1:4 (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS analysis. The LC-MS system used consisted of an ACQUITY Premier UPLC, coupled to a Synapt XS mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY Premier UPLC CSH column (2.1 x 100mm) with a gradient over 20 mins with a flow rate of 150 uL/min. Solvent A consisted of waters/0.1% formic acid, whilst solvent B was ACN/0.1% formic acid. MS data were collected using the ion mobility, DIA schema (U(H)DMSE)over the mass range of 50-2000 Da. Prior to analysis the time-of-flight was calibrated using a NaCsI mixture. Data were collected with a scan time of 0.3 sec and data collected using MassLynz vs 4.2 software.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI for Proteomics was used for retention time alignment, peak picking and normalization. Data were searched against a Homo sapiens UniProt database (release 2020_01) to provide protein identifications with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A decoy database was generated as previously described, allowing for protein/peptide identification rates to be determined. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were set automatically, and searches allowed for one missed proteolytic cleavage site. Carbamidomethyl of cysteines was applied as a fixed modification, whilst oxidation of methionines and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
There is an unmet need for improved diagnostic testing and risk prediction for cases of prostate cancer (PCa) to improve care and reduce overtreatment of indolent disease. Here we have analysed the serum proteome and lipidome of 262 study participants by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, including participants diagnosed with PCa, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), or otherwise healthy volunteers, with the aim of improving biomarker specificity. Although a two-class machine learning model separated PCa from controls with sensitivity of 0.82 and specificity of 0.95, adding BPH resulted in a statistically significant decline in specificity for prostate cancer to 0.76, with half of BPH cases being misclassified by the model as PCa. A small number of biomarkers differentiating between BPH and prostate cancer were identified, including proteins in MAP Kinase pathways, as well as in lipids containing oleic acid; these may offer a route to greater specificity. These results highlight, however, that whilst there are opportunities for machine learning, these will only be achieved by use of appropriate training sets that include confounding comorbidities, especially when calculating the specificity of a test.

### Keywords
Ion mobility, Dia, Prostate cancer, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Waters Corporation

### Submitter
Lee Gethings

### Lab Head
Dr Lee Gethings
Waters Corporation


