### Accession
PXD013589

### Title
Effect of depletion of clpP2, clpX and clpC1 genes on whole cell proteome profile of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv

### Description
Global protein alteration in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37 RV ( Mtb-H37RV) having depletion of Clpx ,Clp2 and ClpC1 were accessed using 4 plex iTRAQ label.

### Sample Protocol
Control, ClpX, ClpP2 and ClpC1 mutant were lysed using bead beater and 50 µg of all sample were digested and labelled with 114 ,115,116 and 117 respectively. Labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated on strong cation exchange cartridge by increasing the concentration of Ammonium formate form 20mM to 500mM manually. Peptides were fractionated using 20 mM, 40 mM, 60 mM , 80 mM, 100 mM, 120 mM and 500 mM of Ammonium formate and 25% Acetonitrile. All the fractioned were dried using speed Vac and reconstitute in 0.1% Formic acid Water. Flow-through of SCX was also dried and desalted using C18 cartridge. All the desalted samples were dried and reconstituted in 20 ul of 0.1% Formic acid water and 5 µl of samples were injected into Acclaim PepMap ( Thermo nano viper ) 75 µm X 250mm ,C18, 3 µm, 100 Å column. Fractions were resolved with water and Acetonitrile gradient and spectra were acquired on 5600 TF ( Sciex) in high resolution mode.

### Data Protocol
All the fraction data were pooled together and searched using Paragon algorithm with deamindated N& Q , Cabidomethyl C , oxided M and iTRAQ 4 plex against the Mtb Uniprot fasta file.

### Publication Abstract
The human pathogen <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) harbors a well-orchestrated Clp (caseinolytic protease) proteolytic machinery consisting of two oligomeric segments, a barrel-shaped heterotetradecameric protease core comprising the ClpP1 and ClpP2 subunits, and hexameric ring-like ATP-dependent unfoldases composed of ClpX or ClpC1. The roles of the ClpP1P2 protease subunits are well-established in Mtb, but the potential roles of the associated unfoldases, such as ClpC1, remain elusive. Using a CRISPR interference-mediated gene silencing approach, here we demonstrate that <i>clpC1</i> is indispensable for the extracellular growth of Mtb and for its survival in macrophages. The results from isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation-based quantitative proteomic experiments with <i>clpC1</i>- and <i>clpP2</i>-depleted Mtb cells suggested that the ClpC1P1P2 complex critically maintains the homeostasis of various growth-essential proteins in Mtb, several of which contain intrinsically disordered regions at their termini. We show that the Clp machinery regulates dosage-sensitive proteins such as the small heat shock protein Hsp20, which exists in a dodecameric conformation. Further, we observed that Hsp20 is poorly expressed in WT Mtb and that its expression is greatly induced upon depletion of <i>clpC1</i> or <i>clpP2</i> Remarkably, high Hsp20 protein levels were detected in the <i>clpC1(</i>-<i>)</i> or <i>clpP2(</i>-<i>)</i> knockdown strains but not in the parental bacteria, despite significant induction of <i>hsp20</i> transcripts. In summary, the cellular levels of oligomeric proteins such as Hsp20 are maintained post-translationally through their recognition, disassembly, and degradation by ClpC1, which requires disordered ends in its protein substrates.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium clp

### Affiliations
Professor
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone, Gurugram-Faridabad Expressway Faridabad-121001

### Submitter
Nisheeth Agarwal

### Lab Head
Dr Nisheeth Agarwal
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute NCR Biotech Science Cluster 3rd Milestone, Gurugram-Faridabad Expressway Faridabad-121001


