### Accession
PXD011432

### Title
Characterizations of HSP90-interacting complex in renal cells using tandem affinity purification and its potential role in kidney stone formation

### Description
Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a highly abundant molecular chaperone that interacts with many other intracellular proteins to regulate various cellular processes. However, compositions of the HSP90-interacting complex remain underinvestigated. This study thus aimed to characterize such complex in human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) cells under normal physiologic state using tandem affinity purification (TAP) followed by protein identification using an ultrahigh-resolution tandem mass spectrometer (Qq-TOF MS/MS). A total of 32 proteins, including four forms of HSP90 and 16 novel HSP90-interacting partners, were successfully identified from this complex using TAP control to subtract non-specific binders. Co-immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence co-staining confirmed the association of HSP90 with known (HSP70, α-tubulin, and β-actin) and novel (vimentin, calpain-1, and importin-β1) partners. Knockdown of HSP90 by small-interfering RNA (siHSP90) caused significant changes in levels of HSP70, α-tubulin, β-actin, vimentin, and calpain-1, all of which are calcium oxalate (CaOx) crystal-binding proteins that play significant roles in kidney stone formation. Moreover, crystal-binding capability was significantly decreased in siHSP90-transfected cells as compared to non-transfected control and siControl-transfected cells. In summary, we report herein a number of novel HSP90-interacting proteins in renal cells and demonstrate the potential role of HSP90-interacting complex in kidney stone formation.

### Sample Protocol
TAP-tag purification of N-terminal tagged HSP90   The HSP90-interacting complex in the N-terminal tagged HSP90 expressing cells, which contained TAP fusion peptides (a streptavidin-binding peptide, an intervening tobacco etch virus (TEV) cleavage site, and a calmodulin-binding peptide), was isolated using the TAP procedure. Briefly, the cells were extracted by ice-cold TAP lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1% (v/v) igepal CA-630, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2mM DTT, and 10% (v/v) glycerol. The cell lysate was then incubated at 4°C overnight with 100 µl streptavidin beads (GE Healthcare; Uppsala, Sweden). The streptavidin beads were isolated by a centrifugation at 800 g for 1 min, washed with TAP lysis buffer, and incubated with TEV protease (Invitrogen) at 4°C overnight. After centrifugation at 800 g for 1 min, the supernatant was added with calmodulin-binding buffer and CaCl2 (with final concentration of 1 mM), and incubated with 100 µl calmodulin beads (GE Healthcare) at 4°C for 4 h. The beads were then isolated by centrifugation at 800 g for 1 min and washed with calmodulin-binding buffer and calmodulin-rinsing buffer. The HSP90-interacting complex was finally eluted with Laemmli’s buffer (without bromophenol blue) and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. In parallel, identical purification procedures were also performed on the TAP control for subtraction of non-specific binders.   In-solution tryptic digestion and ultrahigh-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)  Purified TAP-tag samples (both TAP control and TAP-HSP90) were reduced by heating at 95°C for 5 min and transferred to an Omega Nanosep 10K device (Pall Corporation; Port Washington, NY) for buffer exchange. The proteins were then digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin/protein at 37°C for 16-18 h in a ThermoMixer® C (Eppendorf; Hauppauge, NY). Trypsin activity was then stopped by adding 10 µl of 5% formic acid in 80% acetronitrile (ACN). The digested peptides were dried by a SpeedVac concentrator (Savant; Holbrook, NY), resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, resolved by nanoLC-MS/MS using EASY-nLC II (Bruker Daltonics; Bremen, Germany), and analyzed by an ultra-high resolution Qq-TOF MS/MS system (maXis Impact, Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data processing and label-free quantitative analysis The MS/MS protein identification was done in three independent biological replicates on different occasions (each with two technical replicates, which were used in combination to generate peak lists for each biological replicate). The raw files (.d) were charge-deconvoluted and extracted into peak list files (.mgf) using Data Analysis version 4.1 software (Bruker Daltonics) via an embedded daMGF script. The peak list files from two technical replicates from each independent biological sample were merged and searched against the human Swiss-Prot database using Mascot 2.4 search engine (Matrix Science; London, UK) with maximal number of missed cleavage =1, peptide tolerance = ±0.1 Da, MS/MS tolerance = ±0.5 Da, and false discovery rate(FDR) < 1%. The data obtained from TAP-control purified samples were used for subtraction from those obtained from the TAP-HSP90 purified samples. Only proteins that were identified in the TAP-HSP90 sample, but not in the TAP controlled sample, in at least two out of three biological replicates are reported as the HSP90-interacting partners in this study. Label-free quantitative analysis was performed using Skyline v.3.5 software (http://proteome.gs.washington.edu/software/skyline) as previously described.[1] Briefly, the Mascot search result files (.dat) were imported to generate the spectral libraries using BiblioSpec algorithm by the following parameters: spectra cut-off score = 0.95, peptide length = 8–25 amino acids, and share peptides assigned for particular protein. Subsequently, raw files (.d) were imported and matched to validated peptides in spectral libraries to generate precursor peptide ion intensity. These precursor peptide ion intensities represented the summation of an area under curve of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) containing three precursor ion isotope peaks (M, M+1, and M+2). Finally, the total ion intensity of precursor peptide ion assigned for a given protein was exported.  Global protein network and functional enrichment analyses  The confidence association of HSP90 and its interacting partners was calculated by SAINT algorithm using the command line of SAINTexpress V 3.6.3 (https://sourceforge.net/projects/saint-apms) and was evaluated by global protein network analysis using STRING tool (version 10) (http://string.embl.de/).  For SAINT algorithm, the confidence of protein-protein interaction was averaged from three biological replicates and reported as “SAINT interaction score”. The threshold of significant interaction was set at ≥ 0.500. For STRING analysis, the confidence of protein-protein interaction was computed and reported as “STRING interaction score” by combining the probabilities from the different evidence channels and corrected for the probability of randomly observed interaction. Threshold of significant interaction was set at ≥ 0.400 (medium confidence level). Additionally, functional enrichment analysis was performed using PANTHER classification system (http://www.pantherdb.org/) for defining biological processes, molecular functions and cellular compartments of the HSP90-interacting partners relative to the gene ontology (GO) terms of the whole genome.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a highly abundant molecular chaperone that interacts with many other intracellular proteins to regulate various cellular processes. However, compositions of the HSP90-interacting complex remain underinvestigated. This study thus aims to characterize such complex in human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) cells under normal physiologic state using tandem affinity purification (TAP) followed by protein identification using an ultrahigh-resolution tandem mass spectrometer (Qq-TOF MS/MS). A total of 32 proteins, including four forms of HSP90 and 16 novel HSP90-interacting partners, are successfully identified from this complex using TAP control to subtract nonspecific binders. Co-immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence co-staining confirms the association of HSP90 with known (HSP70, &#x3b1;-tubulin, and &#x3b2;-actin) and novel (vimentin, calpain-1, and importin-&#x3b2;1) partners. Knockdown of HSP90 by small-interfering RNA (siHSP90) causes significant changes in levels of HSP70, &#x3b1;-tubulin, &#x3b2;-actin, vimentin, and calpain-1, all of which are calcium oxalate (CaOx) crystal-binding proteins that play significant roles in kidney stone formation. Moreover, crystal-binding capability is significantly decreased in siHSP90-transfected cells as compared to non-transfected control and siControl-transfected cells. In summary, herein, a number of novel HSP90-interacting proteins in renal cells is reported and the potential role of HSP90-interacting complex in kidney stone formation is demonstrated.

### Keywords
Chaperone; heat shock protein 90; hek293t; kidney stone; sirna; tap tag

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, and Center forResearch in Complex Systems Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Visith Thongboonkerd

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Visith Thongboonkerd
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, and Center forResearch in Complex Systems Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


