### Accession
PXD022284

### Title
Formation and characterization of biofilms formed by salt tolerant yeast strains in seawater-based growth medium

### Description
Yeast whole cells have been widely used in modern biotechnology as biocatalysts to generate numerous compounds of industrial, chemical, and pharmaceutical importance. Since many of the biocatalysis utilizing manufactures have become more concerned about environmental issues, seawater is now considered a sustainable alternative to freshwater for biocatalytic processes. This approach plausibly commenced new research initiatives into exploration of salt tolerant yeast strains. Recently, there has also been a growing interest in possible applications of microbial biofilms in the field of biocatalysis. In these complex communities, cells demonstrate higher resistance to adverse environmental conditions due to their embedment in an extracellular matrix, in which physical, chemical, and physiological gradients exist. Considering these two topics, seawater and biofilms, in this work we characterized biofilm formation in seawater-based growth media by several salt tolerant yeast strains with previously demonstrated bocatalytic capacities. The tested strains formed both air-liquid-like biofilms and biofilms on silicone surfaces, with Debaryomyces fabryi, Schwanniomyces etchellsii, S. polymorphus and Kluyveromyces marxianus showing the highest biofilm formation. The extracted biofilm extracellular matrices mostly consisted of carbohydrates and proteins. The latter group was primarily represented by enzymes involved in metabolic processes, particularly the biosynthetic ones, and in the response to stimuli. Specific features were also found in the carbohydrate composition of the extracellular matrix, which were dependent both on the yeast isolate and the nature of formed biofilms. Overall, our findings presented herein provide a unique data resource for further development and optimization of biocatalytic processes and applications employing seawater and halotolerant yeast biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast growth experiments were carried out in culture plates of YPD-based medium that contained 2% (w/v) agar supplemented with NaCl to a final concentration between 3.5 and 7.5% (w/v). Yeast biofilms were separated from planktonic cells as described above, collected by centrifugation, and washed. Then, the biomass was resuspended in 30 mL of water, and the solution was sonicated for 5 min at 20 kHz in a Vibra Cell VCX-500 sonicator (Sonics & Materials Inc., Newtown, USA). Cells were collected by centrifugation, and the matrix (supernatant) was filtered through 0.22 m PES filtration units (VWR, Radnor, USA). Sodium azide was added to a final concentration of 0.02% (w/v), and the solution was frozen and lyophilized. After resuspension in water and exhaustive dialysis in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, the solution was used for protein quantitation, trypsin digestion and nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed Kluyveromyces and Debaryomyces databases with a list of common lab contaminants (available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP ) to establish False Discovery Rates using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at 2east 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast whole cells have been widely used in modern biotechnology as biocatalysts to generate numerous compounds of industrial, chemical, and pharmaceutical importance. Since many of the biocatalysis-utilizing manufactures have become more concerned about environmental issues, seawater is now considered a sustainable alternative to freshwater for biocatalytic processes. This approach plausibly commenced new research initiatives into exploration of salt-tolerant yeast strains. Recently, there has also been a growing interest in possible applications of microbial biofilms in the field of biocatalysis. In these complex communities, cells demonstrate higher resistance to adverse environmental conditions due to their embedment in an extracellular matrix, in which physical, chemical, and physiological gradients exist. Considering these two topics, seawater and biofilms, in this work, we characterized biofilm formation in seawater-based growth media by several salt-tolerant yeast strains with previously demonstrated biocatalytic capacities. The tested strains formed both air-liquid-like biofilms and biofilms on silicone surfaces, with Debaryomyces fabryi, Schwanniomyces etchellsii, Schwanniomyces polymorphus, and Kluyveromyces marxianus showing the highest biofilm formation. The extracted biofilm extracellular matrices mostly consisted of carbohydrates and proteins. The latter group was primarily represented by enzymes involved in metabolic processes, particularly the biosynthetic ones, and in the response to stimuli. Specific features were also found in the carbohydrate composition of the extracellular matrix, which were dependent both on the yeast isolate and the nature of formed biofilms. Overall, our findings presented herein provide a unique data resource for further development and optimization of biocatalytic processes and applications employing seawater and halotolerant yeast biofilms.Key points&#x2022; Ability for biofilm formation of some yeast-halotolerant strains in seawater medium&#x2022; ECM composition dependent on strain and biofilm-forming surface&#x2022; Metabolic enzymes in the ECM with potential applications for biocatalysis.

### Keywords
Biofilms, Schwanniomyces, Extracellular matrix composition, Debaryomyces, Kluyveromyces, Seawater

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Ciències Biològiques, Universitat de València, Burjassot (València), Spain

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Marcelli del Olmo
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Ciències Biològiques, Universitat de València, Burjassot (València), Spain


