### Accession
PXD023845

### Title
Protein methylation analysis of Jurkat cells

### Description
Protein methylation, especially in arginine and lysine, is one of most important post-translational modifications (PTMs). In this project, we developed a novel chemical strategy which enabled almost complete depletion of histidine-conatining peptides in protein digestion and thereby resulted in the identification of more low-abundance arginine/lysine methylpeptides.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from Jurkat T cells which were metabolic labelled by isotopic labelled methionine. Trypsin and Arg-C were used to digest the proteins. The digestion were dimethyl labelled. Then peptides with at least one mis-cleavage site were enriched by SCX. Enriched peptides were reacted with acrolein. Labelled histidine-containing peptides were depleted by using hydrazide beads. Finally, sample was desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by Maxquant (v1.6.4.0). The files were searched against the Uniprot human database containing 20361 entries (June 2018). Totally five methylation forms in arginine and lysine residues, i.e. Kme1, Kme2, Kme3, MMA and DMA, were taken into consideration. Maximal miscleavage for trypsin/P was set as two. Peptides with score higher than 40 were used to analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein methylation

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, CAS

### Submitter
Qi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Mingliang Ye
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, CAS


