### Accession
PXD029115

### Title
Spatial proteomics reveals differences in the cellular architecture of antibody-producing CHO and plasma-cell derived cells

### Description
Most of the recombinant biotherapeutics employed today to combat severe illnesses e.g. various types of cancer or autoimmune diseases are produced by Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. To meet the growing demand of these pharmaceuticals, CHO cells are under constant development in order to enhance their stability and productivity. The last decades saw a shift from empirical cell line optimization towards rational cell engineering using a growing number of large omics datasets to alter cell physiology on various levels. Especially proteomics workflows reached new levels in proteome coverage and data quality due to advances in high-resolution mass spectrometry instrumentation. One type of workflow concentrates on spatial proteomics by usage of subcellular fractionation of organelles with subsequent shotgun mass spectrometry proteomics and machine learning algorithms to determine the subcellular localization of large portions of the cellular proteome at a given time. Here, we present the first subcellular spatial proteome of a CHO-K1 cell line producing high titers of recombinant antibody and comparison to the spatial proteome of an antibody-producing plasma cell-derived (PCD) myeloma cell line. Both cell lines show strong correlation of immunoglobulin G chains with chaperones and proteins associated in protein glycosylation within the endoplasmic reticulum compartment. However, we report differences in the localization of proteins associated to vesicle-mediated transport, transcription and translation, which may affect antibody production in both cell lines. Furthermore, pairing subcellular localization data with protein expression data revealed elevated protein masses for organelles in the secretory pathway in MPC-11 cells. Our study highlights the potential of subcellular spatial proteomics combined with protein expression as potent workflow to identify characteristics of highly efficient recombinant protein expressing cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis and lysate fractionation, For the generation of spatial proteome maps of the cell lines, a modified version of the LOPIT-DC protocol reported by Geladaki et al. (doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w) was used. Cells were cultured in triplicates until late exponential phase and then collected via centrifugation at 500 g for 3 min. Cell pellets were washed three times with ice-cold PBS. Approximately 5 x 107 cells were used for the generation of one replicate map. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM sucrose, 0.5 mM magnesium chloride, 0.2 mM EGTA, 25 mM Tris pH 7.4) and incubated on ice for 5 min to allow swelling of the cells. Cells were lysed on ice by passing the suspension 15 times through a ball-bearing cell homogenizer (Isobiotec) with a 20 µm clearance size using a pair of 5 ml syringes. cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche) was added to the lysate and isotonic conditions were restored by adding hypertonic sucrose solution (2.5 M sucrose, 0.5 mM magnesium chloride, 0.2 mM EGTA, 25 mM Tris pH 7.4). Lysates were cleared from debris and non-lysed cells by three times centrifugation at 300 g for 5 min. Lysate supernatants were fractionated into 10 fractions by a 9-step sequential differential centrifugation using an Optima XP Ultracentrifuge (Beckman). The centrifugation steps were as follows: 1000 g 10 min, 3000 g 10 min, 5000 g 10 min, 9000 g 15 min, 12.000 g 15 min, 15.000 g15 min, 30.000 g 20 min, 79.000 g 43 min, 120.000 g 45 min. After each centrifugation step, supernatants were collected for the next centrifugation step and pellets were resuspended in 200 µl membrane solubilization buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 0.2% SDS, 8 M Urea) + cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche). The final supernatant was collected as 10th fraction. Each fraction was then sonicated for 3 min on ice. Sample preparation and TMT-Labeling, 50 µg protein of each fraction was subjected to reduction by 10 mM DTT for 2 h at room temperature followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 2 h at room temperature in the dark. Fractions were diluted 1:1 with LC-MS grade H2O and proteins precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone for overnight incubation at -20 °C. On the next day, fractions were centrifuged at 10.000 g at 4 °C for 5 min and the resulting supernatants discarded. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5a and subjected to a two step proteolysis using first rLysC (Promega) for 3 h at 37 °C and afterwards trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 16 h at 37 °C. Both enzymes were added at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tags (TMT) TMT10plexTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Labeld fractions of one map were again combined into a Multiplex, dried by vacuum centrifugation, cleaned up using AttactSPE C18 cartridges (AFFINISEP) and fractionated into 20 fractions by High-pH reverse phase chromatography. Multiplexed samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and cleaned using AttractSPE C18 cartridges (AFFINISEP). For this, labelled samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5 diluted 4:1 with 2 % trifluoroacetic acid (v/v) + 20 % MeCN (v/v) and given onto the AttractSPE cartridges. Peptides were eluted using 70 % MeCN (v/v) + 0.1 % formic acid (v/v), combined into one TMTplex and again dried by vacuum centrifugation. Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry, Combined fractions were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid (v/v) and subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap FusionTM EclipseTM TribridTM Instrument coupled to an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 1 µg per fraction was injected into the HPLC system and peptides were separated using an Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-gradient parameters were as follows: Solvent A: 0.1 % formic acid (v/v), Solvent B: 80 % MeCN (v/v) + 0.1 % formic acid (v/v). Linear gradient from 2 % solvent B – 40 % solvent B in 95 min. Flow rate: 0.3 µl/min. Wash step after separation: 10 min 99 % solvent b. Equilibration step after washing: 10 min 2 % solvent B. Column oven temperature: 55 °C. Total run time: 120 min. The Orbitrap Fusion Eclipse was operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode and peptides were measured using synchronous precursor selection-MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode. For SPS-MS3 data acquisition MS2 acquired data were searched against an organism-specific proteome data base using the real time search (RTS) method implemented in Xcalibur. For MPC-11 cells, the mouse Swissprot proteome data base (Proteome ID UP000000589, download from www.uniprot.org, 13.06.2021) and for CHO-K1 cells the CHO-K1 Uniprot Knowledgebase data base (Proteome ID UP000001075, download from www.uniprot.org, 14.06.2021) with human immunoglobulin heavy and light chain sequences added, were used.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008), Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372) and its built-in search engine Andromeda (Cox, J. et al. (2011), J Proteome Res 10, 1794-1805). CHO-K1 samples were searched against the Cricetulus griseus CHO-K1 UniProt Knowledgebase canonical and isoform protein database (Proteome ID UP000001075, download from www.uniprot.org, 14.06.2021) with human immunoglobulin heavy and light chain sequences added. For MPC-11 cell samples, the mus musculus Swissprot canonical and isoform protein database (Proteome ID UP000000589, download from www.uniprot.org, 13.06.2021) was used. Biological replicates were processed separately. Sample type was set to ‘reporter ion MS3’ and all 10plex TMT labels for both Lysine residues and N-termini were selected. Batch-specific correction factors were used to correct the Reporter ion intensities. Matching between runs was not activated. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme for proteolysis with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. As variable modifications, oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of N-termini were selected. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as fixed modification. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. Precursor ion search tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion search tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered by applying a 0.01 FDR cutoff as determined by reversed target-decoy search against the database. All other parameters were kept at the default value. The ‘proteinGroups.txt’ output file from MaxQuant was used for further data processing. Replicate sample sets were analyzed separately. Initial data processing was performed within Perseus software version 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova, S. et al. (2016), Nature methods 13, 731-740). Proteins that were identified as ‘only identified by site’, ‘potential contaminant’ or by matching to the reverse decoy database were removed from the dataset. Only proteins with complete TMT reporter ion series were retained. For combined maps, only proteins with complete TMT reporter ion series over all replicates were retained (30 TMT ion channels). Protein profiles were calculated as ratio of the summarized intensity over all TMT intensities for the respective protein. Combined maps were generated by calculating the mean protein profiles over the three replicates. Generation of spatial maps by machine learning, Spatial proteome maps were generated using the R statistical language version 3.6.3 (R Core Team (2020))Bioconductor (Gentleman, R. C. et al. (2004), Genome biology 5, R80) packages MSnbase version 2.15.7 (Gatto, L., Gibb, S., and Rainer, J. (2020)) and pRoloc version 1.30.0 (Gatto, L. et al. (2014), Bioinformatics 30, 1322-1324). Processed data were loaded into R and annotated with an organelle specific protein marker set. For each cell line, an organelle specific protein marker set was generated, respectively. The base for both marker sets was the murine specific organelle protein marker set incorporated within the pRoloc package. Additional proteins were added based on literature and from the proposed organelle marker set from (Borner, G. H. H. (2020), Mol Cell Proteomics 19, 1076-1087). The CHO specific organelle protein marker set was generated by searching the murine marker set against the UniProt knowledge base Cricetulus griseus CHO-K1 database using BLAST+ (Camacho, C. et al. (2009), BMC Bioinformatics 10, 421). Protein hits with sequence identity of ≥ 80 % were retained and the hit with lowest e-value was chosen as homologous protein. Finally, the murine marker set was filtered to only contain proteins for which a CHO homologous protein was found. Both marker sets contain 719 organelle marker proteins spread across 11 different subcellular localizations (Cytosol, Endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, Lysosome, Mitochondrion, Nucleus – Chromatin, Nucleus – Non-chromatin, Peroxisome, Plasma membrane, Proteasome, Ribosome). Machine learning algorithms were implemented using the e1071 package version 1.7.6 in R (Meyer, D. D. et al. (2019)) as interface to libsvm version 2.6 (Chang, C.-C., and Lin, C.-J. (2011), ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 2, 1-27). Organelle marker sets were used to train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier with radial basis function kernel in order to predict subcellular locations across the whole proteome. Each dataset was split up into a training set (80 %) and a testing set (20 %) and the cost and sigma hyperparameters of the SVM classifier were optimized via grid search with 100 times internal cross-validation. SVM-based classification was then applied to the entire map and protein classification probabilities were calculated. Classification threshold was set to SVM score ≥ 0.7 for each cluster.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chinese hamster ovary, Subcellular proteomics, Machine learning, Myeloma, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Applied Sciences Albstadt-Sigmaringen, Department of Life Sciences, Anton-Günther-Straße 51, 72488 Sigmaringen, Germany
University of Applied Sciences Albstadt-Sigmaringen

### Submitter
Robin Kretz

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Stoll
University of Applied Sciences Albstadt-Sigmaringen, Department of Life Sciences, Anton-Günther-Straße 51, 72488 Sigmaringen, Germany


