### Accession
PXD036787

### Title
Serial passaging of Aspergillus fumigatus on Galleria extract agar produces strains with altered response of oxidative stress

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is an environmental saprophyte and opportunistic fungal pathogen of the human lung. Serially passaging of A. fumigatus on an agar produced from Galleria mellonella larvae produced strains showing alterations in virulence, anti-fungal susceptibility and in protein abundances that may indicate a degree of adaptation or selection after 25 passages on the artificial agar. While passaged strains demonstrated reduced virulence in G. mellonella larvae, they demonstrated increased tolerance to haemocyte mediated killing, hydrogen peroxide, itraconazole and amphotericin B. Label-free proteomic analysis of control and passaged A. fumigatus strains revealed a total of 3329 proteins of which, 1902 remained following filtration and 32 proteins were statistically significant and differentially abundant. Proteins that play a role in the oxidative stress response were altered in abundance in the passaged strain and included (S)-S-oxide reductase (+2.63 fold), developmental regulator FlbA (+2.27 fold) and histone H2A.Z (-1.82 fold). The results presented here indicate that prolonged culturing of A. fumigatus on Galleria extract agar results in alterations in susceptibility to oxidative stress and in the abundance of proteins associated with the oxidative stress response. The phenomenon may be a result of selection for strains suitable for survival in the adverse conditions imposed by the innate immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extractions were performed as outlined previously (Margalit et al., 2022). Flasks of A. fumigatus mycelia from control and passaged strain E25 (n=3 per group) were grown for 72 hours at 37°C in Czapek-Dox media. Hyphae were harvested by filtration, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground to a fine dust in a mortar using a pestle. Lysis buffer [8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC-grade dH2O], supplemented with protease inhibitors [aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, TLCK (10µgml−1) and PMSF (1mM/ml)] was added (4ml/g of hyphae). The lysates were sonicated (Bandelin Senopuls), three times for 10 seconds at 50% power. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 8 min at 14500g to pellet cellular debris. The protein concentration was quantified by the Bradford method and samples (100µg) were subjected to overnight acetone precipitation. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 14,500g for 10 minutes to pellet proteins, acetone was removed, and the pellet was resuspended in 25 µl sample resuspension buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC-grade dH2O). A 2 µl aliquot was removed from each sample to quantify by the Qubit quantification system (Invitrogen). Ammonium bicarbonate (125 µl, 50mM) was added to the remaining samples which were subjected to reduction by addition of 1µl 0.5 M dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55 M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. Proteins were digested by addition of 1 µl Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5µg µl−1) supplemented with 1µl Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega 1% w/v) and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hours. Digestion was quenched by addition of 1 µl TFA incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were subjected to centrifugation at 14,500g for 10 minutes prior to clean-up using C18 spin columns (Pierce). The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2%(v/v) acetonitrile and 0.05%(v/v) TFA aided by sonication for 5 minutes. The samples were centrifuged to pellet any debris at 14,500g for 5 minutes and 2ul from each sample was loaded onto the Mass spectrometer. Purified peptide extracts (2 μl containing 750ng protein) were loaded onto a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 133-min reverse-phase gradient as per previous methods (Margalit et al., 2020) .Raw MS/MS data files were processed through the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software v.1.6.3.4 110 using a Neosartorya fumigata reference proteome obtained from a UniProt-SWISS-PROT database to identify proteins (9647 entries, downloaded July 2022). Search parameters were followed as described (Margalit et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Perseus v.1.6.15.0 (www.maxquant.net/) was used for analysis, processing and visualisation of data. Normalized LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance. The data matrix generated was filtered to remove contaminants and peptides were identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 -transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group (Wildtype and E25). Proteins not found in all replicates in at least one group were omitted from further analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low-abundance proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this standard deviation. Principle component analysis (PCA) was plotted using normalised intensity values. The proteins identified were then defined using a Perseus annotation file (downloaded July 2022) to assign extract terms for biological process, molecular function and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) name. To visualize differences between two samples, pairwise Student’s t-tests were performed for all using a cut-off of P<0.05 on the post-imputated dataset. Volcano plots were generated by plotting the Log2 fold change on the x axis against the log p values on the y axis for each pairwise comparison. Statistically significant and differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins (ANOVA, p < 0.05) with a relative fold-change greater than ± 1.5 were retained for analysis. SSDA proteins were z-score normalised and then used for hierarchical clustering to produce a heat map. Identified SSDAs could then be assessed using Uniprot codes generated by Perseus to gain insight into their roles within the cells.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is an environmental saprophyte and opportunistic fungal pathogen of humans. The aim of the work presented here was to examine the effect of serially subculturing <i>A. fumigatus</i> on agar generated from <i>Galleria mellonella</i> larvae in order to characterize the alterations in the phenotypes that might occur. The passaged strains showed alterations in virulence, antifungal susceptibility, and in protein abundances that may indicate adaptation after 25 passages over 231 days on <i>Galleria</i> extract agar. Passaged strains demonstrated reduced virulence in <i>G. mellonella</i> larvae and increased tolerance to hemocyte-mediated killing, hydrogen peroxide, itraconazole, and amphotericin B. A label-free proteomic analysis of control and passaged <i>A. fumigatus</i> strains revealed a total of 3329 proteins, of which 1902 remained following filtration, and 32 proteins were statistically significant as well as differentially abundant. Proteins involved in the response to oxidative stress were altered in abundance in the passaged strain and included (S)-S-oxide reductase (+2.63-fold), developmental regulator FlbA (+2.27-fold), and histone H2A.Z (-1.82-fold). These results indicate that the prolonged subculturing of <i>A. fumigatus</i> on <i>Galleria</i> extract agar results in alterations in the susceptibility to antifungal agents and in the abundance of proteins associated with the oxidative stress response. The phenomenon may be a result of selection for survival in adverse conditions and highlight how <i>A. fumigatus</i> may adapt to tolerate the pulmonary immune response in cases of human infection.

### Keywords
Infection, Aspergillus, Galleria, Mini-model, Virulence, Immunity, Passaging

### Affiliations
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University
Maynooth Univeristy 

### Submitter
Aaron Curtis

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Kevin Kavanagh
Medical Mycology Laboratory, Department of Biology, Maynooth University


