### Accession
PXD008016

### Title
AD Study -  A multiomic approach to characterize the temporal sequence in Alzheimer's disease-related pathology

### Description
This section will be updated by the appropriate individual.

### Sample Protocol
This section will be updated by the appropriate individual.

### Data Protocol
This section will be updated by the appropriate individual.

### Publication Abstract
No single-omic approach completely elucidates the multitude of alterations taking place in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we coupled transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic approaches to determine the temporal sequence of changes in mRNA, protein, and phosphopeptide expression levels from human temporal cortical samples, with varying degree of AD-related pathology. This approach highlighted fluctuation in synaptic and mitochondrial function as the earliest pathological events in brain samples with AD-related pathology. Subsequently, increased expression of inflammation and extracellular matrix-associated gene products was observed. Interaction network assembly for the associated gene products, emphasized the complex interplay between these processes and the role of addressing post-translational modifications in the identification of key regulators. Additionally, we evaluate the use of decision trees and random forests in identifying potential biomarkers differentiating individuals with different degree of AD-related pathology. This multiomic and temporal sequence-based approach provides a better understanding of the sequence of events leading to AD.

### Keywords
Ad

### Affiliations
Proteome Sciences plc
Proteome Sciences plc.

### Submitter
Vikram Mitra

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Ian Pike
Proteome Sciences plc


