### Accession
PXD009560

### Title
Time-resolved phosphoproteomic analysis of ZIKV-infected cells

### Description
To investigate cellular pathway dysregulation upon ZIKV infection, time-resolved phosphoproteomics LC-MS/MS analysis was used. ZIKV-infected SK-N-BE2 cells or mock-treated cells were harvested 24, 48 and 72 hours post virus infection and their phosphoproteome was quantitatively analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis, SK-N-BE2 cells (10^7 cells/biological replicate/condition; 4 biological replicates/condition), were mock-infected or infected with ZIKV H/PF/2013 at an MOI of 3. Cell pellets were harvested after 24, 48 and 72 hours, lysed in 1mL of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 4% SDS, and 0.05 mM DTT supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails [Roche]), boiled 10’ at 98 °C, and sonicated (4°C for 15 min, or until a homogeneous suspension was formed). Clarified protein lysates were precipitated with acetone, and normalized protein mixtures resuspended in 500 μL TFE digestion buffer. Protein digestion was performed by adding 1:100 (protein:enzyme) trypsin and LysC with rapid agitation (2,000 rpm) overnight at 37°C. An aliquot of the peptide mixtures was used for determination of the total proteome (10%) as previously described46 while the remaining peptide mixture (90%) was processed for phosphopeptide enrichment using the EasyPhos protocol. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase column (diameter of 75 μm packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin [Dr. Maisch GmbH]) as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed within the MaxQuant environment (version 1.5.7) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR ≤ 0.01 at the protein, peptide, and modification level. Proteome and phosphoproteome files were assigned to separate search parameter groups. The search included fixed modifications for carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications for oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (protein N-term), and phospho (STY) for phosphoproteome files. Peptides with at least six amino acids were considered for identification, and “match between runs” was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min to transfer MS1 identifications between runs. Peptides and proteins were identified using a UniProt FASTA database from human (UniprotKB release 2015_08 including isoforms and unreviewed sequences) and ZIKV virus polyprotein corresponding to the H/PF/2013 strain (NCBI GenBank KJ776791.2; individual viral cleavage products were manually annotated). MaxQuant output files (proteinGroups.txt and “Phospho (STY) Sites.txt” for proteome and phosphoproteome data, respectively) were processed by a combination of in-house R (version 3.3), Julia (version 0.5) and Stan (version 2.14) scripts. Additional details can be found in the Materials and Methods section of the related manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) has recently emerged as a global health concern owing to its widespread diffusion and its association with severe neurological symptoms and microcephaly in newborns<sup>1</sup>. However, the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the pathogenicity of ZIKV remain largely unknown. Here we use human neural progenitor cells and the neuronal cell line SK-N-BE2 in an integrated proteomics approach to characterize the cellular responses to viral infection at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, and use affinity proteomics to identify cellular targets of ZIKV proteins. Using this approach, we identify 386 ZIKV-interacting proteins, ZIKV-specific and pan-flaviviral activities as well as host factors with known functions in neuronal development, retinal defects and infertility. Moreover, our analysis identified 1,216 phosphorylation sites that are specifically up- or downregulated after ZIKV infection, indicating profound modulation of fundamental signalling pathways such as AKT, MAPK-ERK and ATM-ATR and thereby providing mechanistic insights into the proliferation arrest elicited by ZIKV infection. Functionally, our integrative study identifies ZIKV host-dependency factors and provides a comprehensive framework for a system-level understanding of ZIKV-induced perturbations at the levels of proteins and cellular pathways.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Zikv h/pf/2013, Tio4, Sk-n-be2 cells

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany


