### Accession
PXD022410

### Title
Phosphorylation of Rif1 by Plk1

### Description
Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is an important protein kinase for checkpoint recovery and adaptation in response to DNA damage and replication stress. However, although Plk1 is present in S phase, little is known about its localization and function during unperturbed DNA replication. Here used recombinant XRif1 C-terminal domain and recombinant XPlk1 in an in vitro phosphorylation assay followed by LC/MS/MS to identify which residues are phosphorylated by Plk1  on Rif1 CTD.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant Plk1 kinase assays were performed, modified from (Qian et al, 1998) by adding   40 ng/µl recombinant XPlk1,  50 µM ATP, 2 x kinase buffer (40 mM Hepes, pH 7.2, 20 mM MgCl2  , 4 mM DTT, 0.2 mM EGTA) together with 133 ng/µl recombinant XRif1-CTD (2020-2272) or equivalent volume of protein dilution buffer for 30 min at 30°C. Reactions were stopped by denaturing by adding 1% SDS and stored at -80°.  Phosphosite detection was performed using in vitro phosphorylation reactions with recombinant proteins and samples were further processed as followed: S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 10µl of each sample was adjusted to 25µl with 5% SDS/50mM TEAB buffer supplemented with 20mM TCEP and 50mM chloracetamide for reduction and alkylation, respectively.  Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 1.2% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Two extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 40µl of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (38 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 39 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 4 minutes and, at 43 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 16 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between samples to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the database of Xenopus laevis from XENLA_9.2_Xenbase.pep.fa. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification, whereas phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was not allowed. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008) The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. The phosphopeptides output table and the corresponding logarithmic intensities were used for phosphopeptide analysis. The phosphopeptide table was expanded to separate individual phosphosites [Luber, 2010 #1907; Cox, 2008 #1906]

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenopus, Dna replication

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.


