### Accession
PXD009910

### Title
An experimental design to extract more information from MS-based histone studies

### Description
The combinatorial complexity of histone samples is manifold higher than what is usually encountered in proteomics. Consequently, a considerably bigger part of the acquired MSMS spectra remains unannotated to date. Adapted search parameters can dig deeper into the dark histone ion space, but the lack of false discovery rate (FDR) control and the high level of ambiguity when searching combinatorial PTMs makes it very hard to assess whether the newly assigned ions are informative. Therefore, we use an easily adoptable time-lapse enzymatic deacetylation (HDAC1) of a commercial histone extract as a quantify-first strategy that allows isolating ion populations of interest, when studying e.g. acetylation on histones, that currently remain in the dark. By adapting search parameters to study potential issues in sample preparation, data acquisition and data analysis, we stepwise managed to double the portion of annotated precursors of interest from 10.5% to 21.6%. This strategy is intended to make up for the lack of validated  FDR control and has led to several adaptations of our current workflow that will reduce the portion of the dark histone ion space in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Deacetylation was done by adding 10 % of human HDAC-1 enzyme (Sigma, SRP0100) to 15 µg bovine histone extracts (Sigma, 10223565001), in a log-scale time-lapse series (0 min – 8 h) at 37° C. Three negative controls were included in the experiment. Two of which only had buffer added for 0min and 8h (HDAC-). For the third negative control, inhibited enzyme was added for time point 0min (Figure 1). For all samples, a minimum of three replicates were generated. Subsequently, histone propionylation was performed before and after trypsin. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 500ng/4µl, i.e. one injection. All samples were spiked with digested beta-galactosidase (50 fmol on column; Sciex) and MPDS standard (50 fmol on column, Waters). Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters). First, samples were delivered to a trap column (180 µm × 20mm nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/MTrap 5 µm Symmetry C18, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 µL/min for 2min in 99.5% buffer A. Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (100 µm × 100 mm nanoACQUITY UPLC 1.7 µm Peptide BEH, Waters) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 60 min going from 1% to 40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS data acquisition parameters were set according to Helm et al., with minor adaptations 31. A Q-TOF SYNAPT G2-Si instrument (Waters) was operated in positive mode for High Definition-DDA, using a nano-ESI source, acquiring full scan MS and MS/MS spectra (m/z 50–5000) in sensitivity mode. Survey MS scans were acquired using a fixed scan time of 200 ms. Tandem mass spectra of up to eight precursors with charge state 2+ or higher were generated using CID in the trapping region with intensity threshold set at 2000 cps, using a collision energy ramp from 6/9 V (low mass, start/end) up to 147/183 V (high mass, start/end). MS/MS scan time was set to 100 ms with an accumulated ion count “TIC stop parameter” of 200000 cps allowing a maximum accumulation time of 200 ms. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursor ions was set to 30 s. Ion mobility wave velocity was ramped from 2500 to 400 m/s in MSMS to enable wideband enhancement in order to obtain a near 100% duty cycle on singly charged fragment ions (no multiply charged ions are recorded in MSMS). LockSpray of Glufibrinopeptide-B (m/z 785.8426) was acquired at a scan frequency of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS runs was imported and aligned in Progenesis QIP 4.2 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) for feature detection. Ion filtering was performed for the +1 ions. The 10 MSMS spectra closest to the elution apex were retained per feature. A single *.mgf file containing all selected MSMS spectra was exported for searching using Mascot (Matrix Science). Three different searches were performed, of which enzyme specificity and modifications differed. For all three searches, mass error tolerances for the precursor ions and its fragment ions were set at 10 ppm and 50 ppm respectively and a bovine histone database (downloaded from Uniprot on 12/09/2019  comprising 76 proteins in total) was supplemented with contaminants from the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and internal standards.

### Publication Abstract
Histone-based chromatin organization paved the way for eukaryotic genome complexity. Because of their key role in information management, the histone posttranslational modifications (hPTM), which mediate their function, have evolved into an alphabet that has more letters than there are amino acids, together making up the "histone code". The resulting combinatorial complexity is manifold higher than what is usually encountered in proteomics. Consequently, a considerably bigger part of the acquired MSMS spectra remains unannotated to date. Adapted search parameters can dig deeper into the dark histone ion space, but the lack of false discovery rate (FDR) control and the high level of ambiguity when searching combinatorial PTMs makes it very hard to assess whether the newly assigned ions are informative. Therefore, we propose an easily adoptable time-lapse enzymatic deacetylation (HDAC1) of a commercial histone extract as a quantify-first strategy that allows isolating ion populations of interest, when studying <i>e.g.</i> acetylation on histones, that currently remain in the dark. By adapting search parameters to study potential issues in sample preparation, data acquisition and data analysis, we stepwise managed to double the portion of annotated precursors of interest from 10.5% to 21.6%. This strategy is intended to make up for the lack of validated FDR control and has led to several adaptations of our current workflow that will reduce the portion of the dark histone ion space in the future. Finally, this strategy can be applied with any enzyme targeting a modification of interest.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications; lc-ms/ms; proteomics; identification; hdac

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical science, Ghent University, Belgium
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical science, Ghent University, Belgium


