### Accession
PXD036455

### Title
Proteome after 3MB-PP1 treatment

### Description
The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a member of the beta-herpesvirus family and inflicts life-long latent infections in its hosts. HCMV has been shown to manipulate and dysregulate many cellular processes. On major interactor with the cellular host is the viral kinase pUL97. The UL97 gene is essential for viral replication and kinase-deficient mutants of pUL97 display a severe replication defect. Recently, another group established an analog-sensitive version of the pUL97 protein. This mutant kinase can be treated with a non-hydrolysable ATP analog, thereby inhibiting its kinase function. This process is reversible by removing the ATP analog by media change. We introduced this mutant version of the pUL97 protein into the laboratory strain Ad169 of HCMV, BADwt, creating a BAD-UL97-as1 viral mutant. This mutant virus replicated normally in infected cells in the absence of the ATP analog and maintained its ability to phosphorylate its cellular substrates. However, when treated with the ATP analog, BAD-UL97-as1 displayed a defect in the production of intra- and extracellular viral DNA and in the production of viral progeny. Furthermore, in the presence of 3MB-PP1, the well-established substrate of pUL97, the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) was no longer phosphorylated. This effect was detectable as early as 4 hours post treatment, which allows for studies on pUL97 without the complication of low viral titers. Nevertheless, we observed off-target effects of 3MB-PP1 on several cellular processes, which should be considered with this approach.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris⋅HCl pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloracetamide), heated at 95 °C for 10 min, and sonicated with Sonics Vibra-Cell. Protein lysates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform using four volumes of ice-cold methanol, one volume of chloroform, and three volumes of water. The mixture was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min, the upper aqueous phase was removed and three volumes of ice-cold methanol added. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and washed twice with one volume of ice-cold methanol and air dried. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea with 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Protein concentration was determined with PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit. For digestion, 50 µg proteins were diluted to 2 M urea and incubated 1:100 with LysC and 1:100 with Trypsin overnight. The reaction was acidified using TFA (0.5%) and purified using Sep-Pakt C18 according to manufacturer's protocol. Peptide estimation was determined with Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and 10 µg of peptides were TMT labeled and channels adjusted to equimolar ratios as jugged by single-injection measurements by liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS). Peptides were cleaned up by C18 stage tip (washed with 3% ACN , 0.1% TFA) and fractionated according to manufacturer’s instructions using the PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples were vacuum dried for LC-MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) using Sequest HT as the database searche engine. Spectra were searched against the human reference proteome obtained from UniProtKB (one sequence per gene, 2017-09-11). Static modifications were TMT6plex at the peptide N-terminus and lysines as well as carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues, dynamic modification was Oxidation (M). Proteolytic enzyme specified was Trypsin (Full). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v 1.6.15.0) and Metascape.

### Publication Abstract
The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a member of the beta-herpesvirus family and inflicts life-long latent infections in its hosts. HCMV has been shown to manipulate and dysregulate many cellular processes. One major interactor with the cellular host is the viral kinase pUL97. The UL97 gene is essential for viral replication, and kinase-deficient mutants of pUL97 display a severe replication defect. Recently, another group established an analog-sensitive version of the pUL97 protein. This mutant kinase can be treated with a non-hydrolysable ATP analog, thereby inhibiting its kinase function. This process is reversible by removing the ATP analog by media change. We introduced this mutant version of the pUL97 protein into the laboratory strain Ad169 of HCMV, BADwt, creating a BAD-UL97-as1 viral mutant. This mutant virus replicated normally in infected cells in the absence of the ATP analog and maintained its ability to phosphorylate its cellular substrates. However, when treated with the ATP analog, BAD-UL97-as1 displayed a defect in the production of intra- and extracellular viral DNA and in the production of viral progeny. Furthermore, in the presence of 3MB-PP1, a well-established substrate of pUL97 was no longer hyperphosphorylated. This effect was detectable as early as 4 h post treatment, which allows for studies on pUL97 without the complication of low viral titers. Nevertheless, we observed off-target effects of 3MB-PP1 on several cellular processes, which should be considered with this approach.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institut für Biochemie II - Goethe Universität Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II (IBC2), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Uxia Gestal Mato

### Lab Head
Dr Lina Herhaus
Institute of Biochemistry II (IBC2), Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany


