### Accession
PXD015271

### Title
Disome-seq reveals sequence-mediated coupling of translational pauses and protein structures

### Description
The regulation of translation elongation plays a vital role in protein folding; an adequate translational pause provides time and cellular environments for the co-translational folding of nascent peptides. However, the genomic landscape, sequence determinants, and molecular consequences of translational pausing remain mostly unknown. In this study, we performed disome-seq that sequenced mRNA fragments protected by two consecutive ribosomes – a product of severe translational pauses during which the upstream ribosome collides into the paused one. We detected severe translational pauses on ~75% of yeast genes. These pauses were often explained by one of the three mechanisms: 1) slow ribosome releasing at stop codons, 2) slow peptide formation from proline, glycine, asparagine, and cysteine, and 3) slow leaving of polylysine from the exit tunnel of ribosomes. Notably, these amino acids also terminate the α-helical conformation. Such dual roles of amino acids establish an inborn coupling between the synthetic completion of a structural motif and a translational pause. Furthermore, paused ribosomes often recruit chaperones to assist protein folding. As a consequence, emergent protein structures during evolution should be ready to be correctly folded. Collectively, our study shows widespread translational pauses and sheds lights on a better understanding of the regulation of co-translational protein folding.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was performed as described previously (Chen et al., 2019). Briefly, a strain modified from BY4742 (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 lys2Δ0 ura3Δ0 arg4Δ0::kanMX4 car1Δ0::LEU2) was cultured at 30°C in the SC media with arginine and lysine dropped out (SC–Arg–Lys) in the presence of the light amino-acid isotopes (30 mg/L Lys0 and 20 mg/L Arg0) or the heavy amino-acid isotopes (37.25 mg/L Lys8 and 20.94 mg/L Arg10).  Cells were harvested at the mid-log phase (OD660 ~0.6), and polysomes were extracted. After RNase I treatment, polysome profiling was performed, and proteins were precipitated from the monosome or disome fraction with a double volume of 95% ethanol, respectively. The protein precipitants were dissolved with the urea buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM B-glycerophosphate, 0.2% tablet of protease inhibitor, and 1 mM PMSF). 150 μg heavy-labeled monosome protein was mix with 150 μg light-labeled disome protein; 150 μg light-labeled monosome protein was mix with 150 μg heavy-labeled disome protein. The protein mixtures were subject to the MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant V1.5.8.3 using default parameters. All raw data were searched against the yeast proteome with the addition of potential contaminants. The protease was set as trypsin/P and trypsin. Two missed cuts were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Yanming Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wenfeng Qian
State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics and National Center for Plant Gene Research, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China


