### Accession
PXD035534

### Title
Cornu aspersum Comparative Mucomics LC-MSMS

### Description
Here we apply an omics-style workflow to characterize the adhesive, lubricating, and protective mucus from Cornu aspersum snails. Through a combined transcriptomic, proteomic, and glycomic approach alongside the characterization of physical and chemical properties, we explain the origins of the functional differences between each of these biological materials.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus Collection. Snails were provided by Peconic Escargot (Cutchogue, NY, USA), where they were cultured at room temperature and provided a diet of dirt, wild herbs, and cultivated herbs ad libitum. Physically active snails were washed with room temperature tap water to remove food and debris and placed into a plastic aquarium. Snails were allowed to crawl freely on petri dishes to collect lubricating mucus. To collect adhesive mucus, snails were placed against an inverted dish until adhered and left suspended for 15 minutes. Lubricating and adhesive mucus were not processed or manipulated further and were immediately place on ice for preservation. Protective mucus secretion was induced by gently rubbing the snail’s back with a spatula, which was scraped off into a plastic test tube. All mucus samples were stored under ice packs without further processing in an insulated cooler for transport to the laboratory, where they were then stored at ‒80 oC until use.  Mucus Protein Purification. Mucus samples were thawed and physical debris was removed with tweezers. 2 mL of 6 M Guanidinium HCL, CsCl (density 1.388 g/mL) was added to mucus-containing petri dishes and incubated at 4 oC overnight to dissolve mucus. Additional residue was collected from the dishes by gently scraping residue with a razor blade. Mucus-containing solutions in the petri dishes were pooled by mucus type into 13.2 mL ultracentrifuge tubes (Beckman-Coulter). Samples were then subjected to isopycnic density gradient ultracentrifugation70 in a swinging bucket SW41 Ti rotor ultracentrifuge (35,000 rpm, 72 hr, 4 oC). Following centrifugation, tubes were pierced with a needle and fractionated (0.5 – 1 mL). Each fraction was measured for density and tested for carbohydrate content using a microtiter periodic acid-Schiff’s reagent (PAS) staining protocol.71 Fractions with a density of approximately 1.4 g/mL as well as high signal-to-background absorbance at 550 nm, indicating high glycoprotein content, were considered mucus-positive. Mucin-positive fractions were pooled and dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to each pool to reach a final concentration of 0.05 M DTT and shaken at 45 oC overnight in an Echotherm orbital mixing dry bath (Torrey Pines Scientific) to reduce disulfide bonds in the mucus hydrogel networks. Reduced samples were then dialyzed (MM cutoff 2 kDa) against 3 changes of ultrapure water over 48 h and fluffy white precipitate formed. Samples were then lyophilized at ‒55 oC / 1 mbar, resulting in a light beige powder which was stored at ‒80 oC. Protein content was quantified at each step in the purification using a Nanodrop one-C spectrophotometer (Thermo-Fisher). Proteomic Mass Spectrometry. Purified snail mucus protein samples were loaded onto a single stacking gel band to remove lipids, detergents and salts. The single gel band containing all proteins was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetic acid and digested with trypsin. 2 μg of extracted peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) precolumn and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2µM C18 beads) analytical column separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 250 nL/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 1 hr. Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1) with HCD sequencing (15,000 resolution) at top speed for all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater.

### Data Protocol
RNA Extraction and Sequencing. Snails provided by Peconic Escargot in February 2020 were sacrificed on-site via freezing in a dry ice-ethanol mixture. Whole snails were stored in Invitrogen RNAlater™ (Thermo Fisher, AM7021) and frozen at ‒80 °C until used. Total RNA was extracted using a Qiagen RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen, 74004) according to manufacturer’s instructions, from 6 individual tissue slices from different snails. The integrity of total RNA was confirmed using nanodrop and Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer analysis. Total RNA was used as a template to perform polyA enriched first strand cDNA synthesis using the HiSeq RNA sample preparation kit for Illumina Sequencing (Illumina Inc., CA) following manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNA libraries were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 1000 technology using a paired end flow cell and 80 x 2 cycle sequencing.   Read Processing and De Novo Assembly. Raw reads were quality checked with FastQC v0.11.5 (www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk).72 Adapter sequences and low-quality reads (Phred score <33) were removed using Trimmomatic v0.36 and trimmed reads were re-evaluated with FastQC to ensure the high quality of the data after the trimming process.73 Due to the lack of a reference genome, the processed reads were de novo assembled using Trinity v2.4.0.74 De novo assembled transcriptomes were translated with Trinity Super Transcripts.75 Supertranscripts was used to construct the largest isoform of each gene, in other words producing the original unspliced transcripts, rather than spliced variants of the transcripts.75 Nearly 180,000 transcripts were assembled. Bioinformatic analysis. The raw data were converted into *.mgf format (Mascot generic format) for searching using the Mascot 2.6.2 search engine (Matrix Science) against predicted sequences from the de novo assembled snail transcriptome.76 The database search results were loaded onto Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.9.0 (Proteome Sciences) for statistical treatment and data visualization.77 Peptide identifications were made by exact homology of fragmented peptides against translated transcripts. Using the Scaffold Local FDR (false discovery rate) algorithm, probability thresholds for peptide identifications and protein identifications were set at 95.0% and 5.0%, respectively, to achieve an FDR less than 1.0%, as per proteomic research standards.12,20 Additionally, accepted sequences must have contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Every animal secretes mucus, placing them among the most diverse biological materials. Mucus hydrogels are complex mixtures of water, ions, carbohydrates, and proteins. Uncertainty surrounding their composition and how interactions between components contribute to mucus function complicates efforts to exploit their properties. There is substantial interest in commercializing mucus from the garden snail, Cornu aspersum, for skincare, drug delivery, tissue engineering, and composite materials. C. aspersum secretes three mucus-one shielding the animal from environmental threats, one adhesive mucus from the pedal surface of the foot, and another pedal mucus that is lubricating. It remains a mystery how compositional differences account for their substantially different properties. Here, we characterize mucus proteins, glycosylation, ion content, and mechanical properties that could be used to provide insight into structure-function relationships through an integrative "mucomics" approach. We identify macromolecular components of these hydrogels, including a previously unreported protein class termed Conserved Anterior Mollusk Proteins (CAMPs). Revealing differences between C. aspersum mucus shows how considering structure at all levels can inform the design of mucus-inspired materials.

### Keywords
Lubricating, Mucus, Protective, Adhesive, Garden snail, Cornu aspersum

### Affiliations
City University of New York - Advanced Science Research Center
City University of New York Advanced Science Research Center - Nanoscience Department, USA City University of New York Hunter College -Chemistry & Biochemistry Department, USA

### Submitter
Antonio Cerullo

### Lab Head
Dr Adam Brian Braunschweig
City University of New York Advanced Science Research Center - Nanoscience Department, USA City University of New York Hunter College -Chemistry & Biochemistry Department, USA


