### Accession
PXD035278

### Title
Enzyme expression kinetics by Escherichia coli during transition from rich to minimal media depends on proteome reserves

### Description
Bacterial fitness depends on adaptability to changing environments. In rich growth medium, which is replete with amino acids, Escherichia coli primarily expresses protein synthesis machineries, which comprise ~40% of cellular proteins and are required for rapid growth. Upon transition to minimal medium, which lacks amino acids, biosynthetic enzymes are synthesized, eventually reaching ~15% of cellular proteins when growth fully resumes. We applied quantitative proteomics to analyse the timing of enzyme expression during such transitions, and established a simple positive relation between the onset time of enzyme synthesis and the fractional enzyme ‘reserve’ maintained by E. coli while growing in rich media. We devised and validated a coarse-grained kinetic model that quantitatively captures the enzyme recovery kinetics in different pathways, solely on the basis of proteomes immediately preceding the transition and well after its completion. Our model enables us to infer regulatory strategies underlying the ‘as-needed’ gene expression programme adopted by E. coli.

### Sample Protocol
For steady-state growing cells (sample ID M1-M4, P1-P10, N5-N8, O8-O10, A1-A28) we followed the cell growth protocol stated above and took samples around 〖OD〗_600=0.4. For each AA downshift experiment (sample ID S1-S5, A29-A39) we followed the protocol above and took one sample (S1, A29-A31) at pre-shift steady-state around 〖OD〗_600=0.3. For 18AA downshift, samples were taken at 15, 50, 100, 200mins after the shift start. For 18AA-minus-ser downshift, samples were taken at 15, 45, 75, 120mins after the shift start. We collected at least 1 OD_600∙ml cells for each sample by centrifuging at 13,200 RPM for 2mins.  We used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize the abundance of E. coli proteomes at various growth conditions (Supplementary Table 2). The samples belong to three groups: group #1, samples M1-M4, N5-N8 and O8-O10; group #2, samples P1, P3, P8-10 and S1-5; group #3, samples A1 to A39.  Quantitative measurements of E. coli proteomes for group #1 and #2 were carried out as described previously (Mori et al., 2021, MSB). Briefly, E. coli cell pellets were lysed with 2% sodium deoxycholate and digested with LysC and trypsin. An iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) was added to all samples for retention time alignment. Tryptic peptides were measured in SWATH mode (64 variable windows) on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex). The data was analyzed using OpenSWATH (www.openswath.org).  Quantitative measurements for group #3 were carried out in DIA mode on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed using Spectronaut and the directDIA approach (Biognosys). Details for the complete group #3 workflow are given below: Bacterial cell lysis and protein digestion for group #3. Cells were lysed in 100 µL absolute TFA (Sigma-Aldrich; 5 min, 55°C, shaking at 1,000 rpm) and neutralized with 900 µL 2 M Tris (Doellinger et al., 2020, MCP). Protein concentration was determined using Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). Subsequently, 50 µg of total protein amount were reduced and alkylated (10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM Chloroacetamide; 5 min, 95°C). Water-diluted samples (1:1) were subjected to proteolysis with trypsin (Roche, protein ratio 1:50, 30°C, overnight, 400 rpm). Enzymatic digestion was stopped by addition of 3% formic acid (FA). Peptide samples were desalted using self-packed desalting tips prepared in-house using five discs of Empore C18 (3M) material stacked in 200µL pipette tips. The desalting tips were conditioned with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and 40% ACN/0.1% FA, and equilibrated with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water. Peptides were loaded, washed (2% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water) and eluted (40% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water). Samples were dried to completeness and re-dissolved in 30 µl 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water.13.3 µg of total peptide amount (as determined by Bradford assay) was injected into the mass spectrometer per run. DIA-based mass spectrometric data acquisition for group #3. Peptides were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 (micro-flow configuration) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 13.3 µg of peptides were applied directly onto a commercially available Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and separated using a 60 minutes linear gradient ranging from 3% to 28% solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. MS1 full scans (360 – 1300 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target value of 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans (200 – 1800 m/z) were acquired over a total of 40 DIA segments with widths adjusted to the precursor density (see Supplementary Table 7). The scan resolution in the Orbitrap was set to 15,000 with an AGC target value of 105 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The HCD collision energy was set to 30%.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis workflow for the samples of group #1 and #2 using OpenSWATH has described previously (Mori et al., 2021, MSB). directDIA data analysis using Spectronaut for group #3. DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut (v.14.2, Biognosys) using the directDIA functionality, which omits the need for an experimental spectral library. In brief, DIA raw files were loaded into Spectronaut and searched against the Uniprot-derived Escherichia coli (K12, MG1655) reference proteome (UP000000625, download 07.09.2021, protein entries 4438). Trypsin/P was used as digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. For directDIA data extraction default settings provided by Biognosys were used. The mProphet approach was used to estimate FDR. The dataset was filtered to 0.1% FDR at peptide precursor level (q-value cutoff < 0.001). Peptide quantification was performed based on MS2 XIC peak areas, using the best N fragments per peptide (min 3, max 6). Protein intensities were computed from the detected peptide intensities using the newly released algorithm xTop v2.0 separately on the three groups of samples. The following parameters were used in each case: filter_thres=0.5; thres_xTop = 300; N_c_thres = 3; s2_min=0.01; absolute_filter_ratio = 0.1. Batch effects among different groups of samples were accounted for as follows: The relative protein abundances from groups #1 and #2 (obtained with SWATH, but in separate batches) were first harmonized by minimizing the log-ratio between the samples corresponding to glucose minimal medium and carbon-limited growth. Then, proteins from both groups were scaled so that the average protein abundances in glucose minimal medium matched the average abundances from group #3 in the same conditions. Absolute protein mass fractions were computed by calibrating the average protein abundances in samples A7, A8, A9, O10 and P3 for E. coli EQ353 strain to ribosome profiling data for the same strain and condition. Protein mass fractions were computed from number fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial fitness depends on adaptability to changing environments. In rich growth medium, which is replete with amino acids, Escherichia coli primarily expresses protein synthesis machineries, which comprise ~40% of cellular proteins and are required for rapid growth. Upon transition to minimal medium, which lacks amino acids, biosynthetic enzymes are synthesized, eventually reaching ~15% of cellular proteins when growth fully resumes. We applied quantitative proteomics to analyse the timing of enzyme expression during such transitions, and established a simple positive relation between the onset time of enzyme synthesis and the fractional enzyme 'reserve' maintained by E. coli while growing in rich media. We devised and validated a coarse-grained kinetic model that quantitatively captures the enzyme recovery kinetics in different pathways, solely on the basis of proteomes immediately preceding the transition and well after its completion. Our model enables us to infer regulatory strategies underlying the 'as-needed' gene expression programme adopted by E. coli.

### Keywords
Amino acid biosynthesis, Ribosome biogenesis, Coarse-grained theory, Proteomics, Growth transition

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technical University Munich Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising


