### Accession
PXD021728

### Title
Caspase-3 cleaves extracellular vesicle proteins during auditory brainstem development

### Description
Sound localization requires extremely precise development of auditory brainstem circuits, the molecular mechanisms of which are largely unknown. We previously demonstrated a novel requirement for non-apoptotic activity of the protease caspase-3 in chick auditory brainstem development. Here, we used mass spectrometry to identify proteolytic substrates of caspase-3 during chick auditory brainstem development. Functional annotation analysis revealed that our caspase-3 substrates were enriched more than two-fold for proteins associated with extracellular vesicles (EVs), membrane-bound nanoparticles that function in intercellular communication. The proteome of EVs isolated from the auditory brainstem contained caspase-3 and was highly enriched for the caspase-3 substrates identified here. Additionally, we identified two caspase-3 substrates with known functions in axon guidance, namely Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (NCAM) and Neuronal-glial Cell Adhesion Molecule (Ng-CAM), that were found in auditory brainstem EVs and expressed in the auditory pathway alongside cleaved caspase-3. Taken together, these data suggest a novel developmental mechanism whereby caspase-3 influences auditory brainstem circuit formation through the proteolytic cleavage of EV proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Chick auditory brainstems were injected with the caspase-3 inhibitor z-DEVD-fmk or vehicle solution on embryonic days 9 and 10, then dissected several hours after the second injection. EVs were purified using qEV size exclusion chromatography columns (IZON Science). Equivalent microgram amounts of these samples were incubated in 70% formic acid for 72 hours at room temperature with constant shaking and occasional cuphorn ultrasonication. One crystal of cyanogen bromide (CNBr) was added to each sample. After overnight incubation at room temperature in the dark, samples were evaporated to dryness in a Speedvac vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in 8 M urea, 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, pH 8.0, then incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C with occasional cuphorn ultrasonication. Samples were then diluted to 6 M urea with 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.0 followed by addition of LysC at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio and incubation at 37°C. Samples were then diluted to 1 M urea with 0.1 M TEAB, pH 8.0 followed by addition of Trypsin at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein ratio. After overnight incubation at 37°C, samples were supplemented with formic acid to 2% final concentration. Peptides were desalted using C18/SCX as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007), eluting with 160, 205, 255, 325, 540, and 800 mM ammonium acetate in 20% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid, followed by a final elution with 5% NH4OH/80% CH3CN. Elutions were dried under vacuum and re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water. Using an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph, a portion of each sample was injected to a 250 x 0.075 mm (ID) nanocapillary column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (1.9 µm diameter; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column was eluted with a gradient of CH3CN in 0.1% formic acid (0 – 5% over 5 min extending to 25% over 205 min and to 35% CH3CN over a further 30 min) at a flow rate of 250 nanoliters/min. Column eluate was sprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer, collecting precursor spectra in the range 380 – 1600 m/z. Up to 15 of the most intense ions in each precursor spectrum with a charge of +2 to +4 and a minimum signal intensity of 5000 were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy of 30%. Ions were dynamically excluded for 40 s after two fragmentations within 30 sec, via a 500-entry list, with early expiration from the list after a detection within the exclusion period falling below S/N = 2.0.

### Data Protocol
Raw file data were processed to peaklists using Mascot Distiller 2.7.1. Using Mascot 2.6.1, each resulting mass list was subjected to target-decoy searching against the whole proteome of Gallus gallus (UniProt) plus a library of common contaminants, with semi-CNBr+Trypsin enzyme specificity, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, parent and product mass tolerances of 20 ppm, and variable modifications of Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ), Carbamyl (N-term) and Met->Hse (C-term M). Results were calculated using a threshold of p = 0.05 yielding an experimental FDR of < 3%. Matrices of peptides (rows) vs. samples (columns) were generated using in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brainstem, Neurodevelopment, Chicken, Caspase-3

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Forrest Weghorst

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Cramer
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine


