### Accession
PXD002162

### Title
M. truncatula drought response is affected by nodulation

### Description
Two groups of plants were nodulated with Sinorhizobium medicae or S. meliloti; the third group grew in a rhizobia-free medium and received mineral nitrogen fertilizer. In addition to growth analyses, physiological and molecular responses of the two systems were assessed using ionomic, metabolomic and proteomic techniques.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted using a MCW precipitation followed by solubilisation of the pellet using urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM Hepes, 5 mM PMSF, pH 7.8)

### Data Protocol
peptide identification, ProteomeDiscoverer 1.3 with the Sequest algorithm: Methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modification, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.8 Da

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress hampers plant energy and biomass production; however it is still unknown how internal C:N balance and rhizobial symbiosis impact on plant response to water limitation. Here, the effect of differential optimal nitrogen nutrition and root nodule symbiosis on drought stress and rehydration responses of Medicago truncatula was assessed. Two groups of plants were nodulated with Sinorhizobium medicae or Sinorhizobium meliloti--differing in the performance of N fixation; the third group grew in a rhizobia-free medium and received mineral nitrogen fertilizer. In addition to growth analyses, physiological and molecular responses of the two systems were studied using ionomic, metabolomic and proteomic techniques. We found a significant delay in drought-induced leaf senescence in nodulated relative to non-nodulated plants, independent of rhizobial strain and uncoupled from initial leaf N content. The major mechanisms involved are increased concentrations of potassium and shifts in the carbon partitioning between starch and sugars under well-watered conditions, as well as the enhanced allocation of reserves to osmolytes during drought. Consequently, nodulated plants recovered more effectively from drought, relative to non-nodulated M. truncatula. Proteomic data suggest that phytohormone interactions and enhanced translational regulation play a role in increased leaf maintenance in nodulated plants during drought.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Induced tolerance, Drought stress, Priming, Leaf senescence, Stay-green

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
university of vienna dep. of Ecogenomics and systems biology

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
university of vienna dep. of Ecogenomics and systems biology


