### Accession
PXD003669

### Title
Identification of type strain-specific diagnostic peptides of the Bacillus cereus group

### Description
The Bacillus cereus group consists of eight very closely related species and comprises both harmless and human pathogenic species. Yet, methods to rapidly and accurately distinguish these species are currently lacking as we demonstrate that classical matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) biotyping did not achieve reliable identification of each type strain. We assigned type strain-specific diagnostic peptides to the B. cereus group based on comparisons of their proteome profiles. The number of diagnostic peptides varies remarkably in type strain-dependent manner. The state of the art of the reference database is crucial in the process of validating candidate diagnostic peptides and may lead to a noteworthy reduction of verified diagnostic peptides as putative diagnostic peptides might be found in other species as well.

### Sample Protocol
- Grow o/n liquid cultures of individual strains (3 biological samples with 2 technical replicates each were analyzed) - Protein extraction using Bruker standard ethanol/formic protocol (Ref. 1) - Trypsin digestion with assistance of high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU, UTR200 reactor, Hielscher, Teltow, Germany) - LC-MS/MS analysis on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Inc., Milford, USA) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective, Woburn, USA)  Ref. 1: Freiwald, A.; Sauer, S., Phylogenetic classification and identification of bacteria by mass spectrometry. Nature protocols 2009, 4, (5), 732-742.

### Data Protocol
- Generation of MGF using Protoeme Discoverer (v1.4) & processing using the FGCZ Converter Control (FCC) (Ref. 2) - MGF files were searched against Bacillus-specific database which is composed of 113 bacilli protoems (forward and reversed target-decoy FDR estimation) with 1’158 177 bacilli protein sequences downloaded from UniProt (www.uniprot.org, status of May 2015) - Proteomic data validation occurred with Scaffold software (Version 4.4.1.1, Proteome Software, Portland, USA)  Ref. 2: Panse, C.; Grossmann, J.; Barkow-Oesterreicher, S. protViz: Visualizing and Analyzing Mass Spectrometry Related Data in Proteomics, R package version 0.2.9; 2014.

### Publication Abstract
The Bacillus cereus group consists of eight very closely related species and comprises both harmless and human pathogenic species such as Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus, and Bacillus cytotoxicus. Numerous efforts have been undertaken to allow presumptive differentiation of B. cereus group species from one another. However, methods to rapidly and accurately distinguish these species are currently lacking. We confirmed that classical matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) biotyping cannot achieve reliable identification of each type strain. We therefore assigned type strain-specific diagnostic peptides to the B. cereus group based on comparisons of their proteomic profiles. The number of diagnostic peptides varied remarkably in a type strain-dependent manner. The accuracy of the reference database was crucial to validate candidate diagnostic peptides and led to a noteworthy reduction of verified diagnostic peptides. Diagnostic peptides ranged from one for B. weihenstephanensis to 62 for B. pseudomycoides and were associated with proteins involved in diverse biological processes, e.g. amino acid biosynthesis, cell envelope, cellular processes, energy metabolism, and transport processes. However, 45.6% of all diagnostic peptides comprised currently unclassified proteins or proteins of unknown function. In addition, a phylogenetic tree based on clustering of theoretical precursor masses deduced from in silico-generated tryptic peptides was reconstructed.

### Keywords
Bacillus cereus group, Type strains, Diagnostic peptides, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Agroscope, Institute for Food Sciences, 8820 Waedenswil, Switzerland
Agroscope Institute for Food Sciences Schloss 1 8820 Waedenswil Switzerland

### Submitter
David Drissner

### Lab Head
Dr David Drissner
Agroscope Institute for Food Sciences Schloss 1 8820 Waedenswil Switzerland


