### Accession
PXD025625

### Title
The role of Cdk1-cyclin B in G1/S transition  revealed by chemical genetic inhibition of Cdc7

### Description
Entry of mammalian cells into DNA synthesis (S-phase) represents a key event in cell division. According to the current cell cycle models, the Cdc7 kinase represents the essential and rate-limiting trigger of DNA replication, acting together with the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk2. Using chemical genetic systems which allow an acute shutdown of Cdc7 in in vitro cultured cells as well as in vivo in a living mouse, that Cdc7 is dispensable for cell division of many different cell types. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis were performed to elucidate the compensating mechanism.  We demonstrate that Cdk1-cyclin B, a kinase currently thought to act exclusively during mitosis, is also active during G1/S transition both in cycling cells and in cells exiting quiescence. We show that Cdc7 and Cdk1-cyclin B play redundant roles during G1/S transition, and at least one of these kinases is needed to allow S-phase entry. These observations revise our fundamental understanding of cell cycle progression by demonstrating that Cdk1-cyclin B physiologically regulates two distinct transitions during cell division cycle, while Cdc7 plays a redundant function in DNA replication.   In TMT1, to analyze the expression of Cdc7 and its partners upon auxin-mediated induction of Cdc7 degradation, we performed a TMT analysis of ES cells treated with IAA for 24 hours.  In TMT2, to analyze the phosphorylation of Cdc7 targets as a function of time upon degradation of the kinase we performed the time-resolved TMT analysis of ES cells subjected to Cdc7 degradation for three different amounts of time. In TMT3, to determine the ability of Cdk1 to phosphorylate Mcm2, we analyzed the phosphoproteome of mES cells and focused on the phosphorylation of Mcm2 upon Cdk1 inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
In TMT1, five plates ES cells in which endogenous Cdc7 was tagged with the auxin degron domain and expressing the Tir1 f-box protein were treated with auxin for 24h (and five untreated for control). This led to degradation of the tagged protein. At the end of treatment, the cells were harvested by trypsinization and flash-frozen in liqiuid N2.  In TMT2, mES cells in which endogenous Cdc7 was tagged with the auxin degron domain and expressing the Tir1 f-box protein were treated with auxin for 5h, 24h and 48h (and untreated for control). This led to degradation of the tagged protein. At the end of treatment, the cells were harvested by trypsinization and flash-frozen in liqiuid N2.  In TMT3, we used analog-sesnsitive Cdk1 mES cells in which (only) Cdk1 is susceptible to the analog-sensitive inhibitor 3-MB-PP1. The cells were treated with the inhibitor (or untreated for control) and subsequently trypsinized and frozen in liqiuid N2  Detailed protocol is in the Method part in the paper.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based or Comet-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the Mouse UniProt database. This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Detailed search parameters can be found in the paper.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk1-cyclinb, Dna replication, Cdc7, G1/s transition

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


