### Accession
PXD031868

### Title
Mouse Articular chondrocyte LC-MSMS of wild-type, miR-26a -/- and cartilage-specific miR-23ab clusters knockout mice

### Description
To reveal the potential regulation target genes of miR-26a and miR-23a/b clusters in articular chondrocytes, we performed a multi-omics analysis of LC-MSMS and RNA-seq using cultured chondrocytes samples, which were primarily isolated from 3-week-old wild-type, miR-26a -/- (with or without miR-26a mimic transfection afterwards) or miR-23a/b cluster flox/flox;Col2a1-cre mice. For LC-MSMS, protein from TRIZOL reagent was extracted, nanoLC-MSMS was performed. An expression list was made to further explore the regulation targets of miR-26a and miR-23a/b clusters.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to the following pretreatment for proteome analysis. 1) Add acetonitrile to the remaining Trizol solution after separating the aqueous layer (containing RNA) to precipitate proteins. 2) Add 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 0.5% sodium dodecanoate (SDoD) to the precipitates and lyse the proteins using a sealed ultrasonic crusher. 3) Determine the protein concentration by BCA assay and add 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 0.5% sodium dodecanoate (SDoD) to the precipitate to achieve a protein concentration of 1 ug/uL. 4) To cleave the S-S bond of the protein, DTT was added to 20 uL (20 ug) of the protein lysate at a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 50°C for 30 min. 5) To alkylate the cysteine residue, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added at a final concentration of 30 mM. (5) To alkylate the cysteine residue, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 30 mM and incubated at room temperature (light-blocked) for 30 min. (6) To stop the reaction of IAA, cysteine was added to a final concentration of 60 mM and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. 7) To increase the efficiency of enzymatic digestion, add 150 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (protein 8). To remove SDoD, acidify the solution by adding 5% TFA, centrifuge (15,000 g, room temperature, 10 min), and remove the supernatant. To remove SDoD, the solution was acidified by adding 5% TFA and centrifuged (15,000 g, room temperature, 10 min) to collect the supernatant. After desalting with a C18 spin column, the solution was dried by centrifugal evaporator. Peptide concentration was measured by BCA assay and adjusted to 200 ng/uL by 3% ACN 0.1% formic acid LC-MS analysis. Analysis conditions of nanoLC: Injected peptide volume: 200 ng used; nanoLC: UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific); Column size: I.D. 75 um × Length 250 mm; Column particle: CAPCELL CORE MP (Osaka Soda) (particle type: core-shell particle, functional group: C18; particle size: 2.7 um; pore size: 16 nm); Column temperature Solvent: A solvent 0.1% distilled water with formic acid, B solvent 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid; MS analysis conditions: MS used: Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific); Ionization method: ESI positive mode Measurement; Time: 90 min (gradient time 6-96 min was measured); MS analysis type: Overlapping window DIA;

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data was analyzed using Scaffold DIA under the following conditions to identify proteins and peptides, and to calculate quantitative values. Software used for data analysis: Scaffold DIA (Proteome Software); Database: reviewed UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Mus musculus); Fragmentation: HCD; Precursor Tolerance: 8 ppm Fragment; Tolerance: 10 ppm; Data Acquisition Type: Overlapping DIA; Digestion Enzyme: Trypsin; Peptide Length: 8-70; Peptide Charge: 2-8; Max Missed Cleavages: 1; Fixed Modification: Carbamidomethylation [C]; Peptide FDR: <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis (OA), the most prevalent aging-related joint disease, is characterized by insufficient extracellular matrix synthesis and articular cartilage degradation and is caused by various risk factors including aging and traumatic injury. Most microRNAs (miRNAs) have been associated with pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA) using <i>in vitro</i> models. However, the role of many miRNAs in skeletal development and OA pathogenesis is uncharacterized <i>in vivo</i> using genetically modified mice. Here, we focused on miR-23-27-24 clusters. There are two paralogous miR-23-27-24 clusters: miR-23a-27a-24-2 (miR-23a cluster) and miR-23b-27b-24-1 (miR-23b cluster). Each miR-23a/b, miR-24, and miR-27a/b is thought to function coordinately and complementary to each other, and the role of each miR-23a/b, miR-24, and miR-27a/b in OA pathogenesis is still controversial. MiR-23a/b clusters are highly expressed in chondrocytes and the present study examined their role in OA. We analyzed miRNA expression in chondrocytes and investigated cartilage-specific miR-23a/b clusters knockout (Col2a1-Cre; miR-23a/b<i>flox/flox</i>: Cart-miR-23clus KO) mice and global miR-23a/b clusters knockout (CAG-Cre; miR-23a/b<i>flox/flox</i>: Glob-miR-23clus KO) mice. Knees of Cart- and Glob-miR-23a/b clusters KO mice were evaluated by histological grading systems for knee joint tissues using aging model (12 and/or 18 month-old) and surgically-induced OA model. miR-23a/b clusters were among the most highly expressed miRNAs in chondrocytes. Skeletal development of Cart- and Glob-miR-23clus KO mice was grossly normal although Glob-miR-23clus KO had reduced body weight, adipose tissue and bone density. In the aging model and surgically-induced OA model, Cart- and Glob-miR-23clus KO mice exhibited mild OA-like changes such as proteoglycan loss and cartilage fibrillation. However, the histological scores were not significantly different in terms of the severity of OA in Cart- and Glob-miR-23clus KO mice compared with control mice. Together, miR-23a/b clusters, composed of miR-23a/b, miR-24, miR-27a/b do not significantly contribute to OA pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Chondrocyte, Mouse, Mir-26a, Mir-23 cluster

### Affiliations
Hiroshima University
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Japan Medical Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan (lab head)

### Submitter
Chenyang Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Shigeru Miyaki
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Japan Medical Center for Translational and Clinical Research, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan (lab head)


