### Accession
PXD027417

### Title
Global identification and systematic analysis of lysine malonylation in maize (Zea mays L.

### Description
Lysine malonylation is a kind of post-translational modifications (PTMs) discovered in recent years, which plays an important regulatory role in plants. Maize (Zea mays L.) is a major global cereal crop. We therefore performed a global malonylome analysis of maize. In total, 1722 uniquely malonylated lysine residues were obtained in 810 proteins. The modified proteins were involved in various biological processes such as photosynthesis, ribosome and oxidative phosphorylation. Notably, a large proportion of the modified proteins (45%) were located in chloroplast, suggesting an indispensable regulatory role of malonylation in photosynthesis and carbon fixation.

### Sample Protocol
Qingnong-11, a Maize (Z. mays L.) variety, was used in the study. Plant was grown in a greenhouse at 25 °C under constant light. Young maize leaves were collected at the four-leaf stage for total protein extraction. Total protein was extracted from the young leaves. In brief, the leaves were grinded in liquid nitrogen. The resulting cellular powder was mixed with protein-extraction buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% triton-100, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). After sonication 3 times on ice, the remaining cell-debris was removed at 20,000×g 4 °C for 10 min and the resulting supernatant was further mixed with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid for protein precipitation. The extracted protein was redissolved in 8 M urea containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol followed alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide. Afterward, the protein was digested by trypsin. The digested protein in above section was fractionated into 60 fractions using high pH reverse phase HPLC equipped with a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). For enrichment, the peptides were incubated with pan antimalonyllysine antibody conjugated beads (PTM-904, PTM Bio, China) at 4°C for 12 h. The enriched peptides from the antibody beads were eluted using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid followed cleaned by C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Firstly, an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (ThermoFisher) was employed to separate the tryptic peptides. The separated peptides were then analyzed by tandem MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus (ThermoFisher). The normalized collision energy (NCE) was set as 28 and the electrospray voltage applied was set as 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan. The intact peptides and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at resolutions of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. A data-dependent process in which 1 MS scan was followed by 20 MS/MS scans and the dynamic exclusion was 15.0s. The automatic gain control (AGC) and fixed first mass were set at 5E4 and 100 m/z, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was employed to process the resulting mass spectra dataset. The obtained malonylome was annotated using Gene Ontology (GO) from UniProt-GOA database. InterProScan was employed to analyze domain functional description of the modified protein. The metabolic pathway involved in the modified proteins were analyzed by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. The conserved motifs in the malonylated proteins which constituted with amino acid in specific positions were obtained by software MoMo (Motif-X algorithm) (V5.0.2). NetSurfP was used to process secondary structure description of the malonylated proteins. For the subcellular localization predication of the malonylated proteins, software Wolfpsort (PSORT/PSORT II) was employed as described. The conservation of identified proteins between maize and other species was performed by BLASTP. To obtain the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the modified proteins, all the malonylated proteins were searched against STRING database (v. 11.0) and the networks obtained were visualizated by software Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Malonylome, Zea mays l., Photosynthesis, Calvin cycle

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Meng Large

### Lab Head
Dr Guangyuan wang
Qingdao Agricultural University


