### Accession
PXD035974

### Title
LAMTOR1 interactome upon mutation of USP32

### Description
Ubiquitination is among the most prevalent post-translational modifications regulating a great number of cellular functions, and defects in such processes contribute to many diseases. Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are essential to control the precise outcome of ubiquitin signals. The ubiquitin-specific protease 32 (USP32) differs from all other DUBs as it comprises in addition to its catalytic USP domain and the DUSP domain also multiple EF hands and a C-terminal prenylation site. This dataset represents an interactome analysis of GFP-tagged LAMTOR1 in human RPE-1 cells upon knock-out and inactivation (C743S) of USP32.

### Sample Protocol
LAMTOR1-GFP was immunoprecipitated from transfected RPE1 cells using GFP-Trap Agarose beads (gta, ChromoTek). 24 h after transfection, cells were lysed for 20 min at 4 °C with lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % Triton X-100, including PhosStop phosphatase inhibitors (4906837001, Merck/Roche), cOmplete protease inhibitors (4693132001, Merck/Roche) and 20 mM NEM). Lysates were cleared by high-speed centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. GFP-Trap beads were washed twice with wash buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) and added to the lysates. Samples were incubated rotating for 3 h at 4 °C. Beads were washed six times with wash buffer. After the final IP wash, samples for LC-MS analysis were prepared according to the iST-method (Kulak et al., 2014). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur , Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 45 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 15 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 28). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 45 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 4 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s to minimize the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.17.0) applying default parameters. Acquired spectra were searched against the human “one sequence per gene” database (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (2022-04-17; 20509 sequences), and a collection of 244 common contaminants (“contaminants.fasta” provided with MaxQuant) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). Searches were performed using default parameters but adding the GlyGly-remnant on Lysines as a variable modification. Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1 % for peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Protein quantification and data normalization relied on the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014).  The MaxQuant output (“proteinGroups.txt”, “GlyGly(K)sites.txt”) was processed in Perseus (v. 1.6.7.0, (Tyanova et al., 2016b). First, proteins only identified by a single modified peptide (“only identified by site”) or matching to the reversed or contaminants databases were removed. For interactome analysis, iBAQ intensities were used and only proteins with at least two valid values in the respective IP-sample were kept for statistical analysis following the imputation of missing values in the Control-group (GFP-only) by drawing random numbers from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down-shift: 1.8). Interactors were defined by a right-sided Student`s t-test against the Control-group, applying a p-value (p<0.05) and a fold-change (FC>2) filter. The resulting iBAQ-values of bona fide interactors (282 proteins) were normalized with CyclicLoess and differentially interacting proteins defined using limma, both using the NormalyzerDE package in R (v. 3.6.3) via R Studio (v. 2022.02.0, “Prairie Trillium”).

### Publication Abstract
The endosomal-lysosomal system is a series of organelles in the endocytic pathway that executes trafficking and degradation of proteins and lipids and mediates the internalization of nutrients and growth factors to ensure cell survival, growth, and differentiation. Here, we reveal regulatory, non-proteolytic ubiquitin signals in this complex system that are controlled by the enigmatic deubiquitinase USP32. Knockout (KO) of USP32 in primary hTERT-RPE1 cells results among others in hyperubiquitination of the Ragulator complex subunit LAMTOR1. Accumulation of LAMTOR1 ubiquitination impairs its interaction with the vacuolar H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, reduces Ragulator function, and ultimately limits mTORC1 recruitment. Consistently, in USP32 KO cells, less mTOR kinase localizes to lysosomes, mTORC1 activity is decreased, and autophagy is induced. Furthermore, we demonstrate that depletion of USP32 homolog CYK-3 in Caenorhabditis elegans results in mTOR inhibition and autophagy induction. In summary, we identify a control mechanism of the mTORC1 activation cascade at lysosomes via USP32-regulated LAMTOR1 ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Usp32, Lamtor1, Interactome, Rpe1

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Anja Bremm
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


