### Accession
PXD038436

### Title
Proteomics profiling reveals regulation of immune response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection in mice

### Description
Regulation of the immune response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) infection is a complex process, influenced by the interaction between genetic and environmental factors. Different inbred strains of mice exhibit distinct levels of resistance to S. Typhimurium infection, ranging from susceptible (e.g., C57BL/6J) to resistant (e.g., DBA/2J) strains. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to the host response remain elusive. In this study, we present a comprehensive proteomics profiling of spleen tissues from C57BL/6J and DBA/2J strains with different doses of S. Typhimurium infection by tandem tag mass coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS). We identified and quantified 3,986 proteins, resulting in 475 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J strains. Functional enrichment analysis unveiled that the mechanism of innate immune responses to S. Typhimurium infection could be associated with several signaling pathways, including the interferon signaling pathway. We experimentally validated the roles of interferon signaling pathway in innate immune response to S. Typhimurium infection using IFN-γ neutralization assay. We further illustrated the roles of macrophage cells and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the mechanisms underlying the resistance to S. Typhimurium using qRT-PCR. Taken together, our results provide new insights into the genetic regulation of the immune response to S. Typhimurium infection in mice and might provide potential protein targets for controlling the infection.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen spleen samples were weighed and homogenized in the lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 100 μL buffer per 10 mg tissue). The samples were homogenized in a blender (Bullet Blender® Gold, Next Advance) at 4°C at speed 8 for 30 seconds, rest for 5 s, and repeat 5 – 10 times. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Quantified protein samples (200 μg in the lysis buffer with 8 M urea) were treated by 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature to reduce disulfide bonds. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and proteolyzed with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) at room temperature overnight. Peptides were reduced by 1 mM DTT for 2 hours at room temperature and then incubated with 10 mM incuiodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark to alkylate Cys-containing peptides. The reaction was quenched by 30 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to achieve 1% concentration and then centrifuged at 20,000 × g at room temperature for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and desalted by the Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters), and then dried by centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Each sample was resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) for TMT labeling following the manufacturer’s protocol and then mixed equally, followed by desalting for the subsequent fractionation. The TMT labeled samples were fractionated by offline basic pH reverse phase LC, yielding 80 fractions, then concatenated to 20 super-fractions. Each fraction was analyzed by the acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS. In the acidic pH LC-MS/MS analysis, each fraction was run sequentially on a column (75 μm ID × 20 cm L × 365 μm OD, CoAnn Technologies, LLC, Cat. No. HEB07502001718I) interfaced with a Q Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted by a four-hour gradient (buffer A: water; buffer B: acetonitrile). MS settings included the MS1 scan (445 – 1600 m/z, 70,000 resolution, 1 × 106 AGC and 60 ms maximal ion time) and 10 data-dependent MS2 scans (fixed first mass of 120 m/z, 70,000 resolution, 1 × 105 AGC, 105 ms maximal ion time, 1.0 m/z isolation window).

### Data Protocol
We used the JUMP suite with the comet search engine to search MS/MS raw data against a composite target/decoy database to evaluate false discovery rate (FDR). All original target protein sequences were reversed to generate a decoy database that was concatenated to the target database. FDR in the target database was estimated by the number of decoy matches (nd) and the number of target matches (nt), according to the equation (FDR = nd/nt), assuming mismatches in the target database were the same as in the decoy database. The target database was downloaded from the UniProt mouse database (87,952 entries), and decoy database was generated by reversing targeted protein sequences. Major parameters included precursor and product ion mass tolerance (±15 ppm), full trypticity, static mass shift for the TMT tags (+304.2071453) and carbamidomethyl modification of 57.02146 on cysteine, dynamic mass shift for Met oxidation (+15.99491), maximal missed cleavage (n = 2), and maximal modification sites (n = 3). Putative peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by mass accuracy and then grouped by precursor ion charge state and filtered by matching scores (Xcorr and ΔXcorr) to reduce FDR below 1% for proteins. If one peptide could be generated from multiple homologous proteins, based on the rule of parsimony, the peptide was assigned to the canonical protein form in the manually curated Swiss-Prot database. If no canonical form was defined, the peptide was assigned to the protein with the highest PSM number. We removed one-hit wonders from the list of proteins identified. Protein expression was quantified using the following steps with JUMP software suite: (i) TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted for each PSM; (ii) the raw intensities were corrected based on isotopic distribution of each labeling reagent; (iii) PSMs with very low intensities (e.g. minimum intensity of 1,000 and median intensity of 5,000) were excluded from the subsequent analysis; (iv) Sample loading bias was normalized with the trimmed median intensity of all PSMs; (v) the mean-centered intensities across samples was calculated, (vi) protein relative intensities by averaging related PSMs was calculated; (vii) protein absolute intensities by multiplying the relative intensities by the grand-mean of three most highly abundant PSMs was computed.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of the immune response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (<i>S.</i> Typhimurium) infection is a complex process, influenced by the interaction between genetic and environmental factors. Different inbred strains of mice exhibit distinct levels of resistance to <i>S.</i> Typhimurium infection, ranging from susceptible (e.g., C57BL/6J) to resistant (e.g., DBA/2J) strains. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to the host response remain elusive. In this study, we present a comprehensive proteomics profiling of spleen tissue from C57BL/6J and DBA/2J strains with different doses of <i>S.</i> Typhimurium infection by tandem mass tag labeling coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS). We identified and quantified 3,986 proteins, resulting in 475 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J strains. Functional enrichment analysis unveiled that the mechanisms of innate immune responses to <i>S.</i> Typhimurium infection could be associated with several signaling pathways, including the interferon (IFN) signaling pathway. We experimentally validated the roles of the IFN signaling pathway in the innate immune response to <i>S.</i> Typhimurium infection using an IFN-&#x3b3; neutralization assay. We further illustrated the importance of macrophage and proinflammatory cytokines in the mechanisms underlying the resistance to <i>S.</i> Typhimurium using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). Taken together, our results provided new insights into the genetic regulation of the immune response to <i>S.</i> Typhimurium infection in mice and might lead to the discovery of potential protein targets for controlling salmonellosis.

### Keywords
Proteome; proteomics; mass spectrometry; immune response; genetic regulation; salmonella; s. typhimurium; mouse

### Affiliations
University of North Dakota
Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xusheng Wang
Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA


