### Accession
PXD041882

### Title
Proteomic screens of SEL1L-HRD1 ER-associated degradation substrates reveal its vital importance in the biogenesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins

### Description
The SEL1L-HRD1 protein complex of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) plays indispensable roles for many physiological processes in a substrate-specific manner; however, the nature of endogenous substrates remains largely elusive. Here we have developed a unique proteomics strategy based on the intrinsic property of the SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD complex to identify potential endogenous ERAD substrates in human kidney cell line HEK293T and mouse brown adipocytes. Over 100 potential substrates involved in many cellular processes, including both membrane and luminal proteins regardless of their glycosylation and disulfide bond status, are identified in each cell type, among which 34 are shared. We further uncover SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD as a suppressor of the biogenesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins via degrading a key subunit of the GPI-transamidase complex known as phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class K protein (PIGK). Lastly, several PIGK disease variants are highly unstable and quickly degraded by SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD. This study shows the most effective way to identify cell type-specific proteome-wide potential endogenous SEL1L-HRD1 substrates, and uncovers a new function of SEL1L-HRD1 ERAD in the biogenesis and disease pathogenesis associated with GPI-anchored proteins

### Sample Protocol
Mouse tissues or cells were harvested, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and sonicated in lysis buffer [150 mM NaCl, 0.2% Nonidet P-40 (NP40), 0.1% Triton X-100, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5] with protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340), protein phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, P5726) and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min. Supernatants were collected and analyzed for protein concentration using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye (Bio-Rad, 5000006). A total of ~5 mg protein lysates were incubated with 10 μl anti-SEL1L (home-made) 2, anti-PIGK (Abcam, ab201693) or Normal Rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling Technology, #2729) overnight at 4°C with gentle rocking. On the following day, the lysates were incubated with protein A agaroses (Thermo fisher scientific, 5918014) for 6 hours, washed three times with lysis buffer and eluted in the 5x SDS sample buffer (250 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 0.05% Bromophenol blue, 50% glycerol, and 1.44 M β-mercaptoethanol) at 95°C for 5 min followed by SDS-PAGE and Immunoblot. Mass spectrometry The beads were resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8). Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 µl of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 C for 30 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 min at room temperature. An overnight digestion with 1 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin was carried out at 37 C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters). Samples were completely dried using vacufuge. Resulting peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-25% buffer B in 110 min, 25-40% in 20 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 10 min and requilibration with Buffer A for 30 min). Eluent was directly introduced into Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source. MS1 scans were acquired at 60K resolution (AGC target=3x106; max IT=50 ms). Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~28%; 15K resolution; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms). Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against UniProt entries using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) counts data were processed using data-driven machine learning method to identify high confidence ERAD substrate candidates. After getting the confidence score for each hit, the cutoff values for confidence score were searched with the lowest score from hits identified only in the HRD1-/- samples with 2 PSMs. After removing hits derived from keratin (KRT) and keratin associated protein (KRTAP), each hit was subsequently filtered based on the following criteria: PSM ratio of HRD1-/- to WT greater than the smaller value of the HRD1-/- to WT ratio of SEL1L or OS9 in the same experiment; PSM of SEL1L-/- must be smaller than WT unless PSM of SEL1L-/- is no greater than 1; PSM of HRD1-/- must be greater than PSM of SEL1L-/- ; PSM of IgG must be zero or no greater than one-tenth of PSM of HRD1-/-. Nucleus-localized proteins were excluded unless it contains any signal peptide, N-glycosylation, disulfide bonds or transmembrane domains. The hits that passed the criteria in at least two independent experiments were considered ERAD substrate candidates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sel1l-hrd1 erad, Gpi-anchored proteins, Pigk, Endogenous substrates, Proteomic screens, Disease mutants

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,University of Michigan Medical School, 5325 Brehm Tower, 1000 Wall St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48105

### Submitter
Xiaoqiong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qi
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,University of Michigan Medical School, 5325 Brehm Tower, 1000 Wall St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48105


