### Accession
PXD017427

### Title
Proteomic characterization of damaged single hairs recovered after an explosion for protein-based human identification

### Description
Characterization of hair proteome in damaged single hairs after an explosive blast and evaluation of success rates in genetically variant peptide marker detection for protein-based human identification.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted via ultrasonication and concentrated by acetone precipitation before digestion with trypsin for data-dependent nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identifications were performed using a combination of de novo sequencing and database searching in PEAKS Studio 7.5. The UniProtKB SwissProt database and an individualized database generated from variants detected in exome sequence data were searched per sample. Parameters include precursor ion mass tolerance of ±20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, up to 3 PTMs per peptide allowed, and up to 3 tryptic missed cleavages on either side of the peptide. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification while all others were allowed as variable modifications. Only de novo-sequenced peptides with -10lgP greater than 15% were matched to protein sequences during database searching. A list of non-redundant human-unique peptides was filtered to include only peptides identified with a m/z error of ±5 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Evidence recovery is challenging where an explosion has occurred. Though hair evidence may be sufficiently robust to be recovered at the site, forensic analysis underutilizes the matrix by relying on morphological analysis. Where DNA is compromised, particularly in hair, protein-based human identification presents a promising alternative. Detection of amino acid polymorphisms in hair proteins as genetically variant peptides (GVPs) permits the inference of individualizing single nucleotide polymorphisms for identification. However, an explosive blast may damage hair proteins and compromise GVP identification. This work assesses effects of an explosive blast on the hair proteome and GVP identification, investigates microscopy as a predictor of proteome profiling success in recovered hairs to improve analysis throughput, and quantifies discriminative power in damaged hairs. The proteomics dataset has been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium (PXD017427). With the exception of degradation in keratins K75, K80, K40, and keratin-associated protein KAP10-11 as markers of hair cuticular damage, corroborated by scanning electron microscopic analysis, minimal hair proteome degradation following explosion allowed successful proteome profiling of single hairs regardless of morphological damage. Finally, GVP identification remained independent of explosion conditions, permitting similar discriminative power between exploded and undamaged hairs. These findings lend greater confidence to GVP analysis in one-inch hairs for forensic identification and provide information about hair protein localization.

### Keywords
Protein-based human identification, Forensics, Lc-ms/ms, Single hair analysis, Hair damage

### Affiliations
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Forensic Science Center, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

### Submitter
Fanny Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Deon S. Anex
Forensic Science Center, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory


