### Accession
PXD021542

### Title
Low endothelial cell FAK expression reduces pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma liver metastasis after gemcitabine treatment

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most aggressive cancers with a high level of liver metastasis. Despite substantial advances, resistance to therapy, including gemcitabine, is still a major obstacle to improved progression free survival. Recent studies have indicated that endothelial cell (EC) focal adhesion kinase (FAK) regulates DNA-damaging therapy induced angiocrine factors and chemosensitivity in malignant cells. However, the effect of EC-FAK regulated angiocrine signalling in chemosensitivity of metastatic PDAC remains unexplored. Here, we show that inducible loss of EC-FAK in both orthotopic and spontaneous mouse models of PDAC reduces liver metastasis and improves survival rates in gemcitabine treated, but not untreated, mice, without affecting primary tumour growth, tumour vascularization, blood vessel leakage or early metastatic events. Phosphoproteomics analysis show a downregulation of the MAPK/ RAF/ PAK signalling pathways in gemcitabine treated FAK-depleted ECs compared to gemcitabine treated WT ECs. Moreover, low levels of EC-FAK correlate with increased survival and reduced relapse in gemcitabine treated human PDAC patients, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. Altogether, we have identified a new role of EC-FAK regulating PDAC liver metastasis upon gemcitabine treatment that impacts on survival.

### Sample Protocol
7.5x 105 cells of FAK-WT or FAK-NULLS mouse lung endothelial cell (MLEC) grown in MLEC media (40% Ham’s F12 with Glutamax, 40% DMEM with 1g/l glucose, Glutamax and pyruvate, 20% FBS, 12.5 mg/l of Endothelial cell supplements, 1 % Penicillin/Streptavidin and 2% Glutamax) plus 10 nM tamoxifen, were seeded in 10 cm dishes pre-coated with 0.1% gelatin in PBS with collagen 22.5µg/ml and 5 µg/ml fibronectin. The day after, the media was replaced with or without 60 nM gemcitabine in both cell lines, and they were grown in normoxia or hypoxia (0.8% O2) for 48 h. Briefly, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF) and lysed (either in normoxia or hypoxia) with a denaturing buffer with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1mM NaF, 2.5 mM Na4P2O7, 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate). Cell lysates were further homogenised by sonication and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4C. Protein concentration in the supernatants was calculated by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, IL). 250 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 10mM Dithiothreitol and 16.6mM iodoacetamide for an hour. Urea concentration was diluted to below 2M with 20mM HEPES (pH 8.0), trypsin beads [50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230)] were added and samples were incubated on thermoshaker for 18h at 37 ˚C. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 5 min at 4˚C. Peptide solutions were desalted using 10mg OASIS-HLB cartridges (Waters,UK). Cartridges were activated with acetonitrile (ACN [100%]) and equilibrated with washing solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After loading the samples, washing solution was applied to cartridges. Peptides were eluted with glycolic acid buffer (1 M glycolic acid, 50% ACN, 5% TFA). To enrich phosphopeptides, sample volumes were normalised using glycolic acid buffer (1M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA), 50µL of TiO2 beads [(50% slurry in 1% TFA), Hichrom] were added to the peptide mixture, incubated for 5 min at room temperature (RT) with agitation and centrifuged for 30 seconds at 1,500 x g. For each sample, the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the pelleted TiO2 was loaded into an empty PE-filtered top tip (Glygen, USA) prewashed with ACN and packed by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min. After loading the remaining volume of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min, top tips were sequentially washed by 3 min centrifugation at 1500 x g with glycolic acid buffer, 100mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN and twice with 10% ACN. For phosphopeptide recovery, peptides were eluted 4 times by 3 min centrifugation at 1500x g with 5% NH4OH. Eluents were dried in a speed vac and peptide pellets stored at -80˚C.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 13 µL of reconstitution (97% H2O, 3% ACN, and 0.1% TFA, 50fmol/µl-1 enolase peptide digest) and sonicated for 2 minutes at RT. Phosphopeptides were analysed by nano flow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 90 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 °C. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.7.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release September 2019) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Peptides with an expectation value<0.05 were considered for further analysis. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files. For peptide quantification Pescal Software was used to construct extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) for all the identified peptides across all conditions and calculating the peak heights. These peptide peak heights were then normalised to the sum of the intensities for each individual sample and the average fold change between conditions could be determined. Statistical significance between conditions was considered significant when the Student T-Tests produced P <0.05 following Benjamini Hochberg (BH) multiple testing correction. Briefly, peptides differentially phosphorylated between a set of samples (at non-adjusted p < 0.05) were grouped into substrate sets known to be phosphorylated by a specific kinase as annotated in the PhosphoSite, Phospho.ELM, and PhosphoPOINT databases. To infer enrichment of substrate groups across sets of samples the hypergeometric test was used, followed by BH multiple testing correction

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Chemotherapy, Gemcitabine, Phosphoproteomics, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Lc-ms/ms, Focal adhesion kinase, Metastasis, Tumour models, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R Cutillas
Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891 | Email: p.cutillas@qmul.ac.uk


