### Accession
PXD012422

### Title
A comprehensive protein profile analysis from clinical Sialoliths and its practical implications

### Description
We analyzed 29 Sialolith samples, employing classical Population Genetic principles (Hartl and Clark 1980 (1), Hahn 2018 (2)) and Systems Biology analysis (ed: by Rigoustsos and Stephanopoulos 2006 (3)) approaches to create specific algorithms designed for our research objectives. Using these methodologies, specific unknowns such as the intrinsic variability of salivary stones, the role that protein matrix plays in the structure and evolution of the stones, and the nature of their interaction with the inorganic phase were addressed. In addition, the genetic and bio-functional aspects as classifying parameters were included and established an experimental frame of comparisons.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample was adjusted to a final volume of 100µL using 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and the protein was reduced using 10 mM Tris (2- Carboxyethyl) Phosphine Hydrochloride (TCEP) at 55°C for 1 hour. The reduced samples were subsequently alkylated using 5 µL of 375 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Next, the protein sample was precipitated by a chloroform-methanol extraction, air-dried and digested with 2 ug of trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Scientific Pierce) at 37°C overnight.  The samples were then run on a Dionex U3000 nano flow system coupled to a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer. Each sample was subjected to a 240-minute chromatographic method employing a gradient from 2-25% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 200 minutes, a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 20 minutes, a step to 90% ACN/FA for 10 minutes and a 10 minute re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA in a “trap-and-load” configuration. The trap column was an Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 5um, 100A and the column was an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75um x 15cm (Thermo Fisher Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). The entire run was 0.3ul/min flow rate and the sample was ionized through a Thermo Nanospray Flex Ion Source. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap utilizing a resolution of 240,000 and data dependent MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using High Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) of 30% using a resolution of 30,000. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using SEQUEST HT scoring. The data base used was Homo sapiens (SwissProt TaxID=9606, version 2017-10-25) and contained 42,252 entries. Static modification included carbamidomethyl on cysteines (=57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (=15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da, and the maximum number of missed trypsin cleavages was set to 2. Only high scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salivary duct, Disease, Human sialoliths, Protein fraction

### Affiliations
LSUHSC, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Proteomics Core Facility, New Orleans, LA 70112
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
LSUHSC Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Jessie Guidry

### Lab Head
Dr Jessie J Guidry
LSUHSC, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Proteomics Core Facility, New Orleans, LA 70112


