### Accession
PXD027725

### Title
Mapping the peptide binding groove of MHC class I

### Description
An essential element of adaptive immunity is the selective binding of peptide antigens by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins and their presentation to cytotoxic T lymphocytes on the cell surface. Using native mass spectrometry, we here analyze the binding of peptides to an empty disulfide-stabilized HLA-A*02:01 molecule. This novel approach allows us to examine the binding properties of diverse peptides. The unique stability of our MHC class I even enables us to determine the binding affinity of complexes, which are suboptimally loaded with truncated or charge-reduced peptides. Notably, a unique erucamide adduct decouples affinity analysis from peptide identity alleviating issues usually attributed to clustering. We discovered that two anchor positions at the binding surface between MHC and peptide can be stabilized independently and further analyze the contribution of other peptidic amino acids on the binding. We propose this as an alternative, likely universally applicable method to artificial prediction tools to estimate the binding strength of peptides to MHC class I complexes quickly and efficiently. This newly described MHC class I-peptide binding affinity quantitation represents a much needed orthogonal, confirmatory approach to existing computational affinity predictions and has the potential to eliminate binding affinity biases and thus accelerate drug discovery in infectious diseases autoimmunity, vaccine design, and cancer immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Production followed Anjanappa, Garcia-Alai et al. (Nat Commun 11, 1314 (2020)). HLA-A*02:01(Y84C) disulfide mutant (dsA2) heavy chain and human β2m light chain were expressed in Escherichia coli using a pET3a plasmid. The proteins were extracted from inclusion bodies. The dsA2 complex was refolded in presence of 10 mM GM (Bachem), concentrated and purified by size-exclusion chromatography on an ÄKTA system (GE healthcare) using a HiLoad 26/600 Superdex 200 pg column (GE healthcare). Prior to native MS measurements, Micro Bio-Spin 6 Columns (molecular weight cutoff 6 kDa; Bio-Rad) were used at 1,000 × g and 4 °C to exchange purified protein samples to 250 mM ammonium acetate (99.99 % purity; Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.0 as buffer surrogate. For native MS experiments, the final concentration of the dsA2 protein was 10 μM. Total peptide concentration (Genecust) ranged between 50 µM and 200 µM. Native MS analysis was implemented on a Q-Tof II mass spectrometer (Waters/Micromass) in positive ESI mode. The instrument was modified to enable high mass experiments (MS Vision) (Analytical Chemistry 78, 7473-7483 (2006)). Sample ions were introduced into the vacuum using homemade capillaries via a nano-electrospray ionization source (source pressure: 10 mbar). In regular MS mode, spectra were recorded at a capillary voltage of 1.45 kV and a cone voltage of 150 V. Protein species with quaternary structure were assigned by MS/MS analysis. These experiments were carried out using argon as collision gas (1.2 × 10-2 mbar). The acceleration voltage ranged from 10 V to 100 V. Comparability of results was ensured as MS quadrupole profiles and pusher settings were kept constant in all measurements. The instrument settings of the mass spectrometer were optimized for non-denaturing conditions.

### Data Protocol
A spectrum of cesium iodide (25 g/L) was recorded on the same day of the particular measurement to calibrate the data. All spectra were evaluated regarding experimental mass (MassLynx V4.1, Waters), full width at half maximum (FWHM; mMass, Martin Strohalm (Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 22, 905-908 (2008)) and area under the curve (AUC; UniDec, Michael T. Marty (Anal Chem 87, 4370-4376 (2015)) of the detected mass species. The values of the shown averaged masses, FWHM and AUC of the different species as well as the corresponding standard deviation result from at least three independent measurements. Narrow peak widths indicate rather homogeneous samples. In order to eliminate non-specific ESI clustering within the results, the raw data were corrected using the dsA2/pep fraction of the negative control YF9. Affinity Kd,high was calculated directly from AUC measured at 150 V cone voltage and 10 V acceleration voltage, whereas Kd,low was indirectly derived from the AUC of the dsA2/erucamide fraction. Since the cone voltage is linearly proportional to the ISD, the distribution of peptide-bound and peptide-unbound dsA2 at non-dissociating conditions can be estimated. According to the equation (occupancy = - 0.0048 × cone voltage + 1.1747) derived from the linear relationship of cone voltage and occupancy, the binding groove is fully occupied at 36 V and thus reflects the in-solution conditions of the superstoichiometric mixture. The peptide-free (erucamide-bound) fraction of the protein measured at cone voltage of 150 V can be corrected using the linear equation. Subsequently, if this fraction is subtracted from the possible 100 % occupancy, the fraction that binds the peptide is obtained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mhc class i, Native ms, Hla-a, Peptide-binding

### Affiliations
CSSB Centre for Structural Systems Biology
Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI), Germany; Centre for Structural Systems Biology, Germany; 5European XFEL GmbH, Germany.

### Submitter
Janine-Denise Kopicki

### Lab Head
Dr Charlotte Uetrecht
Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology (HPI), Germany; Centre for Structural Systems Biology, Germany; 5European XFEL GmbH, Germany.


