### Accession
PXD005825

### Title
Quantitative proteomic approach identifies Vpr binding protein as novel host factor supporting influenza A virus infections in human cells

### Description
Influenza A virus infections are a major cause for respiratory disease in humans, which affects all age groups and contributes substantially to global morbidity and mortality. IAV have a large natural host reservoir in avian species. However, many avian IAV strains lack adaptation to other hosts and hardly propagate in humans. While seasonal or pandemic influenza A virus (IAV) strains replicate efficiently in permissive human cells, many avian IAV cause abortive non-productive infections in these hosts despite successful cell entry. However, the precise reasons for these differential outcomes are poorly defined. We hypothesized that the distinct course of an IAV infection with a given virus strain is determined by the differential interplay between specific host and viral factors. By using Spike-in SILAC mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics we characterized sets of cellular factors whose abundance is specifically up- or down-regulated in the course of permissive vs. non-permissive IAV infection, respectively. This approach allowed for the definition and quantitative comparison of about 3500 proteins in human lung epithelial cells in response to seasonal or low-pathogenic avian H3N2 IAV. Many identified proteins were similarly regulated by both virus strains, but also 16 candidates with distinct changes in permissive vs. non-permissive infection were found. RNAi-mediated knockdown of these differentially regulated host factors identified Vpr binding protein (VprBP) as pro-viral host factor since its down-regulation inhibited efficient propagation of seasonal IAV while over-expression increased viral replication of both seasonal and avian IAV. These results not only show that there are similar differences in the overall changes during permissive and non-permissive imfluenza virus infections, but also provide a basis to evaluate VprBP as novel anti-IAV drug target.

### Sample Protocol
Spike in-SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture)-based mass spectrometry to measure host proteome response to IAV infection: A549 cells were grown in stable isotope-labeled DMEM (SILAC-DMEM, PAA) containing either light (R0K0: R = 12C6, 14N4, K = 12C6, 14N2) or heavy (R10K8: R = 13C6, 15N4, K = 13C6, 15N2) arginine and lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), 10% dialyzed FBS (Invitrogen), 2 mM L-glutamine and antibiotics for at least six cell doublings prior to infection. Successful incorporation of heavy amino acids was verified by MS. Heavy-labeled cells were mock infected to generate heavy labeled reference proteins, while light-labeled cells were infected with Pan or Mal virus at an MOI of 3. At indicated time points cell extracts were prepared using 1% SDS lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS). Protein concentration of each lysate was determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and each light cell lysate was spiked at a 1:1 ratio with heavy-labeled reference proteins. Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale: Each sample for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was generated by combining two individual SILAC-labeled cell populations. In total 20 samples, two biological replicates for each time point post infection (p.i.) (0 h, 4 h, 8 h, 16 h, 24 h) with Pan or Mal virus were analyzed (Fig. 2). R0K0-labeled, mock-infected A549 cells served as internal standard control. The different time points p.i. were chosen to cover the entire course of infection. Scatter plot analyses and calculation of Pearson correlation were performed to ensure reproducibility of biological replicates. Statistical tests were performed by volcano plot analysis (t-test, both sides, FDR 0.05) using Perseus (V. 1.5.0.31). Sample Preparation: After lysis samples were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 0.1 M and incubation for 5 min at 95 °C. Sulfhydryl groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 0.25 M and incubation for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated according to Wessel and Fluegge (28), resuspended in 6 M urea/2 M thiourea and digested into peptides with C-terminal lysine or arginine using Lys-C (3 h) and Trypsin (overnight, diluted 4× with 50 mM ABC). Enzyme activity was quenched by acidification of the samples with trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (29) prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis: Peptides were separated on a 2 m monolithic column (MonoCap C18 High Resolution 2000 (GL Sciences), 100 µm i.d. x 2,000 mm at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 5 to 45 % acetonitrile gradient on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 480 min gradient. A Q Exactive plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in the data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by top 10 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD). The full scans were performed with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The MS/MS scans were performed with a 17,500 resolution, a 1x106 target value and a 60 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification: Peak lists were generated from raw data files using MaxQuant software version 1.5.1.2 according to the standard workflow (30), which corrects for systematic inaccuracies of measured peptide masses and corresponding retention times of extracted peptides (30, 31). Proteins were identified by searching against the recent Uniprot human database (2013-4; 89,601 protein sequences) as well as 12 viral protein sequences of Pan and Mal virus. Proteins were identified using the integrated Andromeda search engine and the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (32) and appropriate SILAC labels as variable modifications; tryptic digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages; a peptide precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Known contaminants were included for protein identification (2014-11; contaminant.fasta, MaxQuant). Intensity threshold was set to 500 (default setting). The decoy database search option was enabled and all peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were filtered with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 by using the MaxQuant target-decoy approach. Annotated spectra can be visualized using the ProteinProspector MS-viewer (33) with the following search key: jt7cvdk2q3. Protein quantification: The MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt was used to determine relative protein abundance by means of Perseus software version 1.5.0.31. This table contains information on the identified proteins, sequence coverage, number of unique peptides and their H/L ratios in the processed raw-files. Each single row contains the group of proteins that could be reconstructed from a set of peptides. Protein quantification was performed with at least 2 unique and razor (i.e. peptides shared by different proteins of a group) peptides by means of the measured peak intensities. The relative abundance of a protein was derived from its H/L ratio in the differently labeled cell populations. An H/L ratio of 0.5 for a given protein was considered to signal increased abundance in the infected R0K0 cell population. Scatter plot analyses and calculation of Pearson correlation were performed to ensure reproducibility of biological replicates. Thereby, PWP1 protein was excluded as outlier in the Pan_4h dataset, because of strong variation between the two replicates (Rep1: -80.50; Rep2: -0.15). Since data sets have normal distribution, significant differences between data points were determined by t-test using volcano plot analysis. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Principle component analysis (PCA) (cutoff method: Benjamini-Hochberg; FDR 0.05) and IDAS 2.1 (34) hierarchical clustering (Euclidian distance) were used to display structure and variance of significant proteins having valid values in each sample. Classification of proteins with significant log2(fold change) >1 or <-1 upon infection with Pan or Mal virus was performed using PANTHER (Protein analysis through evolutionary relationships) Classification System Version 10.0 according to their gene ontology terms “biological process” (GOBP).

### Publication Abstract
Influenza A virus (IAV) infections are a major cause for respiratory disease in humans, which affects all age groups and contributes substantially to global morbidity and mortality. IAV have a large natural host reservoir in avian species. However, many avian IAV strains lack adaptation to other hosts and hardly propagate in humans. While seasonal or pandemic IAV strains replicate efficiently in permissive human cells, many avian IAV cause abortive nonproductive infections in these hosts despite successful cell entry. However, the precise reasons for these differential outcomes are poorly defined. We hypothesized that the distinct course of an IAV infection with a given virus strain is determined by the differential interplay between specific host and viral factors. By using Spike-in SILAC mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics we characterized sets of cellular factors whose abundance is specifically up- or downregulated in the course of permissive <i>versus</i> nonpermissive IAV infection, respectively. This approach allowed for the definition and quantitative comparison of about 3500 proteins in human lung epithelial cells in response to seasonal or low-pathogenic avian H3N2 IAV. Many identified proteins were similarly regulated by both virus strains, but also 16 candidates with distinct changes in permissive <i>versus</i> nonpermissive infection were found. RNAi-mediated knockdown of these differentially regulated host factors identified Vpr binding protein (VprBP) as proviral host factor because its downregulation inhibited efficient propagation of seasonal IAV whereas overexpression increased viral replication of both seasonal and avian IAV. These results not only show that there are similar differences in the overall changes during permissive and nonpermissive influenza virus infections, but also provide a basis to evaluate VprBP as novel anti-IAV drug target.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Influenza, Vprbp

### Affiliations
Robert Koch Institute FG17 - Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses Seestraße 10, 13353 Berlin, Germany
Robert Koch Institute

### Submitter
Sandra Saenger

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Wolff
Robert Koch Institute FG17 - Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses Seestraße 10, 13353 Berlin, Germany


