### Accession
PXD040593

### Title
Integrated with Proteome-sequencing, bulk RNA-sequencing and Single cell RNA-sequencing to identify potential biomarkers in different grades of intervertebral disc degeneration

### Description
We selected humann intervertebral disc samples to perform proteomics analysis. There were 1 case of grade I , 1 case of grade II, 3 cases of grade Ⅲ and 3 cases of grade Ⅳ according to Pfirrmann classfication. RNA seqencing analysis and single-cell RNA sequencing were integrated with proteomics data to identify the hub genes for intervertebral disc degeneration using bioinformatic method.

### Sample Protocol
Human intervertebral disc samples were collected from patients with lumbar disc herniation. The intervertebral disc samples were obtained after Intervertebral Cage Surgery. The disc tissue with herniation was excised and only the degenerated disc tissue was retained. The  proteomics data was obtained using SCIEX TripleTOF 5600.

### Data Protocol
Sample codes were list below, Grade I: 117, Grade II: 121, Grade III: 114, 115, 119, Grade IV: 113, 116, 118. Grade I was deemed the normal tissue, differente proteins were analized with P value < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 1. Protein-protein interaction analysis, Gene Ontology analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis were performed to identify the hub genes.

### Publication Abstract
Low back pain (LBP) is a prevalent health problem worldwide that affects over 80% of adults during their lifetime. Intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD) is a well-recognized leading cause of LBP. IDD is classified into five grades according to the Pfirrmann classification system. The purpose of this study was to identify potential biomarkers in different IDD grades through an integrated analysis of proteome sequencing (PRO-seq), bulk RNA sequencing (bRNA-seq) and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data. Eight cases of grade I-IV IDD were obtained. Grades I and II were considered non-degenerative discs (relatively normal), whereas grades III and IV were considered degenerative discs. PRO-seq analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in various IDD grades. Variation analysis was performed on bRNA-seq data to differentiate expressed genes (DEGs) in normal and degenerated discs. In addition, scRNA-seq was performed to validate DEGs in degenerated and non-degenerated nucleus pulposus (NP). Machine learning (ML) algorithms were used to screen hub genes. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to validate the efficiency of the screened hub genes to predict IDD. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses were performed to analyze function enrichment and signaling pathways. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was used to prioritize disease-related proteins. SERPINA1, ORM2, FGG and COL1A1 were identified through PRO-seq as the hub proteins involved in regulating IDD. ML algorithms selected ten hub genes, including IBSP, COL6A2, MMP2, SERPINA1, ACAN, FBLN7, LAMB2, TTLL7, COL9A3, and THBS4 in bRNA-seq. Since serine protease inhibitor clade A member 1 (SERPINA1) was the only common gene, its accuracy in degenerated and non-degenerated NP cells was validated using scRNA-seq. Then, the rat degeneration model of caudal vertebra was established. The expression of SERPINA1 and ORM2 was detected using immunohistochemical staining of human and rat intervertebral discs. The results showed that SERPINA1 was poorly expressed in the degenerative group. We further explored the potential function of SERPINA1 by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and cell-cell communication. Therefore, SERPINA1 can be used as a biomarker to regulate or predict the progress of disc degeneration.

### Keywords
Proteome-sequencing, Intervertebral disc degeneration

### Affiliations
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University
Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 76 Linjiang Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400010, China

### Submitter
Xiao Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Chu
Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 76 Linjiang Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400010, China


