### Accession
PXD027547

### Title
Alteration in liver proteome caused by ethinyl estradiol in males Cyprinodon variegatus

### Description
Adult male marine fish were exposed to 100ng/L of ethinyl estradiol (EE2) for 7 days in 1.8L vessels, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was used as carrier never reaching concentrations > 0.001% v/v.  The same volume of DMSO was added to the solvent control vessels. Culture conditions, monitored daily, were as follows: temperature 18.8 ± 0.2°C, pH 7.94±0.03, dissolved oxygen saturation 99.3% ± 1.1 and 16:8 hours of light:dark photoperiod.  90% of the water was renewed daily and EE2 and DMSO concentrations were adjusted after that.

### Sample Protocol
Liver proteins were extracted in lysis buffer (7M urea; 2M thiourea; 4% CHAPS) by sonication. Protein quantification was performed by using a modified version of Bradford method, compatible with lysis buffer components and adapted for microplates. Five pooled samples per treatment were prepared with an equal protein amount from three independent fish. Proteins were acetone precipitated and trypsin digested, following TMT10-plex manual guidelines and five solvent control pools and five EE2 pools were labeled with a distinctive isobaric label. Labeled samples were mix together and separated in 8 fractions using a high pH reversed-phase (RP) peptide fractionation kit following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo scientific; Pub. No. MAN0015701). Peptides from each fraction were resuspended in formic acid 0.5% and analyzed by ESI-MS/MS in an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 100 UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against Cyprinodon variegatus proteome available in Uniprot (31881 protein sequences; September 6th, 2019) using PEAKS Studio v.8.0 software. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 1% at PSM level, 8.5% at protein level; 10 ppm and 0.02 Da were set for precursor and fragment ion tolerance respectively; one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10plex (N-terminal, K)  were set as fixed modification and Methionine oxidation was set as variable. Only identifications with at least one unique peptide were used.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteomic changes in the liver of adult males of Sheepshead minnow (Cyprinodon variegatus) upon exposure to ethinyl estradiol (EE2) were assessed to provide an advanced understanding of the metabolic pathways affected by estrogenic endocrine disruption in marine fish, and to identify potential novel molecular biomarkers for the environmental exposure to estrogens. From a total of 3188 identified protein groups (hereafter proteins), 463 showed a statistically significant difference in their abundance between EE2 treatment and solvent control samples. The most affected biological processes upon EE2 exposure were related to ribosomal biogenesis, protein synthesis and transport of nascent proteins to endoplasmic reticulum, and nuclear mRNA catabolism. Within the group of upregulated proteins, a subset of 14 proteins, involved in egg production (Vitellogenin, Zona Pellucida), peptidase activity (Cathepsine E, peptidase S1, Serine/threonine-protein kinase PRP4 homolog, Isoaspartyl peptidase and Whey acidic protein), and nucleic acid binding (Poly [ADP-ribose] polymerase 14) were significantly upregulated with fold-change values higher than 3. In contrast, Collagen alpha-2, involved in the process of response to steroid hormones, among others, was significantly downregulated (fold change&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.2). This pattern of alterations in the liver proteome of adult males of C. variegatus can be used to identify promising novel biomarkers for the characterization of exposure of marine fish to estrogens. The Whey acidic protein-like showed the highest upregulation in EE2-exposed individuals (21-fold over controls), suggesting the utility of abundance levels of this protein in male liver as a novel biomarker of xenoestrogen exposure.

### Keywords
Sheepshead minnow, Endocrine disruption, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Vigo
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain

### Submitter
Alexandre M Schönemann

### Lab Head
Dr Angel P. Diz
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain


