### Accession
PXD020408

### Title
Proteomics studies confirm CYP450 core involvement in multiple resistance strains of Aedes aegypti from French Guiana

### Description
Insecticide resistance is a worldwide threat for vector control around the world, and Aedes aegypti , the main vector of several arboviruses, is a particular concern. To better understand the mechanisms of resistance, four isofemale strains originally from French Guiana were isolated and analysed using combined approaches. The activity of detoxification enzymes involved in insecticide resistance was assayed, and mutations located at positions 1016 and 1534 of the sodium voltage-gated channel gene, which have been associated with pyrethroid resistance in Aedes aegypti populations in Latin America, were monitored. Resistance to other insecticide families (organophosphates and carbamates) was evaluated. A large-scale proteomic analysis was performed to identify proteins involved in insecticide resistance. Our results revealed a metabolic resistance and resistance associated with a mutation of the sodium voltage-gated channel gene at position 1016. Metabolic resistance was mediated through an increase of esterase activity in most strains but also through the shifts in the abundance of several cytochrome P450 (CYP450s). Overall, resistance to deltamethrin was linked in the isofemale strains to resistance to other class of insecticides, suggesting that cross- and multiple resistance occur through selection of mechanisms of metabolic resistance. These results give some insights into resistance to deltamethrin and into multiple resistance phenomena in populations of Ae. aegypti

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed on pools of 20 midguts for the four tested strains (IR03, IR05, IR13 and NO) sampled five days post blood feeding considering a full digestion of the blood. The midguts were dissected on ice, pools of 20 midguts were collected per condition in lysis buffer (Urea 8M, tris HCl 50 mM, pH 7.5) in “Eppendorf™ Protein LoBind Tubes”, and three independent biological replicates were assayed by repeating the experiment three times. Protein extraction was performed for each sample in a lysis buffer (Urea 8M, Tris 50 mM). Midguts were disrupted by ultrasound (Cup Horn, Sonics & Material) for 20 min with 2 sec pulse on and 2 sec pulse off, at the maximum amplitude and were centrifuged 15 min at 14000g at 4°C. Total protein content in each lysate was analyzed using the Pierce Coomassie Protein assay kit (ThermoFisher™), in 96-well microplates using a microplate reader. Fifty microgram of total proteins were reduced in 5 mM TCEP (Sigma − 646547) for 30 min at 26°C and alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma - I114) for 30 min at 26°C in dark. Proteins were digested with 1 μg rLys-C (Promega - V1671) for 3h30 at 30 °C. Samples were then diluted at 1:8 and 0.625 μg of Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega - V5111) was added for 8 h at 37 °C. The digestion was stop with 0.75% formic acid, and peptides were desalted on reversed phase C18 Sep-Pak Cartridge (Waters - WAT054955). Peptides were eluted twice with elution buffer (50% Acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0.1% Formic acid (FA)). Finally, samples were concentrated using a speed vac (Eppendorf) and then lyophilized. Dried samples were kept at -80°C until mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 40 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 800 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 3% to 22% in 160 min, 22% to 50% in 70 min, 50% to 90% in 5 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 250 min including high ACN level steps and column regeneration).  Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS data were searched using MaxQuant (65, 66) (version 1.5.3.8) (with the Andromeda search engine (67)) against the Uniprot reference proteome of Aedes aegypti. (16650 entries, downloaded the 18th Feb 2017) and a database of chikungunya virus (Frameshift Structural polyprotein, Non-structural polyprotein and structural polyprotein, downloaded from Uniprot the 23rd  Feb 2018).  The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 7 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels.   Quantitative analysis was based on pairwise comparison of LFQ intensities. LFQ were log-transformed (log2). Reverse hits and potential contaminant were removed from the analysis. Proteins with at least 2 peptides (including one unique peptide) were kept for further statistics. LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR (68)). Remaining proteins without any LFQ value in one of both conditions have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in the other. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the impute.MLE function of the R package imp4p (69). Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test (70) thanks to the R package limma (71). An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p (72) using the robust method described in (73) to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins

### Publication Abstract
Insecticide resistance is a worldwide threat for vector control around the world, and Aedes aegypti, the main vector of several arboviruses, is a particular concern. To better understand the mechanisms of resistance, four isofemale strains originally from French Guiana were isolated and analysed using combined approaches. The activity of detoxification enzymes involved in insecticide resistance was assayed, and mutations located at positions 1016 and 1534 of the sodium voltage-gated channel gene, which have been associated with pyrethroid resistance in Aedes aegypti populations in Latin America, were monitored. Resistance to other insecticide families (organophosphates and carbamates) was evaluated. A large-scale proteomic analysis was performed to identify proteins involved in insecticide resistance. Our results revealed a metabolic resistance and resistance associated with a mutation of the sodium voltage-gated channel gene at position 1016. Metabolic resistance was mediated through an increase of esterase activity in most strains but also through the shifts in the abundance of several cytochrome P450 (CYP450s). Overall, resistance to deltamethrin was linked in the isofemale strains to resistance to other class of insecticides, suggesting that cross- and multiple resistance occur through selection of mechanisms of metabolic resistance. These results give some insights into resistance to deltamethrin and into multiple resistance phenomena in populations of Ae. aegypti.

### Keywords
Insecticide resistance, Diagnostic concentration, Multiple resistance, Aedes aegypti, Cyp

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, Vectopôle Amazonien "Emile Abonnenc", Vector Adaptation and Control Unit, Cayenne, French Guiana, France INRS-Centre Armand Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Groupe de recherche en écologie microbienne, H7V 1B7, QC, Canada Global Health department, Institut Pasteur, Paris

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Dusfour
Institut Pasteur de la Guyane, Vectopôle Amazonien "Emile Abonnenc", Vector Adaptation and Control Unit, Cayenne, French Guiana, France INRS-Centre Armand Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Groupe de recherche en écologie microbienne, H7V 1B7, QC, Canada Global Health department, Institut Pasteur, Paris


