### Accession
PXD001988

### Title
cell surface glycoproteome liver and lung

### Description
Purpose Cell surface proteins are the primary means for a cell to sense and interact with its environment and their dysregulation has been linked to numerous diseases. In particular, the identification of proteins specific to a single tissue type or to a given disease phenotype may enable the characterization of novel therapeutic targets. We tested here the feasibility of a cell surface proteomics approach to identify pertinent markers directly in a clinically relevant tissue.  Experimental design We analyzed the cell surface proteome of freshly isolated primary heptatocytes using a glycocapture-specific approach combined with a robust bioinformatics filtering.  Results Using primary lung epithelial cell cultures as negative controls, we identified 32 hepatocyte-specific cell surface proteins candidates. We used mRNA expression to select six markers that may provide adequate specificity for targeting therapeutics to the liver.  Conclusions and clinical relevance We demonstrate the feasibility and the importance of conducting such studies directly in a clinically-relevant tissue. In particular, the cell surface proteome of freshly isolated hepatocytes differed substantially from cultured cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Glycocapture procedure The glycocapture protocol was performed as described by Wollscheid et al.  Nat. Biotechnol. 2009, 27, 378-386) with some modifications. Briefly, approximately 30x106cells attached either to the bottom of a flask (confluent cell culture) or plated on a modified polystyrene Petri dish (primary hepatocytes) were gently oxidized with meta-periodate and subsequently labeled with biocytin hydrazide. Cells were then lysed by sonication and a crude membrane fraction was isolated by differential centrifugation at 100,000g for 1 h at 4 °C. After washing with 1 M KCl and 0.1 M Na2CO3, constituent proteins were digested with trypsin and the peptide mixture incubated with streptavidin-coated resin to capture glycopeptides. The flow-through (FT), containing all non-glycopeptides was collected for further analysis. After extensive washing, glycopeptides were eluted from the resin using PNGase F and collected (eluate, EL). Peptides in both the FT and EL fractions were desalted by SPE, dried overnight in a speed-vac concentrator and kept at 4 °C until use.  2.3 Mass spectrometric data acquisition and protein identification Peptide samples were analyzed by nanoscale LC-ESI-MS/MS using a LTQ-Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (for a detailed protocol, see supplementary materials and methods). The EL and FT peptide mixture were dissolved in 20 l of buffer A and 5 l of a 1:10 (EL) or a 1:500 to a 1:1000 (FT) dilution were injected onto the system. Peptides were eluted using either a 1 h (EL) or a 3 h (FT) sigmoidal gradient. Survey scans (scanning range m/z 400-1650) were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 with the lock mass option enabled. Data-dependent MS/MS spectra of the five most abundant ions from the survey scan were recorded in the LTQ ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the SEQUEST search algorithm (SEQUEST version 27.0, revision 12, ThermoFisher) and searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase database (version 2011_07) filtered for “homo sapiens” (58772 sequences concatenated with their decoy entries). Data were searched with a mass tolerance of +/-5 ppm for parent ions and +/-1.0 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) was a static modification for the FT fraction while methionines (reduced/oxidized; +15.9949 Da) and asparagine (native/deglycosylated, +0.9839 Da) were considered as differential modifications for all analyses. Only fully tryptic peptides with no more than one miscleavage were considered for data analysis. Protein identification was achieved in a two-steps process. Protein identification was first performed using the combined EL and FT dataset and filtered at 1% protein FDR using the Roche algorithm “Clotho”. When possible, identifications were reduced to one single entry per protein family by keeping the canonical UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot naming if equivalent isoforms were reported. Second, glycoproteins were flagged in the combined EL/FT dataset by the presence of a corresponding glycopeptide in the EL fraction bearing the signature sequence “AsnAsp-Xxx-Ser/Thr” with Xxx≠Pro. Comparison between replicates, conditions, and cell lines was achieved by combining the protein identifications in Microsoft Excel and by presenting the data in the form of pivot tables. Only proteins with at least two different peptides identified in at least one experiment are reported, with the exception of glycoproteins identified solely by one glycopeptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Epithelial lung cells, Primary hepatocytes, Ltq-orbitrap, Glycocapture

### Affiliations
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development Roche Innovation Center Basel F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd

### Submitter
Axel Ducret

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Ducret
Roche Pharma Research and Early Development Roche Innovation Center Basel F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd CH-4070 Basel, Switzerland


