### Accession
PXD033983

### Title
Proteome characterization of synovial fluid polarized healthy monocytes

### Description
This project involves proteome characterization of healthy monocytes polarized (activated) with synovial fluid (SF) versus serum from patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). The objective is to investigate the influence of SF on monocytes at the proteome level, using serum polarized monocytes as a control. Monocytes were isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy donors following negative selection and were subsequently polarized overnight with 20% of a pool of either serum or SF. They were subsequently detached and used for proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Healthy monocytes from three donors were isolated through negative selection and polarized overnight at 37°C, 5% CO2, with 20% serum or synovial fluid. They were next detached, washed twice with PBS, and lysed using cold RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail. The samples were reduced with 5 µM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by alkylation using 10 µM iodoacetamide (IAA). Proteins were precipitated in 90% EtOH over night at -20°C. The samples were centrifuged at 14000g, 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellets were dried. The sample concentrations were determined and trypsination was performed (1:100 trypsin:protein ratio) overnight at 37°C. The samples were acidified and peptides were dried and resolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Monocytes, Inflammation, Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund University Faculty of Medicine, Lund, Skane, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Schmidt
Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund University Faculty of Medicine, Lund, Skane, Sweden


