### Accession
PXD009490

### Title
Fibrinogen  chain positive circulating exosomes are a colorectal cancer potential biomarker

### Description
Exosomes are small vesicles contain cellular nucleic acids, proteins, lipids and other substances secreted by living cells. The special structure of exosomes makes it possible to protect the inside contents exist in blood stably. Recent researches showed that exosomes are blame for tumor metastatic dissemination, recurrence and malignance, which makes them strong competitors in diagnosis of cancer. The proteomics of exosomes in circulatory system as well as the phosphorylation state of them through different stages of colorectal cancer (CRC) process remain rarely reported. Here we isolate and identify proteins and phosphorylated protein in exosomes from human plasma in healthy donors and different stages of CRC patients by prolonged ultracentrifugation and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. In this study, a total of 462 quantitative proteins were identified, meanwhile, the strategy allowed us to identify 177 quantifiable proteins along with 315 sites. Proteins with notable different levels are verified and fibrinogen  chain positive (FGA+) circulating exosomes (crExos) from patients and from mice could identify CRC with excellent sensitivity and specificity while perform very well in early diagnosis of adenomas. According to our findings, FGA+ crExos could serve as a potential non-invasive diagnostic and screening tool to detect early stages of CRC to facilitate possible curative surgical therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line and protein extraction The human colorectal cancer cell lines SW620 (CCL-227, LOT: 61867814) were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). SW620 cells were cultured in Leibovitz’s L-15 medium at 37°C under free gas exchange conditions with atmospheric air. LoVo cell line cultured from CRC patient of grade IV in DMEM medium was purchased from the Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). Cell lines mentioned above were all characterized by short tandem repeat (STR) markers (Shanghai Biowing Applied Biothechnology Co. LTD). Culture medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin. The SW620 cells’ supernatant was collected as below methods to isolate exosomes. The LoVo cells were digested by trypsin, resuspended in PBS and washed. Every 107 cells were resuspended in 50L protein lysis (Beyotime Biotechnology) for following use. Mice and clinical samples Animal studies and human sample collections were approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Zhejiang, P.R. China). All mouse work was performed in Zhejiang Chinese Medical University (permit number SYXK2008-0115). BALB/c female mice were purchased from the National Cancer Institute Tumor Repository (DTP/DCTD, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research). Human peripheral blood samples were obtained from healthy donor persons and/or histologically confirmed CRC patients with or without liver metastasis, respectively, at the Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine. All individuals provided informed consent for blood donation according to a protocol approved by the institutional review board (Number 2013-052).

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. Statistics Quantitative results are reported as means±standard deviation. Differences were detected using an independent sample t-test. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test were carried out in multigroup comparisons of the means with post hoc contrasts by Student–Newman–Keuls test. SPSS 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA) was used for data analysis, and the significance level was set at 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background</b>: Early screening for colorectal cancer (CRC) is essential to improve its prognosis. Liquid biopsies are increasingly being considered for diagnosing cancer due to low invasiveness and high reproducibility. In addition, circulating extracellular vesicles (crEVs, extracellular vesicles isolated from plasma) expressing tumour-specific proteins are potential biomarkers for various cancers. Here, we present a data-independent acquisition (DIA)-mass spectrometry (MS)-based diagnostic method for liquid biopsies. <b>Methods</b>: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from culture supernatants of human CRC cell lines, and plasma of patients with CRC at different tumour stages, by overnight ultracentrifugation coupled with sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Tumour-specific EV proteins were prioritized using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based shotgun proteomics and phosphoproteomics. The results were verified in a second independent cohort and a mouse tumour-bearing model using Western blotting (WB). The candidate biomarkers were further validated in a third cohort by DIA-MS. Finally, the DIA-MS methodology was accelerated to permit high-throughput detection of EV biomarkers in another independent cohort of patients with CRC and healthy controls. <b>Results</b>: High levels of total and phosphorylated fibronectin 1 (FN1) in crEVs, haptoglobin (HP), S100A9 and fibrinogen &#x3b1; chain (FGA) were significantly associated with cancer progression. FGA was the most dominant biomarker candidate. Analysis of the human CRC cell lines and the mouse model indicated that FGA+ crEVs were likely released by CRC cells. Furthermore, fast DIA-MS and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-MS both confirmed that FGA+ crEVs could distinguish colon adenoma with an area of curve (AUC) in the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.949 and patients with CRC (AUC of ROC is 1.000) from healthy individuals. The performance outperformed conventional tumour biomarkers. The DIA-MS quantification of FGA+ crEVs among three groups agreed with that from PRM-MS. <b>Conclusion</b>: DIA-MS detection of FGA+ crEVs is a potential rapid and non-invasive screening tool to identify early stage CRC. <b>Abbreviations:</b> FGA: fibrinogen &#x3b1; chain; CRC: colorectal cancer; crEVs: circulating extracellular vesicles; EV: extracellular vesicles;MS: mass spectrometry; WB: Western blotting; ROC: receiver operating characteristic; PRM: Parallel Reaction Monitoring; GPC1: Glypican-1; GO: Gene ontology; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; FN1: Fibronectin 1; HP: haptoglobin; TMT: Tandem Mass Tag; LC-MS/MS: liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry; DIA: data-independent acquisition; DDA: data-dependent acquisition; CiRT: Common internal Retention Time standards;AGC: Automatic gain control; AUC: area under curve.

### Keywords
Exosome, Protein mass spectrometry，biomarker, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, Medicine Cancer Institute
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Chenyu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Shu Zheng
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, Medicine Cancer Institute


