### Accession
PXD014395

### Title
Immunoprecipitate sample of Hela cells transfected with TRAPPC2-3xFLAG

### Description
IP of 3xFLAG-TRAPPC2 in state state and under Sodium Arsenite to find interactor

### Sample Protocol
Hela tasfected cells was lised and immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag, Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted and reduced in Laemmli buffer with 10 mM TCEP, boiled and alkylated with 120 mM acrylamide and fractionated by SDS-PAGE.Gel lanes were cut into 3 pieces, gel pieces were washed, destained, dehydrated and digested subsequently (1:100 ratio) overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin. The peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique (Rappsilber et al., 2003).LC-MS/MS analysis were loaded on a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to a quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human database (v. 2016) including a list of common contaminants.  Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Fixed modifications: Propionamide Variable modifications: Oxidation, Acetyl (N-term) Digestion: Tripsin Min. peptide length = 7 Max. peptide mass = 470Da False discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum = 1% For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min.valid number and two – sample t-test was performed. FDR = 5% S0 = 0

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3xflag-trappc2, Ip, Trappc2

### Affiliations
TIGEM
De Matteis laboratory, TIGEM, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy

### Submitter
Michele Santoro

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Antonietta De Matteis
De Matteis laboratory, TIGEM, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy


