### Accession
PXD020940

### Title
Oryza sativa cv. Nipponbare and Oryza barthii as unexpected tolerance and susceptibility sources against Schizotetranychus oryzae (Acari: Tetranychidae) mite infestation

### Description
Cultivated rice (Oryza sativa L.) is frequently exposed to multiple stresses, including Schizotetranychus oryzae mite infestation. Rice domestication has narrowed the genetic diversity of the species, leading to a wide susceptibility. This work aimed to observe the response of two wild rice species (Oryza barthii and O. glaberrima) and two O. sativa genotypes (cv. Nipponbare and f. spontanea) to S. oryzae infestation. Surprisingly, leaf damage, histochemistry, chlorophyll concentration and fluorescence showed that the wild species present higher level of leaf damage, increased accumulation of H2O2 and lower photosynthetic capacity when compared to O. sativa genotypes under infested conditions. Infestation decreased tiller number, except in Nipponbare. Infestation also caused the death of wild plants during the reproductive stage. While infestation did not affect the weight of 1,000 grains in both O. sativa genotypes, the number of panicles per plant was affected only in f. spontanea, and the percentage of full seeds per panicle and seed length were increased only in Nipponbare. Using proteomic analysis, we identified 195 differentially abundant proteins when comparing susceptible (O. barthii) and tolerant (Nipponbare) genotypes under control and infested conditions. O. barthii has a less abundant antioxidant arsenal and is unable to modulate proteins involved with general metabolism and energy production under infested condition. Nipponbare presents high abundance of detoxification-related proteins, general metabolic processes and energy production, suggesting that, under infested condition, the primary metabolism is maintained more active compared to O. barthii. Also, under infested conditions, Nipponbare presents higher levels of proline and a greater abundance of defense-related proteins, such as osmotin, ricin B-like lectin, and protease inhibitors. These differentially abundant proteins can be used as biotechnological tools in breeding programs aiming increased tolerance to mite infestation.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth conditions and mite infestation  Seeds of O. sativa cv. Nipponbare and O. sativa f. spontanea (hereafter “Nipponbare” and “weedy rice”, respectively), O. glaberrima and O. barthii species were surface sterilized and germinated for four days in an incubator (28oC) on paper soaked with distilled water. After germination, plantlets were transferred to vermiculite/soil mixture (1:3) for additional 14 days in greenhouse conditions, and then transferred to plastic buckets containing soil and water. Fifty plants of each cultivar/species (five plants per bucket) were infested by proximity with the bucket containing the highly infested plants placed in the center of the other buckets. Ten plants of each cultivar were cultivated without infestation (control condition).  Plant protein extraction and quantification  Three biological samples (250 mg of fresh matter) of control and EI leaves from O. barthii (mite-sensitive) and Nipponbare (mite-tolerant), each containing three leaves from three different plants, were subjected to protein extraction using Plant Total Protein Extraction Kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The protein concentration was measured using 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA).  Protein digestion For protein digestion, three biological replicates of 100 µg of proteins from O. barthii and Nipponbare leaves were used. Before the trypsin digestion step, protein samples were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform methodology to remove any detergent from samples (Nanjo et al. 2012), followed by resuspension in Urea 7 M and Thiourea 2 M buffer. Protein digestion was performed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology (Wiśniewski et al. 2009), with modifications described by Burrieza et al. (2019). Peptides were resuspended in 100 µL solution of 95% 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The resulting peptides were quantified by the A205 nm protein and peptide methodology, using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Mass spectrometry analysis  A nanoAcquity UPLC connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. Runs consisted of injecting 1 µg of digested peptides from each biological replicate. During separation, samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 μm C18 trap column (180 μm × 20 mm) at 5 μl/min during 3 min and then onto the nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical reversed phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL/min, with a column temperature of 45°C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used, with mobile phase A consisting of water (Tedia, Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution started at 7% B, then ramped from 7% B to 40% B up to 91.12 min, and from 40% B to 99.9% B until 92.72 min, being maintained at 99.9% until 106.00 min, then decreasing to 7% B until 106.1 min and kept 7% B until the end of experiment at 120.00 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 FWHM, with ion mobility, and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode; ion mobility separation (HDMSE ) using IMS wave velocity of 600 m/s, and helium and IMS gas flow of 180 and 90 ml/min respectively; the transfer collision energy ramped from 19 V to 55 V in high-energy mode; cone and capillary voltages of 30 V and 2750 V, respectively; and a source temperature of 70°C. In TOF parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuum mode with a mass range of 50 to 2,000 Da. The human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol/μl was used as an external calibrant and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectra acquisition was performed by MassLynx v4.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and database searching conditions were performed by ProteinLynx global server (PLGS; version 3.0.2) (Waters) and ISOQuant workflow software (Distler et al. 2014). The analysis used the following parameters: Apex3D of 150 counts for low energy threshold, 50 counts for elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to three, minimum fragment ion per protein equal to seven, minimum peptide per protein equal to two, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY). The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein was set to a maximum of 1 %, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. The analysis used the Oryza sativa subsp. japonica protein databank from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org//).  Comparative label-free quantification analysis was performed using ISOQuant software using the TOP3 approach (Distler et al. 2014). Only proteins identified by at least two peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids were considered for label-free quantitation. After data processing and to ensure the quality of results, only proteins present or absent (for unique proteins) in three out of three runs were accepted and submitted to differentially abundance analysis. Data were analyzed using Student’s t-test (two tailed). Proteins with P < 0.05 were considered up-regulated if the Log2 of fold change (FC) was greater than 0.5 and down-regulated if the Log2 of FC was less than -0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Cultivated rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i> L.) is frequently exposed to multiple stresses, including <i>Schizotetranychus oryzae</i> mite infestation. Rice domestication has narrowed the genetic diversity of the species, leading to a wide susceptibility. This work aimed to analyze the response of two African rice species (<i>Oryza barthii</i> and <i>Oryza glaberrima</i>), weedy rice (<i>O. sativa</i> f. <i>spontanea</i>), and <i>O. sativa</i> cv. Nipponbare to <i>S. oryzae</i> infestation. Surprisingly, leaf damage, histochemistry, and chlorophyll concentration/fluorescence indicated that the African species present a higher level of leaf damage, increased accumulation of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, and lower photosynthetic capacity when compared to <i>O. sativa</i> plants under infested conditions. Infestation decreased tiller number, except in Nipponbare, and caused the death of <i>O. barthii</i> and <i>O. glaberrima</i> plants during the reproductive stage. While infestation did not affect the weight of 1,000 grains in both <i>O. sativa</i>, the number of panicles per plant was affected only in <i>O. sativa</i> f. <i>spontanea</i>, and the percentage of full seeds per panicle and seed length were increased only in Nipponbare. Using proteomic analysis, we identified 195 differentially abundant proteins when comparing susceptible (<i>O. barthii</i>) and tolerant (Nipponbare) plants under control and infested conditions. <i>O. barthii</i> presents a less abundant antioxidant arsenal and is unable to modulate proteins involved in general metabolism and energy production under infested condition. Nipponbare presents high abundance of detoxification-related proteins, general metabolic processes, and energy production, suggesting that the primary metabolism is maintained more active compared to <i>O. barthii</i> under infested condition. Also, under infested conditions, Nipponbare presents higher levels of proline and a greater abundance of defense-related proteins, such as osmotin, ricin B-like lectin, and protease inhibitors (PIs). These differentially abundant proteins can be used as biotechnological tools in breeding programs aiming at increased tolerance to mite infestation.

### Keywords
Resistance, Wild species, Protease inhibitors, Proline, Osmotin

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences and Health Center, University of Taquari Valley - Univates, Lajeado, RS, Brazil
University of Taquari Valley - Univates

### Submitter
Raul Sperotto

### Lab Head
Dr Raul Antonio Sperotto
Biological Sciences and Health Center, University of Taquari Valley - Univates, Lajeado, RS, Brazil


