### Accession
PXD005009

### Title
Hadrurus spadix venom -  Venom-gland transcriptomics and venom proteomics of the black-back scorpion (Hadrurus spadix) reveal detectability challenges and an unexplored realm of animal toxin diversity

### Description
We used a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach to characterize the venom of a male and female of the black-back scorpion (Hadrurus spadix).

### Sample Protocol
Digested tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid at a final concentration of 250 ng/ul. Three digested Escherichia coli proteins were used as internal standards. We used 2,500 fmol of P31697 (Chaperone protein FimC), 250 fmol of P31658 (Protein deglycase 1), and 25 fmol of P00811 (Beta-lactamase ampC) per injection. A 2 ul aliquot was run on LC-MS/MS as follows. An externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) was used in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System. A 2 ul sample was aspirated into a 50 ul loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo u-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 um i.d.X10 cm). The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 uMx 15 cm nanoviper). Mobile phase A was composed of 99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was composed of 99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. A 60 minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed. The LC eluent was directly nanosprayed into Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). During the chromatographic separation, the Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-20 method for the Q Exactive HF, dynamically choosing the most abundant not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (350-1700). Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 10^5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Full scans (350-1700 m/z) were performed at 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution. Ions with single charge or charges more than seven as well as unassigned charge were excluded. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used. All measurements were performed at room temperature. To facilitate label-free quantification, all measurements were done with three technical replicates to account for machine-related variability.

### Data Protocol
Resultant raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SequestHT as the search engine with custom-generated FASTA databases and percolator as peptide validator. SequestHT search parameters used were as follows: enzyme name = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage = 2, minimum peptide length = 6, maximum peptide length = 144, maximum delta Cn = 0.05, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da, dynamic modifications,  carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da(C) and oxidation +15.995 Da(M). Protein and peptide identities were validated using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) software. Peptide identities were accepted based on a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identities were also accepted with an FDR of 1.0% and a minimum of one recognized peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The order Scorpiones is one of the most ancient and diverse lineages of venomous animals, having originated approximately 430 million years ago and diversified into 14 extant families. Although partial venom characterizations have been described for numerous scorpion species, we provided the first quantitative transcriptome/proteome comparison for a scorpion species using single-animal approaches. We sequenced the venom-gland transcriptomes of a male and female black-back scorpion (Hadrurus spadix) from the family Caraboctonidae using the Illumina sequencing platform and conducted independent quantitative mass-spectrometry analyses of their venoms. We identified 79 proteomically confirmed venom proteins, an additional 69 transcripts with homology to toxins from other species, and 596 nontoxin proteins expressed at high levels in the venom glands. The venom of H.&#xa0;spadix was rich in antimicrobial peptides, K<sup>+</sup>-channel toxins, and several classes of peptidases. However, the most diverse and one of the most abundant classes of putative toxins could not be assigned even a tentative functional role on the basis of homology, indicating that this venom contained a wealth of previously unexplored animal toxin diversity. We found good agreement between both transcriptomic and proteomic abundances across individuals, but transcriptomic and proteomic abundandances differed substantially within each individual. Small peptide toxins such as K<sup>+</sup>-channel toxins and antimicrobial peptides proved challenging to detect proteomically, at least in part due to the significant proteolytic processing involved in their maturation. In addition, we found a significant tendency for our proteomic approach to overestimate the abundances of large putative toxins and underestimate the abundances of smaller toxins.

### Keywords
Scorpion, Venom

### Affiliations
Florida State University

### Submitter
Darin Rokyta

### Lab Head
Dr Darin R. Rokyta
Florida State University


