### Accession
PXD015295

### Title
The plastidial Arabidopsis thaliana NFU1 delivers [4Fe-4S] clusters to specific client proteins

### Description
Proteins incorporating iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cofactors are required for a plethora of metabolic processes. Their maturation depends on three Fe-S cluster assembly machineries located in the cytosol, mitochondria and chloroplasts. After de novo formation on scaffold proteins, Fe-S centers are loaded on client proteins by use of Fe-S cluster transfer proteins. Among plastidial representatives of this latter category, NFU2 and NFU3 are required for the maturation of the [4Fe-4S] clusters found in photosystem I subunits acting upstream of HCF101. NFU2 is additionally required for the maturation of the [2Fe-2S] dihydroxyacid dehydratase, important for branched-chain amino acid synthesis. Here, we report that recombinant Arabidopsis thaliana NFU1 is able to solely assemble a [4Fe-4S] cluster per homodimer. We also provide insights into the specificity of NFU1 for the maturation of chloroplastic Fe-S proteins by performing co-immunoprecipitation experiments and assaying the physical interaction of NFU1 with many [4Fe-4S]-containing plastidial proteins using binary yeast two-hybrid assays. Interactions with two proteins involved in isoprenoid and thiamine biosynthesis, respectively 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl 4-diphosphate synthase (ISPG) and 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine phosphate synthase (THIC), have been further confirmed by bimolecular fluorescence complementation and in vitro Fe-S cluster transfer experiments. The additional interactions detected with SUFD and SUFA allowed building a model in which NFU1 receives its Fe-S cluster from the SUFBC2D scaffold complex and serves for the maturation of [4Fe-4S] client proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation of 14 days old seedling with antiGFP antibodies and LC-MS/MS experiment on a Qexactive Plus.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were matched against the TAIR10 + GFP database. For protein identification and quantification, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set up as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. At least two different peptides are necessary for protein identification and quantification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion. For the other characteristics, Maxquant default parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins incorporating iron-sulfur (Fe-S) co-factors are required for a plethora of metabolic processes. Their maturation depends on three Fe-S cluster assembly machineries in plants, located in the cytosol, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. After <i>de novo</i> formation on scaffold proteins, transfer proteins load Fe-S clusters onto client proteins. Among the plastidial representatives of these transfer proteins, NFU2 and NFU3 are required for the maturation of the [4Fe-4S] clusters present in photosystem I subunits, acting upstream of the high-chlorophyll fluorescence 101 (HCF101) protein. NFU2 is also required for the maturation of the [2Fe-2S]-containing dihydroxyacid dehydratase, important for branched-chain amino acid synthesis. Here, we report that recombinant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> NFU1 assembles one [4Fe-4S] cluster per homodimer. Performing co-immunoprecipitation experiments and assessing physical interactions of NFU1 with many [4Fe-4S]-containing plastidial proteins in binary yeast two-hybrid assays, we also gained insights into the specificity of NFU1 for the maturation of chloroplastic Fe-S proteins. Using bimolecular fluorescence complementation and <i>in vitro</i> Fe-S cluster transfer experiments, we confirmed interactions with two proteins involved in isoprenoid and thiamine biosynthesis, 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-(E)-butenyl-4-diphosphate synthase and 4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine phosphate synthase, respectively. An additional interaction detected with the scaffold protein SUFD enabled us to build a model in which NFU1 receives its Fe-S cluster from the SUFBC<sub>2</sub>D scaffold complex and serves in the maturation of specific [4Fe-4S] client proteins. The identification of the NFU1 partner proteins reported here more clearly defines the role of NFU1 in Fe-S client protein maturation in <i>Arabidopsis</i> chloroplasts among other SUF components.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
INRA
Unite Mixte de Recherches 1136 Université de Lorraine/INRA

### Submitter
Nathalie Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas Rouhier
Unite Mixte de Recherches 1136 Université de Lorraine/INRA


