### Accession
PXD023188

### Title
The protein-protein interaction network of the Drosophila Speciation Core Complex

### Description
In this study we described the protein-protein interaction network of the Drosophila Speciation Core Complex by analysing the interactome of its subunit: HMR, LHR, NLP, BOH1 (CG33213), BOH2 (CG4788) and HP1a. For this purpose we performed Affinity Purification coupled with Mass Spectrometry (AP-MS) in D. melanogaster SL2 cells using as bait the two hybrid incompatibility proteins HMR (n = 8) and LHR (n = 4), as well as NLP (n = 3), BOH1(CG33213, n = 4), BOH2 (CG4788, n = 5) and HP1a (n = 4). Each bait was targeted with at least one antibody (rat anti-LHR 12F4, mouse anti-HP1a 2C09, rabbit anti-Nlp, anti-FLAG-M2 for FLAG-CG33213 and FLAG-CG4788), while HMR was targeted with three different antibodies (rat anti-HMR 2C10 and 12F1, anti-FLAG-M2 for FLAG-HMR). Individual replicates and antibodies used are listed in samples_table.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts from Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation as follows. α-FLAG immunoprecipitation was performed using 20 μL of packed agarose-conjugated mouse α-FLAG antibody (M2 Affinity gel, A2220 Sigma-Aldrich). The other IPs were performed by non-covalently coupling the specific antibodies with 30 uL of Protein A/G Sepharose beads. Rabbit anti-NLP, mouse anti-HP1a were directly incubated with the beads, while rat α-HMR and α-LHR were incubated with beads that were pre-coupled with 12 μL of a rabbit anti-rat bridging antibody (Dianova, 312-005-046). FLAG-IPs in non-FLAG containing nuclear extracts were used as mock controls for FLAG-IPs. For all other IPs, unspecific IgG coupled to Protein A/G Sepharose or Protein A/G Sepharose alone were used as mock controls.  After the washes, the beads containing the immunoprecipitated proteins were directly digested with trypsin and desalted with C18 stage tips before being injected into the mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were subjected to nanoRP-LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 nano chromatography system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with the Andromeda algorithm of the MaxQuant package (v1.6.7.0)against the Flybase reference database dmel-all-translation-r6.12.fasta including reverse sequences and contaminants. Default settings were used except: Variable modifications = Oxidation (M); Unique and razor, Min. peptides = 1; Match between windows = 0.8 min. Downstream analysis on the proteinGroups.txt file were performed in R (v4.0.1). Data were filtered for Reverse, Potential.contaminant and Only.identified.by.site. iBAQ values were log2 transformed and imputed using the R package DEP (v1.10.0, impute function with following settings: fun = "man",shift = 1.8, scale = 0.3). Statistical tests were performed by fitting a linear model and applying empirical Bayes moderation using the limma package (v3.44.3). Each group of bait IPs was compared with a pool of all control samples (CTRL and CTRL_FLAG, i.e. IgG and FLAG mock IPs). For each bait, result tables with log2 fold-change (IP vs CTRL) and negative log10(p-value) are provided.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin; speciation; nucleolus; centromere; heterochromatin; chromocenter; drosophila; development; hybrids; nlp; nph; nucleoplasmin; nucleophosmin; hp1a; hmr; lhr; boh1; boh2;

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center of the Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Biomedical Center - Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany

### Submitter
Andrea Lukacs

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Biomedical Center - Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Germany


