### Accession
PXD009381

### Title
Chikungunya virus phosphoproteomics

### Description
SILAC-labeled MRC-5 cells were seeded in 75-cm2 flasks 1 day before infection with CHIKV-LS3 [1] at MOI 5. One hour post infection (h p.i.), the inoculum was removed and replaced with SILAC DMEM containing 2% dialyzed FBS, 0.280 mM arginine, 0.384 mM lysine, 0.5 mM proline, 25 mM HEPES, 2 mM L-Glutamine and 1% NEAA. At 2, 8, and 12 h p.i., infected and mock-infected cells were harvested for phosphoproteomics analysis by lysis in 4% SDS, 0.1M Tris pH 7.6, followed by heating to 96°C for 10 min. At 12 h p.i,. protein lysates for western blot (WB) analysis were harvested in 4× Laemmli sample buffer (LSB) (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 40% glycerol, 8% SDS, 40 mM DTT, 0,04 mg/ml bromophenol blue) and cells grown on coverslips were fixed in 3% PFA in PBS . The experiment was performed in duplicate with a label swap.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion The protein concentration of the SILAC cell lysates was determined using the bicin chonicic acid assay (Pierce). Digestion of the proteins was performed using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method [2], for which equal amounts (900 µg) of mock and infected lysates were mixed and DTT was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by a 5-min incubation at 70°C. Samples were loaded on two 15-ml 30 kDa Microcon filter devices (Millipore), which were washed twice with 8 M urea 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5, while cysteines were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the same buffer. Samples were washed 3 times with 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris pH 8. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature using 20 ug endoLysC (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) in the same buffer per filter device. The sample was diluted fourfold with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.4 containing 20 ug trypsin (Worthington Chemical Corporation), and digested for 4h at room temperature. Peptides were collected by centrifugation, acidified to a final percentage of 1% TFA, and desalted using solid phase extraction. Peptides were eluted in 20/80/0.1 milliQ/acetonitrile (ACN) (Actu-All Chemicals)/trifluoric acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich) (v/v/v).  Phosphopeptide enrichment  The samples were enriched for phosphopeptides by Hydroxy Acid Modified Metal Oxide Chromatography (HAMMOC) [3]. Per 500 ug peptide digest a 200 ul tip with an Octyl C8 membrane (Empore) and 2.5 mg Titansphere TiO2 10 µm (GL Sciences) were used. The tips were preconditioned with 20/80/0.1 milliQ/ACN/TFA (v/v/v) (solution A) and equilibrated with 300 mg/ml DL Lactic acid (Fluka Analytical) in solution A. Peptide samples were mixed 1:1 with 300 mg/ml DL Lactic acid in solution A and loaded on the tips. The tips were washed with 300 mg/ml DL Lactic acid in solution A and solution A. 100 ul 20% phosphoric acid (Sigma-Aldrich) was put in collection tubes and phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 ul 0.5% piperidine (Actu-All Chemicals) followed by 50 ul 5% piperidine. Peptides were desalted on 200 ul tips with an SDB-XC membrane (Empore). Tips were preconditioned with solution A and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded on the tips and the tips were washed with 0.1 %TFA. Peptides were eluted with solution A and lyophilized in a CHRIST RVC-2-18 CDplus.  Mass spectrometry Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed via on-line C18-nano-HPLC-MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 30% solvent B (10/90/0.1 water/ACN/FA v/v/v) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in top10-mode. Parameters were resolution 70,500 at an AGC target value of 3,000,000, maximum fill time of 250 ms (full scan), and resolution 17,500 at an AGC target value of 200,000/maximum fill time of 80 ms for MS/MS at an intensity threshold of 2,500. Apex trigger was set to 1 to 15 seconds, and allowed charges were 2-6. Each sample was analyzed in duplo.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw data files were analyzed using Maxquant 1.4.0.3 [4] using the Andromeda search engine [5]. Databases used for the main search were UNIPROT/KB_Human (88,665 entries) and a custom-made database containing the protein sequences of CHIKV-LS3 (11 entries) using the GenBank sequence (accession KC149888) [1]. For the first search a smaller database, human.first.search (15,612 entries) containing a subset of human protein sequences was used. A list of common contaminants was included in the search. To reach a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 a concatenated reversed database (KR special amino acids) was used, FDR at the peptide level was also 0.01. Enzyme specificity was Trypsin/P. Variable modifications included in the search were oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and phospho (STY), whereas carbamidomethyl (C) was included as a fixed modification. Up to 3 missed cleavages and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide were allowed. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40 and the minimum delta score for modified peptides was set to 17. Match between runs was turned on with a matching time window of 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chikungunya virus chikv phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
LUMC
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
PA van Veelen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter van Veelen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center


