### Accession
PXD047238

### Title
Parechovirus infection in human brain organoids: host innate inflammatory response and not neuro-infectivity correlates to neurologic disease

### Description
Picornaviruses are a leading cause of central nervous system (CNS) infections. While genotypes such as Parechovirus A3 (PeV-A3) and echovirus 11 (E11) can elicit severe neurological disease, the highly prevalent PeV-A1 is not associated with CNS disease. Here, we expand our current understanding of these differences in PeV-A CNS disease using human brain organoids and clinical isolates of PeV-A genotypes. Our data indicates that PeV-A1 and A3 specific differences in neurological disease are not due to infectivity of CNS cells as both viruses productively infect brain organoids with a similar cell tropism. Proteomic analysis showed that PeV-A infection significantly alters the host cell metabolism. The inflammatory response following PeV-A3 (and E11 infection) was significantly more potent than that upon PeV-A1 infection. Collectively, our findings align with clinical observations and suggest a role for inflammatory-mediated neurology, rather than viral replication, in PeV-A3 (and E11) infection.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by carrying out freezing and thawing cycles four times. The plates were frozen by submerging in liquid nitrogen for 2 min and immediately heated at 37°C for another 2 min. Extracted proteins were denatured by heating at 90°C for 5 min and plates were centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 2 min. One µL of 25 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WA) in 100 mM TEAB was addedand incubated at 37°C overnight. TMTpro (16plex) reagents were used for labeling, 1 μL of the respective TMTpro reagent dissolved in dry acetonitrile (ACN) at a concentration of 10 μg/μL was dispensed in the wells using the MANTIS robot. After incubation at room temperature (RT) for 1 h the reaction was quenched by dispensing 1 μL of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma) to each well and incubating the plates at RT for 15 min. The dried TMTpro-labelled peptides were resuspended in 7 μL of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides reconstituted in solvent A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) were injected onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm,100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 25 cm long EASY-Spray C18 column (ES802A, Thermo Fisher Scientific) installed in an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatographic separation was carried out at 300 nL/min applying an organic modifier gradient from 4% to 5.5% in 29 minutes, and then further increased to 6% B in another minute. The flow rate was then reduced to 100 nL/min, and a linear gradient was applied where %B was increased from 6% to 27% in 100 min.  LC-MS/MS data were acquired on a Q Exactive HF hybrid quarupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using nano-electrospray ionization in positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 1.9 kV. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode parameters were set as follows: isolation the most intensive precursors in full mass spectra for 2 s at 120,000 mass resolution in the m/z range of 350−1500, maximum allowed injection time of 100 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000, and dynamic exclusion for 45 s. Precursor isolation width was set as 1.4 Th with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) energy 35% at a resolution of 50,000, maximum injection time of 100 ms in a single microscan.

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw files were analyzed on Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were searched against both human (SwissProt) and PEV databases with MS Amanda 2.0 allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Mass tolerance for the precursor and fragment ions were set as 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine; deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and TMTpro of lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications. The PSMs were filtered at target false discovery rate of 1% (strict) and 5% (relaxed), with validation based on q-values. Correction was applied to account for known isotopic impurities in the TMT batch used. Normalization was done based on total peptide amount. Normalized protein abundances were extracted from the search results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Picornavirus, Brain organoids

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Akos Vegvari

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


