### Accession
PXD018207

### Title
ATAD5 regulates R-loop by maintaining RNA helicase level and unloading PCNA at the replication fork

### Description
R-loops are formed when replicative forks collide with the transcriptional machinery and can cause genomic instability. However, it is unclear how R-loops are regulated at transcription-replication conflicts (TRC) sites and how replisome proteins are regulated to prevent R-loop formation or mediate R-loop tolerance. Here, we report that ATAD5, a PCNA unloader, plays dual functions to reduce R-loops both under normal and replication stress conditions. ATAD5 interacts with RNA helicases such as DDX1, DDX5, DDX21 and DHX9 and increases the abundance of these helicases at replication forks to facilitate R-loop resolution. Depletion of ATAD5 or RNA helicases consistently increases R-loops during the S phase and reduces the replication rate, both of which are enhanced by replication stress. In addition to R-loop resolution, ATAD5 prevents the generation of new R-loops behind the replication forks by unloading PCNA which, otherwise, accumulates and persists on DNA, causing a collision with the transcription machinery. Depletion of ATAD5 reduces transcription rates due to PCNA accumulation. Consistent with the role of ATAD5 and RNA helicases in maintaining genomic integrity by regulating R-loops, the corresponding genes were mutated or downregulated in several human tumors.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with Strep-tagII-ATAD5 for 48 h; then, nuclear extracts were prepared, and lysates were incubated with Streptactin-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Bead-bound proteins were washed and eluted with 2.5 mM d-Desthiobiotin (Sigma-Aldrich) in buffer X. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and then visualized by staining with Coomassie blue. For LC-MS/MS analyses, gel lanes were sliced into bands and processed as follows. Briefly, the acetylated protein bands were divided into 10-mm sections and in-gel digested with trypsin. Trypsin digest products were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler, a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75-μm inner diameter, 2-cm length), and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75-μm inner diameter, 15-cm length, 3-μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific. Samples were then subjected to electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nL·min−1. The chromatography system was coupled in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Obtained spectra were screened against the UniProt human database using Proteome Discoverer Sorcerer 2.1 software with a SEQUEST-based search algorithm. The comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4 Q+S.

### Publication Abstract
R-loops are formed when replicative forks collide with the transcriptional machinery and can cause genomic instability. However, it is unclear how R-loops are regulated at transcription-replication conflict (TRC) sites and how replisome proteins are regulated to prevent R-loop formation or mediate R-loop tolerance. Here, we report that ATAD5, a PCNA unloader, plays dual functions to reduce R-loops both under normal and replication stress conditions. ATAD5 interacts with RNA helicases such as DDX1, DDX5, DDX21 and DHX9 and increases the abundance of these helicases at replication forks to facilitate R-loop resolution. Depletion of ATAD5 or ATAD5-interacting RNA helicases consistently increases R-loops during the S phase and reduces the replication rate, both of which are enhanced by replication stress. In addition to R-loop resolution, ATAD5 prevents the generation of new R-loops behind the replication forks by unloading PCNA which, otherwise, accumulates and persists on DNA, causing a collision with the transcription machinery. Depletion of ATAD5 reduces transcription rates due to PCNA accumulation. Consistent with the role of ATAD5 and RNA helicases in maintaining genomic integrity by regulating R-loops, the corresponding genes were mutated or downregulated in several human tumors.

### Keywords
Pcna, Dead-box rna helicase, Atad5, R-loop, Replication stress

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Center for Genomic Integrity, Institute for Basic Science, Ulsan, Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyoo-young Lee
Center for Genomic Integrity, Institute for Basic Science, Ulsan, Korea


