### Accession
PXD017518

### Title
Cholesteryl α-D-glucoside 6-acyltransferase enhances the adhesion of Helicobacter pylori to gastric epithelium

### Description
Cellular locations of (Cholesteryl α-D-glucoside 6-acyltransferase) CGAT   To study the cellular location of CGAT, based on our pervious experiments, the CGAT activity was observed in the outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), rather than in the culture medium, suggesting that CGAT resided in the outer membrane can be enclosed in the OMVs and secreted to the extracellular space. We then performed proteomic analysis for OMVs. Based on proteomic analysis, we found CGAT was present in the OMVs isolated from the strains of H. pylori 26695 and ΔCGT-knock-out, instead of ΔCGAT-knock-out strain.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. After normal staining and destaining procedures, the desirable bands were cut into small slices and completely destained with 50% ACN in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Reduction was performed by using 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM ABC buffer at 37 °C for 1 h. The alkylation was performed by using 100 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC buffer at room temperature for 1 h in dark. Gel slices were then washed 4 times with 50% ACN in 25 mM ABC buffer for 15 min each and dried after the addition of 100% ACN. Lys-C and Trypsin in 25 mM ABC buffer were added sequentially to digest the proteins for 16 h at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted by sonication of the gel slices in 50% ACN and 5% trifluoroacetic acid for 2 min (repeatedly sonicated 10 sec and relaxed 10 sec) twice. After centrifugation, the supernatants were transferred into new tubes and evaporated. A Zip-Tip desalting procedure was then performed. After the samples had been washed with 0.1% formic acid, they were eluted with 50% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The samples were then dried and subjected to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mascot database searching was used for protein identification. The data were selected with a false discovery rate (FDR) <1%. The searching was performed on the concatenated MGF files with an ion score cutoff of 50 and a significance threshold of p < 0.05. Only peptides with ion scores over 50 were considered (bold peptide), and only proteins with at least one unique peptide (red bold in Mascot) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Helicobacter pylori, the most common etiologic agent of gastric diseases including gastric cancer, is auxotrophic for cholesterol and has to hijack it from gastric epithelia. Upon uptake, the bacteria convert cholesterol to cholesteryl 6'-O-acyl-&#x3b1;-D-glucopyranoside (CAG) to promote lipid raft clustering in the host cell membranes. However, how CAG appears in the host to exert the pathogenesis still remains ambiguous. Herein we identified hp0499 to be the gene of cholesteryl &#x3b1;-D-glucopyranoside acyltransferase (CGAT). Together with cholesteryl glucosyltransferase (catalyzing the prior step), CGAT is secreted via outer membrane vesicles to the host cells for direct synthesis of CAG. This significantly enhances lipid rafts clustering, gathers adhesion molecules (including Lewis antigens and integrins &#x3b1;5, &#x3b2;1), and promotes more bacterial adhesion. Furthermore, the clinically used drug amiodarone was shown as a potent inhibitor of CGAT to effectively reduce the bacterial adhesion, indicating that CGAT is a potential target of therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Cholesteryl glucoside, Lipid raft, Integrin, Helicobacter pylori, Outer membrane vesicle, Acyltransferase

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, No. 128 Academic Road Section 2, Nan-Kang, Taipei, 11529
Chun-Hung Lin's Lab, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, No. 128 Academic Road Section 2, Nan-Kang, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan

### Submitter
Hau-Ming Jan

### Lab Head
Dr Chun-Hung Lin
Chun-Hung Lin's Lab, Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, No. 128 Academic Road Section 2, Nan-Kang, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan


