### Accession
PXD022106

### Title
Antagonism of the Mu-Delta Opioid Receptor Heterodimer Enhances Opioid Anti-Nociception by Activating Src and CaMKII Signaling

### Description
The opioid receptors are important regulators of pain, reward, and addiction. Limited evidence suggests the mu and delta opioid receptors form a heterodimer (MDOR), which may act as a negative feedback brake on opioid-induced analgesia. However, evidence for the MDOR in vivo is indirect and limited, and there are few selective tools available. We recently published the first MDOR-selective antagonist, D24M, allowing us to test the role of the MDOR in mice. We thus co-treated CD-1 mice with D24M and opioids in tail flick, paw incision, and chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy pain models. D24M treatment enhanced oxymorphone anti-nociception in all models by 52.3%-628%. This enhancement could not be replicated with the mu and delta selective antagonists CTAP and naltrindole, and D24M had a mild transient effect in the Rotarod test, suggesting this increase is selective to the MDOR. However, D24M had no effect on morphine or buprenorphine, suggesting that only specific opioids interact with the MDOR. To find a mechanism we performed phosphoproteomic analysis on brainstems of mice. We found that the kinases Src and CaMKII were repressed by oxymorphone, which was restored by D24M. We were able to confirm the role of Src and CaMKII in D24M-enhanced anti-nociception using small molecule inhibitors (KN93, Src-I1). Together these results provide direct in vivo evidence that the MDOR acts as an opioid negative feedback brake, which occurs via the repression of Src and CaMKII signal transduction. These results further suggest that MDOR antagonism could be a means to improve clinical opioid therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were injected with Vehicle or 1 nmol D24M icv, 5 min, followed by Vehicle or 0.32 mg/kg oxymorphone subcutaneous (sc) for 20 min. The animals were then sacrificed by rapid cervical dislocation, and the brainstems dissected out and flash frozen on liquid nitrogen. Soluble protein was extracted by dounce homogenization using a lysis buffer, with a 2 hour incubation and the supernatant collected by centrifugation at 13,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein quantitation assay from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). To determine global differences in protein phosphorylation abundance 5mg of protein lysate per sample (n=4) was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment using sequential enrichment from metal oxide affinity chromatography per manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
). Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification. In an automated format, .raw files were imported and converted into two-dimensional maps (y-axis = time, x-axis =m/z) followed by selection of a reference run for alignment purposes. An aggregate data set containing all peak information from all samples was created from the aligned runs, which was then further narrowed down by selecting only +2, +3, and +4 charged ions for further analysis. The samples were then grouped in wild-type versus knockdown. A peak list of fragment ion spectra was exported in Mascot generic file (.mgf) format and searched against the mouse SwissProt database using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6). The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; 13C=1. The resulting Mascot .xml file was then imported into Progenesis, allowing for peptide/protein assignment, while peptides with a Mascot Ion Score of <25 were not considered for further analysis. Precursor ion-abundance values for peptide ions were normalized to all proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The opioid receptors are important regulators of pain, reward, and addiction. Limited evidence suggests the mu and delta opioid receptors form a heterodimer (MDOR), which may act as a negative feedback brake on opioid-induced analgesia. However, evidence for the MDOR in vivo is indirect and limited, and there are few selective tools available. We recently published the first MDOR-selective antagonist, D24M, allowing us to test the role of the MDOR in mice. We thus cotreated CD-1 mice with D24M and opioids in tail flick, paw incision, and chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy pain models. D24M treatment enhanced oxymorphone antinociception in all models by 54.7% to 628%. This enhancement could not be replicated with the mu and delta selective antagonists CTAP, naltrindole, and naloxonazine, and D24M had a mild transient effect in the rotarod test, suggesting this increase is selective to the MDOR. However, D24M had no effect on morphine or buprenorphine, suggesting that only specific opioids interact with the MDOR. To find a mechanism, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis on brainstems of mice. We found that the kinases Src and CaMKII were repressed by oxymorphone, which was restored by D24M. We were able to confirm the role of Src and CaMKII in D24M-enhanced antinociception using small molecule inhibitors (KN93 and Src-I1). Together, these results provide direct in vivo evidence that the MDOR acts as an opioid negative feedback brake, which occurs through the repression of Src and CaMKII signal transduction. These results further suggest that MDOR antagonism could be a means to improve clinical opioid therapy.

### Keywords
Opiod mdor oxymorphone nociception

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr John Streicher
Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson


