### Accession
PXD014663

### Title
The salivary gland proteome of root-galling grape phylloxera (Daktulosphaira vitifoliae Fitch) feeding on Vitis spp.

### Description
Herbivory plant-parasite interactions depend on the delivery of effector molecules by the invading insect species. Sedentary gall forming insects, such as grape phylloxera (Daktulosphaira vitifoliae FITCH, Phylloxeridae) secrete multiple effectors into host plant tissues that alter host cellular functions to the benefit of the insect. Analyses revealed 420 putative ‘DvEffectors’ were detected in salivary glands, dissected from root-feeding vs. starving D. vitifoliae larvae reared on Teleki 5C (V. berlandieri x V. riparia) under controlled growth conditions (25±3°C, 60% rH) by proteomic mass spectrometry and in-silico secretory prediction. Sixty-two conserved DvEffectors were shared with the aphid species A. pisum, M. persicae and R. padi including candidate effector proteins involved in feeding site establishment, plant defence suppression and nutrient uptake

### Sample Protocol
Dormant single eye cuttings of the rootstock Teleki 5C (V. berlandieri x V. riparia, clone Gm 6-52) were propagated in Jiffy-7 pots (40 mm; Jiffy Products International AS, Norway) under controlled greenhouse conditions. In total 48 rooted plants were transplanted in four growth containers (38 x 28 x 20 cm) containing a mixed substrate of perlite and foamed clay (1:1). The growth containers were located in a climate chamber set to (25°C, 60% rH and 16 h photoperiod) and fertigated weekly (0.25‰ Ferty 3 MEGA) in quarantine conditions [50, 51]. Two hundred eggs of a D. vitifoliae single founder lineage were placed adjacent to the roots of each plant growth container. Twelve plants (one container) remained not inoculated in order to harvest non-infested root tip (control) samples.   After 50 days feeding D. vitifoliae L3 larvae [52] were carefully removed from root galls and submerged in ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with pH 7.0 (VWR, Radnor, USA) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (0.2 mM, Complete Mini, Roche, Basel, CH). For each biological sample the salivary glands of 100 larvae were dissected under the binocular using two metallic needles and immediately snap-frozen in liquid N2. The salivary gland samples for the qRT-PCR analyses were collected likewise, but from L3 larvae submerged in a PBS buffer containing RNAlater (Qiagen, Hilden, DE). For the qRT-PCR analyses salivary glands were dissected from feeding (SG0) and starving D. vitifoliae larvae (SG24). For the starvation treatment, feeding L3 larvae were gently removed from the root galls and kept without plant contact on moist filter paper in isolated petri dishes for 24 h at 25±3°C in the dark simulating equal environmental conditions. For each treatment four or three biological samples were collected and stored at -80°C for the subsequent proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, respectively.  Salivary glands were homogenized with a motorised pestle in 150 µl lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche, Complete Mini). Samples were briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 9000 g for 5 min to pellet the cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and purified using the 2D clean-up Kit (GE Heath Care, Chicago, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions (procedure A) and the resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µl of 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and quantified using the Qubit Protein assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). 20 µl of this resuspension was removed for protein digestion and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample. Proteins were reduced with 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 20 min and alkylated with 0.55 M iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 15 min, in the dark. 1 µl of a 1% w/v solution of Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) and 1 µg of Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) was added and the protein/trypsin mixture was incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was terminated by adding 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and incubation at room temperature for 10 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 × g and a volume equivalent to 40 µg of pre-digested protein was removed and purified for mass spectrometry using ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Burlington USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions and the resulting eluant was concentrated with a SpeedyVac (Savant DNA120, Thermo Scientific Waltham, USA) and resuspended in acetonitrile (2% v/v); TFA (0.05% v/v) buffer.   A volume equivalent to 1 µg of tryptic peptides was loaded onto a QExactive high resolution accurate mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Waltham, USA) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific Waltham, USA). The peptides were separated by a 2% to 40% gradient of acetonitrile on a Biobasic C18 PicofritTM column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 120 minute reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 140,000 resolution and a range of 300-1700 m/z was followed by an MS/MS scan, resolution 17,500 and a range of 200-2000 m/z, selecting the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was performed using MaxQuant v1.5.6.5 (http://www.maxquant.org) to correlate data against the predicted protein set derived from the D. vitifoliae genome version 3.2 [53] produced and provided by the International Aphid Genomic Consortium (IAGC)  (bipaa.genouest.org/is/aphidbase) and a contaminant sequence set provided by MaxQuant. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed, ranked on their average MS intensities and proteins not found in three of the four replicates were omitted from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The successful parasitisation of a plant by a phytophagous insect is dependent on the delivery of effector molecules into the host. Sedentary gall forming insects, such as grape phylloxera (Daktulosphaira vitifoliae Fitch, Phylloxeridae), secrete multiple effectors into host plant tissues that alter or modulate the cellular and molecular environment to the benefit of the insect. The identification and characterisation of effector proteins will provide insight into the host-phylloxera interaction specifically the gall-induction processes and potential mechanisms of plant resistance. Using proteomic mass spectrometry and in-silico secretory prediction, 420 putative effectors were determined from the salivary glands or the root-feeding D. vitifoliae larvae reared on Teleki 5C (V. berlandieri x V. riparia). Among them, 170 conserved effectors were shared between D. vitifoliae and fourteen phytophagous insect species. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of five conserved effector candidates (protein disulfide-isomerase, peroxidoredoxin, peroxidase and a carboxypeptidase) revealed that their gene expression decreased, when larvae were starved for 24 h, supporting their assignment as effector molecules. The D. vitifoliae effectors identified here represent a functionally diverse group, comprising both conserved and unique proteins that provide new insight into the D. vitifoliae-Vitis spp. interaction and the potential mechanisms by which D. vitifoliae establishes the feeding site, suppresses plant defences and modulates nutrient uptake.

### Keywords
Daktulosphaira vitifoliae, Phylloxera, Proteomics, Effectors, Salivary gland

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.


