### Accession
PXD023259

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles and cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles and cells isolated from primary cells were submitted to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides mixture (4.5 µL cell samples and 4.0 µL EV samples) were analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems) with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were subsequently separated in a 2–90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using a PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm × ID75, 5 µm particle size, New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 212 min (cells samples) and 80 min (EVs samples), in which a gradient of 35% acetonitrile is reached in 175 min and 40 min, respectively. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the source temperature was set to 275 °C. The instrument methods employed for LTQ Orbitrap Velos were set up in DDA mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000, and the 20 most intense peptide ions (top 20) with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5000 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by CID (collision-induced dissociation) with a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500 peptides, an exclusion duration of 60 s and a repetition count of 1. An activation Q of 0.25 and an activation time of 10 ms were used. The run order was randomized and blocked using the open-source statistical programming language R.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.8 software, and MS/MS spectra were searched against The Mouse UniProt database (released December 2020, 63,724 sequences, and 28,586,808 residues) using the Andromeda search engine. As search parameters, a tolerance of 10 ppm was considered for precursor ions (MS search) and 1 Da for fragment ions (MS/MS search), with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered variable modifications. A maximum of a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for both the protein and peptide identification. Protein quantification was performed using the LFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant software, with a minimal ratio count of 1 and a window of 2 min for matching between runs. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus v.1.5.2.6 software (4) which is available in the MaxQuant package. Identified protein entries were processed, excluding reverse sequences and those identified “only by site” entries. Contaminants were not removed from the dataset. Protein abundance, which was calculated based on the normalized spectrum intensity (LFQ intensity), was log2-transformed.  Significance was assessed using ANOVA to identify differentially expressed proteins among the samples with (cell samples) or without (EV samples) P-values adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini−Hochberg FDR method, adj. P-value < 0.05. Exclusive and common proteins from each comparison are presented as a Venn diagram generated using the InteractiVenn tool. For data visualization, heat maps with log2 LFQ intensities were built using the open-source Metaboanalyst software using Euclidean distance with Ward clustering algorithm. The Enrichr database(http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/) was used to perform pathway enrichment analysis, including kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and WikiPathways from https://www.wikipathways.org/index.php/WikiPathways.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of the administration of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) may vary according to the source. We hypothesized that MSC-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) obtained from bone marrow (BM), adipose (AD), or lung (L) tissues may also lead to different effects in sepsis. We profiled the proteome from EVs as a first step toward understanding their mechanisms of action. Polymicrobial sepsis was induced in C57BL/6 mice by cecal ligation and puncture (SEPSIS) and SHAM (control) animals only underwent laparotomy. Twenty-four hours after surgery, animals in the SEPSIS group were randomized to receive saline or 3 &#xd7; 10<sup>6</sup> MSC-derived EVs from BM, AD, or L. The diffuse alveolar damage was decreased with EVs from all three sources. In kidneys, BM-, AD-, and L-EVs reduced edema and expression of interleukin-18. Kidney injury molecule-1 expression decreased only in BM- and L-EVs groups. In the liver, only BM-EVs reduced congestion and cell infiltration. The size and number of EVs from different sources were not different, but the proteome of the EVs differed. BM-EVs were enriched for anti-inflammatory proteins compared with AD-EVs and L-EVs. In conclusion, BM-EVs were associated with less organ damage compared with the other sources of EVs, which may be related to differences detected in their proteome.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; primary cells; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CNPEM
National Laboratory of Biosciences, CNPEM, Campinas,Brazil

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences, CNPEM, Campinas,Brazil


