### Accession
PXD040948

### Title
The heme-responsive PrrH sRNA regulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa pyochelin gene expression

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that requires iron for growth and virulence, yet this nutrient is sequestered by the innate immune system during infection. When iron is limiting, P. aeruginosa expresses the PrrF1 and PrrF2 small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs), which post-transcriptionally repress expression of non-essential iron-containing proteins thus sparing this nutrient for more critical processes.The genes for the PrrF1 and PrrF2 sRNAs are arranged in tandem on the chromosome, allowing for the transcription of a longer heme-responsive sRNA, termed PrrH. While the functions of PrrF1 and PrrF2 have been studied extensively, the role of PrrH in P. aeruginosa physiology and virulence is not well understood. In this study, we performed transcriptomic and proteomic studies to identify the PrrH regulon.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and growth conditions:  P. aeruginosa strains were maintained on LB or BHI agar or broth. Strains carrying the complementation plasmids were maintained with carbenicillin (250 µg/mL). Media was supplemented with iron or heme as follows: 50 nM FeCl3 (-Fe), 100 µM FeCl3 (+Fe), and 1 µM or 5 µM Heme (+He) prepared. Overnight cultures were grown in LB or BHI broth, aerobically (250 RPM, 37˚C) and washed in M9 media (Teknova, Hollister, CA) prior to inoculating into M9 supplemented with iron or heme to a starting OD600=0.05. Shaking cultures were grown in 1:10 (media:flask) ratios, shaking aerobically at 250 RPM, 37˚C and collected at 8 hours for analyses. Static cultures were grown in 24-well cell culture plates (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmunster, Austria) at 37˚C and collected at 8 hours for analyses. For ambient light conditions, cultures were grown in a well-lit room (fluorescent overhead lights and near a window during the day). For infrared (IR) light conditions, plates were placed under a 730 nM LED Lightbar (Forever Green Indoors, Inc, Seattle, WA). Plates were wrapped in foil for dark conditions. For RNA isolation, cultures were mixed with an equal volume of RNALater (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and stored at -80˚C until processing. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)  RNA was isolated following manufacturer’s suggested protocol using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). An additional DNase I (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) treatment was performed at 37˚C for 2 hours, ethanol precipitated, and eluted in RNase- free water. qRT-PCR was performed using previously described procedure.  Northern blot analyses RNA was isolated following manufacturer’s suggested protocol using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 5 µg (PrrF1, PrrF2) or 20 µg (PrrH) of total RNA was electrophoresed on a 10% denaturing urea TBE gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). RNAseq Cultures were grown in shaking conditions as described above, without any additional controls for light. Cultures were collected (at 8 hours of growth) directly into RNALater. Iron was supplemented at a concentration of 50 nM (low iron) or 100 µM (high iron), while heme was used at 5 µM. Sample preparation and subsequent RNA extraction and analyses were performed as previously described. RNA integrity was validated using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Libraries were prepared with samples with an RNA Integrity Number (RIN) greater or equal to 8. Ribosomal RNA was depleted using the Ribo Zero kit and samples were converted into Illumina sequencing libraries using the ScriptSeq v2 RNA-Seq Library Preparation Kit (Epicentre, Illumina). Libraries were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq (2 x 150 bp reads). Three biological replicates were sequenced in each group and an average of 40 million reads were obtained for each sample. Quantitative label-free proteomics Cultures were grown in shaking conditions as described above, without any additional controls for light. Cultures were collected at 8 hours of growth. Iron was supplemented at a concentration of 50 nM (low iron) or 100 µM (high iron), while heme was used at 5 µM. Sample preparation and subsequent proteomics analyses were performed using previously described protocols.

### Data Protocol
Full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, and precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy at 30%) for a maximum 3-second cycle. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Pseudomonas genome database PAO1 reference protein sequences using the Sequest-HT and MS Amanda algorithms with a maximum precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were treated as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Resulting hits were validated at a maximum false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 using the semi-supervised machine learning algorithm Percolator. Protein abundance ratios were measured by comparing the MS1 peak volumes of peptide ions, whose identities were confirmed by MS2 sequencing. Label-free quantification was performed using an aligned AMRT (Accurate Mass and Retention Time) cluster quantification algorithm (Minora; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2017). Protein interactions were analyzed using STRING 10.5 and visualized with Cytoscape 3.8.0.  For statistical analysis, significance was calculated using an unpaired t test with two-tailed P values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heme-responsive, Prrf1, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Iron

### Affiliations
University of Maryland Baltimore
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD USA

### Submitter
Mehari Weldemariam

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen A. Kane
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD USA


