### Accession
PXD005262

### Title
A protocol for global quantification of phosphoproteins combining metabolic labeling and gel-based proteomics

### Description
Differential proteomics targeting the abundance level and changes of proteins is commonly used in biology to determine changes induced by different physiological states in living organisms. Here, current methods comprise both label-free and label-based proteomics approaches. More specifically, besides the experimental view on changes on protein abundances, differences in the level of post translational modifications (PTM) like phosphorylations are of interest in physiological studies due to the anticipated role of PTM in regulatory processes. Here, particularly in microbes, both identification and quantification of phosphorylated proteins is hampered by their low abundance. They can be quantified by comparison of spot intensities on 2D gels after functional phosphoprotein staining or by stable isotope labeling combined with phosphopeptide enrichment.  To combine the best of two worlds, we combined 14N/15N metabolic labeling with preceding protein separation on 2D gels and visualization of phosphorylations by functional staining in a proof-of-principle experiment. In our workflow, a global 15N heavy standard spiked in light, 14N based cell extracts was used to allow for relative quantification of changes in phosphorylation levels in Bacillus pumilus exposed to hydrogen peroxide stress comparing control and stress conditions. Mapping of putative protein phosphorylation events on the protein level was followed by protein identification and determination of molecular phosphosites by LC-MS/MS. Altogether, we were able to map 19 putatively phosphorylated proteins and could calculate the quantitative changes of stressed vs. unstressed cells for phosphorylated and non- phosphorylated peptides for 12 of these proteins to demonstrate the practicability of this method.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain and growth conditions: B. pumilus Jo2 was cultured in LB Broth base (Invitrogen, Eugene, Oregon, USA) with a pH of 7.5 and with 1 x 15N BioExpress-Medium, supplemented with 0.13 % (v/v) glucose. Overnight cultures were inoculated at an optical density (OD) at 540 nm of 0.04 and cultivated for about 16-18 h at 37°C in a shaking incubator with 180 U/min. The main culture was inoculated from a grown overnight culture to the same OD. The cells were harvested at OD540 = 1.0 by centrifugation (8.500 U/min,4 °C, 8 min) followed by two washing steps of the cell pellet with 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7,5. When the bacteria’s reaction to oxidative stress was investigated, H2O2 was added at OD540 = 1.0 to the medium in a final concentration of 0.2% (v/v) for 30 min and subsequently the bacteria were harvested as described above.  Preparation of cell extracts: Harvested cells were resuspended in Tris/HCl pH 8, 10 mM supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM glycerol phosphate, 5 mM sodium vanadate, and 10 mM sodium fluoride) and protease inhibitor (86 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), in 2% (v/v) ethanol). Cell disruption was accomplished using a cell disrupter (Precellys 24, Bertin Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) with five cycles of 30 s at 6,500 rpm with 5 min breaks on ice in between with subsequent nuclease digestion at room temperature (GE healthcare, München, Germany). The protein concentration was determined according to Starcher et al. For control and H2O2 stress condition, each three independent biological replicates were prepared. For sample preparation, each 14N cultivation of the control or H2O2 stressed bacteria were mixed 1:1 with the 15N extract from each cultivation condition.   Gel-based proteome analysis: After cell lysis, gel-based proteome analysis was performed according to Büttner et al. using 18 cm IGP stripes in the pH ranges of 4-7 (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) for the isoelectric focusing (IEF). IEF was performed according to the manufacturers instruction and accomplished with the Protean i12 (Biorad, Hercules, USA). For identification of proteins, 2D gels, image analysis, and picking of putatively phosphorylated proteins, pooled from three gels per biological replicate were conducted according to Bäsell et al. In brief, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin over night at 37° C, gel pieces were dehydrated and peptides were extracted in buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid).   Mass spectrometry analysis: Separation of peptides was accomplished using a 45 min binary gradient with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) and buffer B (99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid). Mass spectrometry measurements were performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA) coupled to an Easy-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, U.S.) for peptide separation. A self-made C18 column (Luna 3n, Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min was used. MS and MS/MS data were acquired in data dependent MS/MS mode. After a full scan in the Orbitrap analyzer (R= 60,000) the 20 most abundant precursor ions were fragmented via CID and recorded in the LTQ analyzer. Lock mass option, wideband activation and multistage activation at -97.98, -48.99, -32.70 and -24.49 Thompson were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the Comet search in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). The database was downloaded from NCBI (The National Center for Biotechnology Information) and consists of 3675 entries from B. pumilus SAFR-032, 42 contaminants and all decoy sequences. For phosphopeptide identification, the samples were searched with phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine as differential modification. Furthermore, variable oxidation at methionine and carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification. For the 15N quantification samples, for each nitrogen atom in amino acids, the modification of 15N (0.997035 Da) was set. The resulting pep.xml data were subsequently analyzed using Xinteract in the TPP, followed by using iProphet to merge the heavy and light interact.pep.xml files. The attained interact.ipro.pep.xml files related to analyses for each protein spot were exported to Microsoft Excel and filtered manually. Following criteria for peptide filtering were used: (i) peptide probability: 0.9, (ii) min peptide sequence length: seven amino acids, (iii) precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, (iv) fragment mass tolerance 1 Da, and (v) charges of 2+ and higher were accepted. Following, the interact.ipro.pep.xml files were analyzed using Skyline. For every single spot, a spectral library was created with 0.95 peptide probability within Skyline with a single missed cleavage allowed and with implementation of all matching scans. Subsequently, all identified chromatograms were manually checked followed by quantification of all peptides for the identified protein in each spot. Herein, all peptides, which were only found in the light or heavy version or which could not clearly be assigned to a single protein or whose intensity was too close to the noise level were discarded from quantification. The average value of all calculated peptide 14N/15N ratios was used to determine the 14N/15N protein ratio. For relative quantification of the two conditions, ratios of average protein ratios from three biological replicated of the stressed to the average of three biological replicates of the control were calculated. Proteins exceeding a peroxide vs. control ratio with an absolute fold change ≥ 2 were regarded as regulated due to the stress condition.

### Publication Abstract
Differential proteomics targeting the protein abundance is commonly used to follow changes in biological systems. Differences in localization and degree of post-translational modifications of proteins including phosphorylations are of tremendous interest due to the anticipated role in molecular regulatory processes. Because of their particular low abundance in prokaryotes, identification and quantification of protein phosphorylation is traditionally performed by either comparison of spot intensities on two-dimensional gels after differential phosphoprotein staining or gel-free by stable isotope labeling, sequential phosphopeptide enrichment and following LC-MS analysis. In the current work, we combined in a proof-of-principle experiment these techniques using <sup>14</sup> N/<sup>15</sup> N metabolic labeling with succeeding protein separation on 2D gels. The visualization of phosphorylations on protein level by differential staining was followed by protein identification and determination of phosphorylation sites and quantification by LC-MS/MS. This approach should avoid disadvantages of traditional workflows, in particular the limited capability of peptide-based gel-free methods to quantify isoforms of proteins. Comparing control and stress conditions allowed for relative quantification in protein phosphorylation in Bacillus pumilus exposed to hydrogen peroxide. Altogether, we quantified with this method 19 putatively phosphorylated proteins.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Quantification, Peroxide stress adaptation, Bacillus pumilus, Gel-based proteomics, 14n/15n metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
Dörte Becher Department of Microbial Proteomics,  Institute for Microbiology,  Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald,  Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstraße 15a,  17489 Greifswald, Germany
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Dörte Becher Department of Microbial Proteomics,  Institute for Microbiology,  Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald,  Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstraße 15a,  17489 Greifswald, Germany


