### Accession
PXD003706

### Title
Three Marine Bacterial Isolates

### Description
High throughput proteomics of three marine bacterial isolates, Neptuniibacter sp. MED92, Phaeobacter (Roseobacter) sp. MED193, Dokdonia sp. MED134, comparing exponential growth phase with stationary phase.

### Sample Protocol
The three marine bacterial isolates were grown in culture and samples were harvested both in exponential growth phase and stationary phase. The cells were lysed and processed using FASP with trypsin, samples were labelled with TMT6plex, and peptide mixtures were separated with HiRIEF before LC-MS on a Q exactive instrument. Each TMT6plex set consisted of one species with three replicates of stationary phase and three replicates of exponential growth phase.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using Sequest/Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 against the FASTA proteome of the respective species (canonical and isoform) obtained from uniprot.org on 2012-10-11. Oxidation of Methionine was used as dynamic modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT6plex on peptide N-terminus and on Lysines used as static modifications. Isobaric tag based quantitative analysis was done using the "Reporter Ions Quantifier" node in PD.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dokdonia med134, Neptuniibacter med92, Q exactive, Phaeobacter med193, Exponential growth, Marine bacteria, Stationary phase, Roseobacter

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Science For Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtio
Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Dept. Oncology-Pathology, Science For Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


