### Accession
PXD014372

### Title
Human Inferior Parietal Lobule (IPL) from Non-Hispanic Whites and African Americans with and without Alzheimer's disease LC-MS3

### Description
This study examined global proteomic changes in postmortem inferior parietal lobule (IPL) tissue from Non-Hispanic Whites and African American individuals who were cognitively normal or had Alzheimer's disease using LC-MS3 on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Proteins were quantified in the LC-MS3 experiments using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT)11plex.

### Sample Protocol
IPL tissue (20 mg) was homogenized and protein was extracted in 1x PBS + 8M urea with protease inhibitors. After protein concentration for each sample was determined using BCA assay, a pool with equal protein amounts from all samples was prepared for QC and normalization purposes. The samples were divided into 2 batches of 11, with each batch including at least one pooled sample, and each batch was processed separately. 100 ug of protein from each sample was digested using trypsin/Lys-C. 25 ug of the resulting peptides were tagged using TMT 11plex. After pooling the 11 tagged samples, each batch was fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase fractionation into 12 fractions. Each fraction was injected in duplicate for LC-MS3 analysis. Online reversed phase LC separation took place over 100 minutes for all analyses.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 using SEQUEST HT and the Target Decoy PSM Validator node. Some key parameters include dynamic modifications of TMT 10plex at the peptide N-terminus and Lysine residues and Methionine oxidation, and carbamidomethyl on Cysteine residues as a fixed modification. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The cleavage enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide confidence was set to at least medium with one peptide minimum needed for identification and peptides were only counted for the top scored protein. Quantification was performed based on reporter ion intensity, and underwent a two-step normalization using the pooled samples. Quantifiable proteins had to be identified with high confidence peptides, at least 2 PSMs, and have intensity values for at least 17 of the 22 TMT channels including all pooled channels and at least 3 samples per group.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) disproportionately affects certain racial and ethnic subgroups, such as African American/Black and Hispanic adults. Genetic, comorbid, and socioeconomic risk factors contribute to this disparity; however, the molecular contributions have been largely unexplored. Herein, we conducted a pilot proteomics study of postmortem brains from African American/Black and non-Hispanic White adults neuropathologically diagnosed with AD compared to closely-matched cognitively normal individuals. Examination of hippocampus, inferior parietal lobule, and globus pallidus regions using quantitative proteomics resulted in 568 differentially-expressed proteins in AD. These proteins were consistent with the literature and included glial fibrillary acidic protein, peroxiredoxin-1, and annexin A5. In addition, 351 novel proteins in AD were identified, which could partially be due to cohort diversity. From linear regression analyses, we identified 185 proteins with significant race x diagnosis interactions across various brain regions. These differences generally were reflective of differential expression of proteins in AD that occurred in only a single racial/ethnic group. Overall, this pilot study suggests that disease understanding can be furthered by including diversity in racial/ethnic groups; however, this must be done on a larger scale.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Tmt, Inferior parietal lobule, Alzheimer's disease, Lc-ms3

### Affiliations
University of Maryland
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Kaitlyn Stepler

### Lab Head
Dr Renã A.S. Robinson
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry


