### Accession
PXD033347

### Title
Dynamics of protein phosphorylation during Arabidopsis seed germination

### Description
Seed germination is a major step of plant growth and development. It is critical for species competition and spreading capacity in ecosystems. In agrosystems, it eventually impacts crop growth and yield. To prevent unappropriated germination under environmental conditions that do not guarantee the establishment of a robust plantlet, seeds from temperate species are generally dormant at maturity. Dormancy is a physiological mechanism that blocks seed germination even under favorable conditions and dormancy release is therefore required prior to germination [1]. A range of environmental (e.g. temperature, light, oxygen availability) and endogenous (e.g. hormonal) signals regulate these processes and germination completion, i.e. the early emergence of embryo radicle from seed envelope, can be achieved only when promoting mechanisms overcome inhibiting processes [2]. In that sense, the balance between the two antagonistic hormones abscisic acid (ABA) and gibberellins (GA), that inhibit and stimulate seed germination, respectively, promotes either dormancy (high ABA and low GA contents) or germination (low ABA and high GA contents) [3]

### Sample Protocol
seed were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and proteins were extracted in phenol buffer. Internal standard for normalization was generated by mixing each of the 24 samples in equal amount. Samples and standards were digested with trypsin before stable isotope dimethyl labeling. Biological replicates were labeled with the intermediate and heavy isotopes whereas the internal standard was labeled with the light isotope. Each triplex was fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography. Then, phosphopeptides from each fraction were enriched using immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography. Phosphopeptides were separated by on-line liquid chromatography and analyzed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. In parallel, a label-free shotgun proteome analysis was carried out on the 24 samples with trypsin digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass matching identification : Database searches were performed using X!Tandem Alanine (http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM). . Identifications were performed using the TAIR 10 database (http://www.arabidopsis.org/). Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using the X!Tandem pipeline C++ v0.2.37  (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/). Relative phosphopeptides quantification was performed using the MassChroQ software by extracting ion chromatograms (XICs).

### Publication Abstract
While a significant fraction of topological materials has been characterized using symmetry requirements<sup>1-4</sup>, the past two years have witnessed the rise of novel multi-gap dependent topological states<sup>5-9</sup>, the properties of which go beyond these approaches and are yet to be fully explored. Although already of active interest at equilibrium<sup>10-15</sup>, we show that the combination of out-of-equilibrium processes and multi-gap topological insights galvanize a new direction within topological phases of matter. We show that periodic driving can induce anomalous multi-gap topological properties that have no static counterpart. In particular, we identify Floquet-induced non-Abelian braiding, which in turn leads to a phase characterized by an anomalous Euler class, being the prime example of a multi-gap topological invariant. Most strikingly, we also retrieve the first example of an 'anomalous Dirac string phase'. This gapped out-of-equilibrium phase features an unconventional Dirac string configuration that physically manifests itself via anomalous edge states on the boundary. Our results not only provide a stepping stone for the exploration of intrinsically dynamical and experimentally viable multi-gap topological phases, but also demonstrate periodic driving as a powerful way to observe these non-Abelian braiding processes notably in quantum simulators.

### Keywords
Dormancy, Seeds, Arabidopsis, Protein phoshorylation, Germination, Protein kinases

### Affiliations
CNRS
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine

### Submitter
Marlène Davanture

### Lab Head
Dr Baudouin Emmanuel
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine


