### Accession
PXD015623

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of iron limitation in Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Description
Nutrient adaptation is key in limiting environments for the promotion of microbial growth and survival. In microbial systems, iron is an essential component for many cellular processes and bioavailability varies greatly among different conditions. In the bacterium, Klebsiella pneumoniae, the impact of iron limitation is known to alter transcriptional expression of iron-acquisition pathways and influences the secretion of iron-binding siderophores; however, a comprehensive view of iron limitation at the protein-level remains to be defined. Here, we apply a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics strategy to profile the global impact of iron limitation on the cellular proteome and extracellular environment (secretome) of K. pneumoniae. Our data defines the impact of iron on proteins involved in transcriptional regulation and emphasizes the modulation of a vast array of proteins associated with iron acquisition, transport, and binding. We also identify proteins in the extracellular environment associated with conventional and nonconventional modes of secretion, as well as vesicle release. In particular, we demonstrate a new role for Lon protease in promoting iron homeostasis outside of the cell. Our characterization of Lon protease in K. pneumoniae validates roles in bacterial growth, cell division, iron utilization, and virulence. Moreover, our results uncover novel degradation candidates of Lon protease. Overall, we provide evidence of novel connections between Lon and iron in a bacterial system and define a unique role for Lon protease in the extracellular environment during nutrient limitation.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular proteome samples were processed in quadruplicate per condition and subjected to a total proteome extraction protocol. Briefly, samples were washed twice with 50 µl PBS, and resuspended in 300 µl of ice cold 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a proteinase inhibitor cocktail tablet. Using a probe sonicator, samples were lysed in an ice bath for 3 cycles (30% power, 30 s on/30 s off), 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the samples were incubated at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm. The samples were cooled, 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added, incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark and then 100% ice cold acetone (final concentration of 80%) was added prior to storage at -20°C overnight. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone, and air dried. Pellets were resolubilized in 8M Urea/40 mM HEPES and a BSA tryptophan assay determined protein concentrations27. Samples were then diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the Urea concentration to approximately 2 M, and digested overnight with a mixture of LysC and trypsin (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). Digestion was stopped with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50 µg of the acidified peptides were loaded onto STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol.   Secretome samples were processed in quadruplicate per condition and subjected to an in-solution digestion. Culture supernatant was filtered through 0.22 µm syringe filters to remove any cell debris prior to processing. Briefly, 175 µl of 8 M Urea containing 40 mM HEPES was added to 500 µl of filtered supernatant followed by sonication in a water bath at 4°C for 15 min (30 s on/ 30 s off). Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM IAA, followed by enzymatic digestion and STAGE-tip purification as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26.). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae ATCC 700721 proteome (August 2018; 5,127 sequences) from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient adaptation is key in limiting environments for the promotion of microbial growth and survival. In microbial systems, iron is an essential component for many cellular processes, and bioavailability varies greatly among different conditions. In the bacterium, <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i>, the impact of iron limitation is known to alter transcriptional expression of iron-acquisition pathways and influence secretion of iron-binding siderophores, however, a comprehensive view of iron limitation at the protein level remains to be defined. Here, we apply a mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics strategy to profile the global impact of iron limitation on the cellular proteome and extracellular environment (secretome) of <i>K. pneumoniae</i>. Our data define the impact of iron on proteins involved in transcriptional regulation and emphasize the modulation of a vast array of proteins associated with iron acquisition, transport, and binding. We also identify proteins in the extracellular environment associated with conventional and non-conventional modes of secretion, as well as vesicle release. In particular, we demonstrate a new role for Lon protease in promoting iron homeostasis outside of the cell. Characterization of a Lon protease mutant in <i>K. pneumoniae</i> validates roles in bacterial growth, cell division, and virulence, and uncovers novel degradation candidates of Lon protease associated with improved iron utilization strategies in the absence of the enzyme. Overall, we provide evidence of unique connections between Lon and iron in a bacterial system and suggest a new role for Lon protease in the extracellular environment during nutrient limitation.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lon protease, Iron limitation, Secretome, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
Assistant Professor, Molecular and Cellular Biology Departmetn, University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Assistant Professor, Molecular and Cellular Biology Departmetn, University of Guelph


