### Accession
PXD013585

### Title
Musashi interaction with poly(A) binding protein is required for activation of target mRNA translation

### Description
The Musashi family of mRNA translational regulators control both physiological and pathological stem cell self-renewal primarily by repressing targets that promote differentiation.  In response to differentiation cues, Musashi can switch from a repressor to an activator of target mRNA translation.  However, the molecular events that distinguish Musashi-mediated translational activation from repression are not understood.  We have previously reported that Musashi function is required for the maturation of Xenopus oocytes, and specifically for translational activation of specific dormant maternal mRNAs.  Here, we employed mass spectrometry to identify cellular factors necessary for Musashi-dependent mRNA translational activation.  We report a requirement for association of Musashi1 with the embryonic poly(A) binding protein (ePABP) or the canonical somatic cell poly(A) binding protein PABPC1 for activation of Musashi target mRNA translation.  Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated an increased Musashi1 interaction with ePABP during oocyte maturation.  Attenuation of endogenous ePABP activity severely compromised Musashi function, preventing downstream signaling and blocking oocyte maturation.  Recovery of Musashi-dependent mRNA translational activation and maturation of ePABP attenuated oocytes was achieved through ectopic expression of either ePABP or PABPC1.  Consistent with the findings in Xenopus oocytes, PABPC1 remained associated with Musashi under conditions of Musashi target mRNA de-repression and translation during mammalian stem cell differentiation. Since association of Musashi1 with poly(A) binding proteins has previously only been implicated in repression of Musashi target mRNAs, our findings reveal distinct context-dependent roles for the interaction of Musashi with poly[A] binding protein family members in response to extracellular cues that control cell fate.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid Chromatography Coupled Tandem Mass Spectrometry. We used mass spectrometry to identify Musashi1-associated protein complexes. 120 oocytes were each injected with 115ng mRNA encoding GST-XMsi1 or GST alone. Following overnight incubation, the oocytes were collected and lysed in ice cold Tween 20 buffer (0.1% Tween 20, 20mM Tris pH 8.0, 137mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 50mM NaF, 10mM Sodium Pyrophosphate, 1mM PMSF, 1x Protease Inhibitor (Thermo Scientific)).  A glutathione pulldown for each condition was then performed.  600µl of oocyte lysate was added to 250l of 50% glutathione sepharose conjugated bead slurry (GE) at 4˚C for 6h with gentle rotation.  Beads were then gently pelleted by centrifugation at 500 rpm for 5 minutes; the supernatant was removed and replaced with 1ml fresh Tween 20 lysis buffer.  This process was repeated 3 times at 4˚C and following the final centrifugation, all lysis buffer was removed and 50l of LDS sample loading buffer (Invitrogen) was added and incubated overnight at 4˚C for 6h with gentle rotation. Beads were incubated for 10 minutes at 70˚C, then crushed by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Finally, 45µl of the sample was loaded per each lane of a 10% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and electrophoresed.  Following electrophoresis, the gel was fixed by 5 minute incubation with 10% acetic acid and 16% methanol at room temperature.  Following incubation, fixative was replaced with deionized water and microwaved for 45s.  The water was poured off and replaced with GelCode Blue (Pierce) and microwaved again for 30s to begin staining.  The gel was then gently rocked for 30 minutes at room temperature.  Finally, the GelCode Blue was replaced with 1% acetic acid and gently rocked for 1 hour.  Protein gel bands were then excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion.  Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Fisher), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction in 10mM Tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine (Pierce) and alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich).  Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Fisher), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37oC for 12-16 hours.  Peptide products were then acidified in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce).  Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) on a 100 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters).  Peptides were eluted using a 40 min gradient from 97:3 to 35:65 buffer A:B ratio. [Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile.]  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (1.9 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using collision-induced dissociation on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo).  MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.  MS/MS data were acquired for the top 15 peaks from each MS scan using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with a normalized collision energy of 35.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching against the UniprotKB database restricted to Homo sapiens (177,579 entries) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8, Max Planck Institute) with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on C, and variable modifications including oxidation on M, and Acetyl on peptide N-terminus.  Scaffold (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (62).  The pulldown and MS experiments were repeated in triplicate and a p-value representing the t-test significance of an interaction with GST-Musashi1 versus the GST moiety alone after correction of assigned spectral hits for molecular weight of the target protein (log2 normalized spectral abundance factor, (49)) was derived for each identified protein.  Thirty four proteins were found to specifically interact with Musashi1.

### Publication Abstract
The Musashi family of mRNA translational regulators controls both physiological and pathological stem cell self-renewal primarily by repressing target mRNAs that promote differentiation. In response to differentiation cues, Musashi can switch from a repressor to an activator of target mRNA translation. However, the molecular events that distinguish Musashi-mediated translational activation from repression are not understood. We have previously reported that Musashi function is required for the maturation of <i>Xenopus</i> oocytes and specifically for translational activation of specific dormant maternal mRNAs. Here, we employed MS to identify cellular factors necessary for Musashi-dependent mRNA translational activation. We report that Musashi1 needs to associate with the embryonic poly(A)-binding protein (ePABP) or the canonical somatic cell poly(A)-binding protein PABPC1 for activation of Musashi target mRNA translation. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated an increased Musashi1 interaction with ePABP during oocyte maturation. Attenuation of endogenous ePABP activity severely compromised Musashi function, preventing downstream signaling and blocking oocyte maturation. Ectopic expression of either ePABP or PABPC1 restored Musashi-dependent mRNA translational activation and maturation of ePABP-attenuated oocytes. Consistent with these <i>Xenopus</i> findings, PABPC1 remained associated with Musashi under conditions of Musashi target mRNA de-repression and translation during mammalian stem cell differentiation. Because association of Musashi1 with poly(A)-binding proteins has previously been implicated only in repression of Musashi target mRNAs, our findings reveal novel context-dependent roles for the interaction of Musashi with poly(A)-binding protein family members in response to extracellular cues that control cell fate.

### Keywords
Stem cell, Musashi, Pabp, Mrna translation, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Department of Neurobiology and Developmental Science, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR
UAMS

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Angus M. MacNicol
Department of Neurobiology and Developmental Science, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR


