### Accession
PXD029457

### Title
Staphylococcal ClpXP protease targets the cellular antioxidant system to eliminate fitness-compromised cells in stationary phase

### Description
The transition from growth to stationary phase is a natural response of bacteria to starvation and stress. When stress is alleviated and more favorable growth conditions return, bacteria resume proliferation without a significant loss in fitness. Although specific adaptations that enhance the persistence and survival of bacteria in stationary phase have been identified, mechanisms that help maintain the competitive fitness potential of non-dividing bacterial populations have remained obscure. Here, we demonstrate that staphylococci that enter stationary phase following growth in media supplemented with excess glucose undergo regulated cell death to maintain the competitive fitness potential of the population. Upon a decrease in extracellular pH, the acetate generated as a byproduct of glucose metabolism induces cytoplasmic acidification and extensive protein damage in non-dividing cells. Although cell death ensues,it does not occur as a passive consequence of protein damage. Instead, we demonstrate that the expression and activity of the ClpXP protease is induced, resulting in the degeneration of cellular antioxidant capacity and, ultimately,cell death. Under these conditions, inactivation of either clpX or clpP resulted in the extended survival of unfit cells in stationary phase, but at the cost of maintaining population fitness. Finally, we show that cell death from antibiotics that interfere with bacterial protein synthesis can also be partly ascribed to the corresponding increase in clpP expression and activity. The functional conservation of ClpP in eukaryotes and bacteria suggests that ClpP-dependent cell death and fitness maintenance may be a widespread phenomenon in these domains of life.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, 100 μg of protein per sample from three biological replicates per group was resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) overnight at 37°C following reduction with 10 mM DTT at 56 ° C for 30 mins and alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide was carried out for 20 mins in the dark. The resulting peptides were cleaned using PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo) and resuspended in a solvent containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). 500 ng of each sample was loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo Scientific™) at a flow rate of 4 µl/min then separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific™) on a Thermo Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 75 µm x 50 cm C-18 2 µm column (Thermo Scientific™) with a step gradient of 4–25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80 % ACN) from 10-100 min and 25–45% solvent B for 100–130 min at 300 nL/min and 50oC with a 155 min total run time. The eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific™) mass spectrometer in a data-dependent acquisition mode.A full scan MS survey (from m/z 350–1800) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The AGC target for MS1 was set as 4 × 105 and ion filling time was set as 100 ms. The most intense ions with charge state 2-6 were isolated in a 3 s cycle and fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target for MS/MS was set as 5 × 104 and ion filling time set 60 ms dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s with a 10 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by searching MS/MS data using PEAKS Studio X+ software against an in-house database created from the predicted proteins of S. aureus USA300 FPR3757. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Oxidized methionine was included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set 10 ppm for and maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of ≤ 1%. Qualitative analysis was performed using Progenesis QI proteomics 4.2 (Nonlinear Dynamics). Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA and the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method was used to adjust P values for multiple-testing using the false discovery rate. The adjusted p ≤ 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
The transition from growth to stationary phase is a natural response of bacteria to starvation and stress. When stress is alleviated and more favorable growth conditions return, bacteria resume proliferation without a significant loss in fitness. Although specific adaptations that enhance the persistence and survival of bacteria in stationary phase have been identified, mechanisms that help maintain the competitive fitness potential of nondividing bacterial populations have remained obscure. Here, we demonstrate that staphylococci that enter stationary phase following growth in media supplemented with excess glucose, undergo regulated cell death to maintain the competitive fitness potential of the population. Upon a decrease in extracellular pH, the acetate generated as a byproduct of glucose metabolism induces cytoplasmic acidification and extensive protein damage in nondividing cells. Although cell death ensues, it does not occur as a passive consequence of protein damage. Instead, we demonstrate that the expression and activity of the ClpXP protease is induced, resulting in the degeneration of cellular antioxidant capacity and, ultimately, cell death. Under these conditions, inactivation of either <i>clpX</i> or <i>clpP</i> resulted in the extended survival of unfit cells in stationary phase, but at the cost of maintaining population fitness. Finally, we show that cell death from antibiotics that interfere with bacterial protein synthesis can also be partly ascribed to the corresponding increase in <i>clpP</i> expression and activity. The functional conservation of ClpP in eukaryotes and bacteria suggests that ClpP-dependent cell death and fitness maintenance may be a widespread phenomenon in these domains of life.

### Keywords
Clpx, Competitive fitness, Cell death, Clpp, Soda, Staphylococcus aureus, Stationary phase

### Affiliations
Center for Staphylococcal Research Department of Pathology and Microbiology University of Nebraska Medical Center
UNMC

### Submitter
Vikas Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Vinai C Thomas
Center for Staphylococcal Research Department of Pathology and Microbiology University of Nebraska Medical Center


