### Accession
PXD006195

### Title
Super-SILAC reveals intricate crosstalk between lipopolysaccharide, phospholipid and fatty acid metabolism in Escherichia coli

### Description
The only membrane-anchored and essential ATP-dependent protease in Escherichia coli is FtsH. It controls the intracellular concentration of the deacetylase LpxC, which catalyses the first committed step in lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis. LpxC stability is strictly regulated in a growth rate-dependent manner to ascertain a vital equilibrium of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and phospholipid biosynthesis. Previous studies suggested the involvement of yet unknown factors in LpxC degradation. Aiming at the identification of such factors that are predicted to be associated with LpxC and/or FtsH at high and low growth rates, we established a quantitative super-SILAC LC-MS/MS-based approach. The identification of known LpxC and FtsH interactors validated our approach. Several enzymes involved in fatty acid biosynthesis and degradation, including the central regulator FadR, interacted with LpxC and/or FtsH and showed a significant impact on LpxC stability. The newly identified LpxC and FtsH interactor WaaH, a LPS-modifying enzyme, stimulates LpxC degradation. Our results go beyond the previously established link between LPS and phospholipid biosynthesis and uncover a far-reaching network that controls LPS biosynthesis by involving multiple enzymes in fatty acid metabolism and phospholipid biosynthesis and modification.

### Sample Protocol
A total number of 36 samples were prepared and measured by LC-MS/MS (Strep-tag, Strep-LpxC, His6-MBP and His6-MBP-FtsH each from three different growth rates and with three biological replicates) to investigate the growth rate dependent LpxC and FtsH interactome. 1.5 µg of purified Strep-LpxC or His6-MBP-FtsH were mixed with 1.5 µg of the super-SILAC standard. For Strep-tag or His6-MBP empty vector (EV) controls, the same volume as in the corresponding Strep-LpxC or His6-MBP-FtsH sample was used. Samples were concentrated on a Novex NuPage 4-12% gradient gel until the sample completely entered the gel. Proteins were visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining. Single protein bands were excised and washed with 40 µL of buffer A (10 mM NH4HCO3 in A. dest.) and 40 µL buffer B (buffer A in 50% (v/v) Acetonitrile (ACN)). Samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator. Dry gel pieces were digested using 5 µL of 2.0 µg/µL trypsin (cut after arginines or lysines) in 10 mM HCl and 55 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Peptide were extracted by incubating each sample in 20 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/100% ACN (v/v= 1:1) in A. dest. twice for 10 min each in an ultrasonic bath. The remaining ACN was removed by evaporation and 15 µL 0.1% TFA was added to the sample prior to measurement by LC-MS/MS. For peptide separation and identification an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. 15 µL of the peptide sample were enriched and desalted on an Acclaim® PepMap™ C18 µ-precolumn (5 µm particle size, 2 cm length, 100 µm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 95% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) TFA in A. dest.) and 5% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) TFA, 50% (v/v) ACN in A. dest.) with a flow rate of 30 µL/min for 7 min. Peptides were subsequently loaded on an Acclaim® PepMap™ C18 analytical column (2 µm particle size, 50 cm length, 75 µm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 95% solvent C (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in A. dest.) and 5% solvent D (0.1% (v/v) FA, 84% (v/v) ACN in A. dest.) for peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/min and a linear gradient of 5% to 40% solvent D over 120 min. Peptides separated by the HPLC were ionized positively and injected by electro spray ionization (ESI). A Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) scan in a mass/charge range between 300 and 2,000 with a resolution of 60,000 was performed. For MS/MS, the 20 most intense peptide peaks (Top20 method) of the FTMS scan with a minimal signal intensity of 1,500 and a charge range >+2 were selected and fragmented by CID with a collision energy of 35%. The inclusion list size was set to 500 and the exclusion duration time to 35 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of high-resolution MS data, MaxQuant (Version 1.5.0.0, Max-Planck-Institute Martinsried) [38] was used, which is based on the search algorithm Andromeda [39]. All samples were processed together and parameters were set as follows: “Variable modification” = oxidation of methionine, “Multiplicity” = 2, “Heavy labels” = Arg10 and Lys8, “Max. missed cleavages” = 2, “MS tolerance” = 20 ppm, “MS/MS tolerance” = 0.5 Da, “False discovery rate” (FDR) = 0.01, “Re-quantify” = checked, “Randomize” = decoy mode, “Minimal ratio count” = 1, “Match between runs” = unchecked, “iBAQ” = checked, “Include contaminants” = checked, “Cut peaks” = checked, “discard unmodified counterparts peptides” = unchecked. The “ecoprot.lib” database was used and supplemented with the sequences of His6-MBP and Strep-tag. The taxonomy was set to “E. coli”. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. If not stated otherwise, default parameters in MaxQuant were used. Known contaminants were excluded. ). For quantification a heavy labelled super-SILAC standard was spiked into each of these samples. Proteins were considered as part of the interactome using following criteria: (i) At least two “unique peptide” and a minimum of one “h/l ratio count” (“l intensity” > 0), (ii) a fold change (complex/Strep-tag or His6-MBP EV control) of at least “>2” and (iii) a t-test p-value of <0.05. If the protein was identified in 0-1 replicates in the EV control samples, the protein was identified “LpxC/FtsH only”.

### Publication Abstract
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) in the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria provide the first line of defense against antibiotics and other harmful compounds. LPS biosynthesis critically depends on LpxC catalyzing the first committed enzyme in this process. In <i>Escherichia coli</i>, the cellular concentration of LpxC is adjusted in a growth rate-dependent manner by the FtsH protease making sure that LPS biosynthesis is coordinated with the cellular demand. As a result, LpxC is stable in fast-growing cells and prone to degradation in slow-growing cells. One of the factors involved in this process is the alarmone guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) but previous studies suggested the involvement of yet unknown factors in LpxC degradation. We established a quantitative proteomics approach aiming at the identification of proteins that are associated with LpxC and/or FtsH at high or low growth rates. The identification of known LpxC and FtsH interactors validated our approach. A number of proteins involved in fatty acid biosynthesis and degradation, including the central regulator FadR, were found in the LpxC and/or FtsH interactomes. Another protein associated with LpxC and FtsH was WaaH, a LPS-modifying enzyme. When overproduced, several members of the LpxC/FtsH interactomes were able to modulate LpxC proteolysis. Our results go beyond the previously established link between LPS and phospholipid biosynthesis and uncover a far-reaching network that controls LPS production by involving multiple enzymes in fatty acid metabolism, phospholipid biosynthesis and LPS modification.

### Keywords
Ftsh, Super-silac, Quantitative proteomics, Proteolysis, Escherichia coli, Lipopolysaccharide, Lc-ms/ms, Lpxc

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinische Proteom-Center Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinische Proteom-Center Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany


### SDRF
- organism: Escherichia coli
- organism part: multi-cellular organismal disposition
- cell type: cell culture
- disease: not available
- label: SILAC light R:12C(6)14N(4), SILAC heavy R:13C(6)15N(4)
- label: SILAC light K:12C(6)14N(2), SILAC heavy K:13C(6)15N(2)
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: 13C6-15N4
- modification parameters: 13C6-15N2
- factor value[label: SILAC light, SILAC heavy

