### Accession
PXD034104

### Title
LFQ shotgun proteomic analysis of HAP1 NatC KO cells

### Description
The impact of NatC subunits NAA30, NAA35 and NAA38 on the human proteome (protein abundance). Analysis of HAP1 WT, NAA30 KO, NAA35 KO and NAA38 KO cells

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of HAP1 WT, NAA30-KO, NAA35-KO and NAA38-KO cells were grown in 10-cm dishes to 70-80% confluency. Cells were washed twice in cold DPBS buffer (Gibco), detached by scraping in cold DBPS containing cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche), and collected by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 sec at 4°C (twice). Cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. For each cell line there was four samples per proteomic setup. N-terminal acetylation status was determined by positional proteomics using strong cation exchange (SCX) enrichment while protein abundance was determined by label-free quantitative (LFQ) shotgun proteomics. Detailed information is given below.Cell pellets were dissolved in 0.5 ml urea lysis buffer (8 M urea; pH 8.0, 20 mM HEPES). The cells were then sonicated 3 times for 15 s (with 1 min breaks on ice) each and centrifuged at 16 000 xg for 15 min. The protein concentrations of the samples were determined by Bradford (Bradford assay reagent 5x, Bio-rad, cat. No. 5000006). Proteomics samples were prepared in quadruplicate for each condition. From each replicate, equal protein amounts (1 mg) were used for further analysis. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT f.c. for 30 min at 55 °C. Proteins were alkylated with 10 mM f.c. iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 15 min. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES at pH 8.0 to achieve a urea concentration of 4 M; then, the proteins were digested with 1/100 (w:w) endoLysC (Wako, Lysyl Endopeptidase, mass spectrometry grade (Lys-C), cat. No. 121-05063-4548995075888 ) for 1.5 h at37°C. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES at pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M, and the proteins were digested with 1/100 (w:w) trypsin (Sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega, Cat. No. V5111) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were acidified with TFA   (to a final concentration of 1% TFA), which allows precipitation of undigested proteins. Samples were incubated on ice for 15 min, centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 min at RT, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Peptides were desalted by SampliQ (100 mg) The peptides (half of the sample was usesd, the other half was stored) were then purified on a SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge (SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge, Agilent, cat. No. 5982-1111.). The eluted peptides were dried and stored at -20°C before MS analysis. Samples were re-dissolved in 20 µL loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98 : 2, v/v)). Sample concentrations were measured on Lunatic microfluidic device (Unchained Labs) and 2 µg of peptide material was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC™ column (C18-endcapped functionality, 300 µm wide channels, 5 µm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 2.5 µm and a depth of 20 µm; Pharmafluidics, Belgium). The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50 °C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient reaching 55% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) after 145 min and 99% MS solvent B at 150 min, followed by a 10-minutes wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The first 15 min, the flow rate was set to 750 nl/min after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. T The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 s, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to an AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The most intense ions above a threshold value of 5,000 and a charge state ranging from 2 to 7, subjected to a dynamic exclusion of 60 s, were isolated in the quadrupole for fragmentation in the ion routing multipole at a normalized collision energy of 34% after accumulation of precursor ions at a target value of 12,000 with a maximum of 40 ms with an isolation width of 1.2 Th. The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (release May 2021). The enzyme specificity was set at trypsin/P, allowing for two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was put as fixed modification. In the settings of advanced identifications match between runs was enabled (with standard settings). All other settings were kept as standard. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software [REF]. Minimum of 2 ratio counts and both unique and razor peptides were considered for protein quantification. The iBAQ function was also used. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed, and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a multiple sample t-tests were performed (FDR = 0.01  and S0 = 0). After the multiple sample t-test, the z-score of the significant proteins of each sample were calculated and further analyzed by hierarchical clustering (Euclidean with standard Perseus settings). Also pairwise comparisons were also made by a t-test (FDR 0.01 and S0=0.1) between the different KO cell lines and control samples to generate volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hap1 cells, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun, Natc ko

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
1 VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, East Flanders, 9052, Belgium 2 Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, East Flanders, 9052, Belgium

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
1 VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent, East Flanders, 9052, Belgium 2 Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, East Flanders, 9052, Belgium


