### Accession
PXD014720

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of the Peroxisomal Retrograde Signaling in C. elegans

### Description
While retrograde signalling pathways have been identified for several organelles, the existence of such a pathway for peroxisomes remains elusive. We identified a peroxisomal retrograde signalling (PRS) in C. elegans, which is activated in response to peroxisomal import stress. We analyzed the PRS using a proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and digested using the iST Preomics Kit (Germany) with an initial step of sonication with glass beads (Bioruptor, Diagenode). For the mass spectrometry analysis, 5 µl were injected in an RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical Aurora C18 nanocolumn (75μm ID 120 Å, 1.6 μm, Ion Opticks) with a 120-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Q Exactive HF (Thermo). The Q Exactive HF instrument was operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states between 3 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy with R=15000. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_3AUP000001940_Celegans-; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 10ppm; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as up/down-expressed if their MaxQuant LFQ values displayed a log2 value >1 or <-1 and a p-value of 0.05 in a limma moderated t-test adjusted for multiple comparisons when compared to the control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prs, Prx-5(rnai), C. elegans, Peroxisome, Tag-208(rnai)

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biozentrum der LMU München Department Biologie II Zell- und Entwicklungsbiologie Room B03.051 Großhaderner Str. 2 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: 089 / 2180 - 74218 Email: rolland@bio.lmu.de  http://www.cellbiology.bio.lmu.de/people/principal_investigators/stephane_rolland/index.html

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephane Rolland
Biozentrum der LMU München Department Biologie II Zell- und Entwicklungsbiologie Room B03.051 Großhaderner Str. 2 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: 089 / 2180 - 74218 Email: rolland@bio.lmu.de  http://www.cellbiology.bio.lmu.de/people/principal_investigators/stephane_rolland/index.html


