### Accession
PXD005556

### Title
Mouse retina LC-MSMS -  Diurnal expression of proteins in the retina of the blind cone-rod homeobox (Crx(-/-) ) mouse and the 129/Sv mouse: a proteomic study

### Description
To investigate the role of the circadian clock of the photoreceptor cells in regulation of retinal protein rhythms, we have analyzed diurnal protein expression in the photoreceptor-deficient cone-rod homeobox knock out mouse (Crx-/-). Retinal homogenates of 129/sv and Crx-/- mice were analysed by 2D-PAGE. Differentially expressed spots were in-gel digested with trypsin and identified by LC-MS/MS. Data were used to search the Swiss-Prot protein database.

### Sample Protocol
Eye bulbs from Crx-/- mice and 129/sv mice were removed and the retinas removed by dissection and frozen in crushed carbon dioxide and stored at -80 C. Three retinae were used for each 2D-gel.Proteins were separated in the first dimension on pH 3-10, non-linear gradient strips and in the second dimension using a polyacrylamide gel (12%T, 3%C).

### Data Protocol
In-gel tryptic digestion was performed on excised protein spots. Peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS using an inert nano liquid chromatography system from LC Packins (San Francisco, CA) connected to a Q-TOF Premier mass spectrometer with a Nano-LC sprayer (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Data were recorded and processed using MassLynx v4.1 (Waters, Milford, MA). Each acquisition was performed for 48 min. with electrospray ionisation in positive V mode with normal dynamic range. MS survey scans were performed in continuum format for 1.48 s with interscan delay of 0.02 s in the range 450 Da – 1500 Da. The acquisition was switched to MS/MS mode when the intensity of individual ions was rising above 20 counts per second. MS/MS was performed in the range 50 Da – 1800 Da with up to 4 ions analyzed in a single survey scan. The MS/MS scan was stopped after 10 seconds or when the intensity fell below 3 counts per second. The scan time was 0.98 s with interscan delay of 0.02 s. Data format was continuum. Ions with charge state of +2, +3 and +4 were selected with a 4 Da peak detection window. Masses acquired in MS/MS were then excluded for 40 s. The raw data files were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server v2.5.3 using Background Subtract Type: Adaptive, Background Threshold: 35.0% and Background Polynomial: 5. Deisotoping Type: Medium, Iterations: 30, Automatic Thresholds: Yes, Threshold: 3%, Minimum peak width: 4 channels, Centroid Top: 80%, TOF resolution 10000 and NP multiplier: 0.7. The generated pkl files were used to search the total SwissProt database (version 2016_10, 552884 sequences) using the online version of Mascot MS/MS Ions Search facility (Matrix Science, http://www.matrixscience.com). For database searches, +2, +3 and +4 charged ions with one or two missed cleavages, a peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. Searches included one fixed modification of Cys with carbamidomethyl. Contaminating peptides, either environmental or from previous samples, e.g. keratins, trypsin, bovine serum albumin, cingulin and dermcidin, were disregarded. At least two ‘bold red’ peptides, each with individual ions scores giving a <5% probability that the observed match was a random event, was required to qualify as a protein hit. For the protein hits we report the protein score.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2d-page, Lc-msms, Mouse, Retina

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Arhus, Denmark

### Submitter
Bent Honoré

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Honoré
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Arhus, Denmark


