### Accession
PXD042114

### Title
Unravelling the function of GEXP15, a regulator of Protein Phosphatase type 1, in Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
The Protein Phosphatase type 1 catalytic subunit (PP1c) works in combination with an array of regulatory proteins  to specifically dephosphorylate a diverse range of substrates in the cell. In the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, this phosphatase and its regulators are poorly characterized. In this study, we employed a multi-faceted approach to investigate the structural and functional characteristics of a conserved Plasmodium specific regulator known as Gametocyte EXported Protein 15, GEXP15. In-silico study highlights three significant regions of interest, an PP1-interacting RVxF motif located in its N-terminal region, a conserved domain whose function is unknown, and a GYF-like domain that may mediate specific protein-protein interactions. In vitro interaction studies shows that GEXP15 has a direct interaction with PP1 via the RVxF binding motif, enhancing its phosphatase activity. Using transgenic GEXP15-tagged line, confocal microscopy reveals that GEXP15 is highly expressed in late asexual stages and is localized in the parasite nucleus. Immunoprecipitation assays followed by mass spectrometry analyses shows its interaction with ribosomal and RNA binding proteins. Furthermore, pulldown analyses of His-tagged recombinant functional domains of GEXP15 confirm its binding to the ribosomal complex via the GYF domain. Our study provides the first insight into the PfGEXP15-PP1-ribosome interaction, crucial for protein translation, and supports PfGEXP15 as a potential target for malaria drug development.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on immunoprecipitation eluates and pulldown eluates according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were supplemented with 20% SDS to a final concentration of 5%, reduced with 20mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 5min at 95oC. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 2.5% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Five washes were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 47°C for 2 h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 30 µL and an amount of 400ng was injected on a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in water; Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 250nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (Ion Optics, Australia) using a 40min gradient elution (2 to 11% solvent B during 19min; 11 to 16% during 7min; 16% to 25% during 4min;  25% to 80% for 3min and finally 80% for 7min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method in DDA (Data Dependent Analysis) mode. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values from 0.7 to 1.1 V s/cm2(1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.2s and the number ofPASEF MS/MS scans was set to 6.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software version2.1.3.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the TrEMBL/Swiss-Prot Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 database downloaded from Uniprot on 10/10/2022 (5392 entries) and E.Coli BL21-DE3 database downloaded from Uniprot on 10/10/2022 (4173 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 10 ppm for the main search and 40 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation (Prot N-term) were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output as well as the protein only identified by site. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities and protein quantification was obtained using at least 1 peptide per protein. Match between runs was allowed only with IP samples. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (2). For statistical comparison, we set four groups, each containing up to 3 biological replicates for the pulldown samples (Control, RVxF, UD, GYF). For the IP samples we set two groups with 3 biological replicates each (Control, GEXP15). We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 2 and 3 valid values in at least one group for IP and pulldown experiments respectively. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and using 3 and 1.8 SD downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values for pull-down and IP datasets respectively. We performed then an ANOVA test (FDR<0.05, S0=1) for the pull-down samples and statistical t-test (FDR<0.05, S0=0.1) for IP samples. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
The Protein Phosphatase type 1 catalytic subunit (PP1c) (PF3D7_1414400) operates in combination with various regulatory proteins to specifically direct and control its phosphatase activity. However, there is little information about this phosphatase and its regulators in the human malaria parasite, <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>. To address this knowledge gap, we conducted a comprehensive investigation into the structural and functional characteristics of a conserved <i>Plasmodium</i>-specific regulator called Gametocyte EXported Protein 15, GEXP15 (PF3D7_1031600). Through in silico analysis, we identified three significant regions of interest in GEXP15: an N-terminal region housing a PP1-interacting RVxF motif, a conserved domain whose function is unknown, and a GYF-like domain that potentially facilitates specific protein-protein interactions. To further elucidate the role of GEXP15, we conducted in vitro interaction studies that demonstrated a direct interaction between GEXP15 and PP1 via the RVxF-binding motif. This interaction was found to enhance the phosphatase activity of PP1. Additionally, utilizing a transgenic GEXP15-tagged line and live microscopy, we observed high expression of GEXP15 in late asexual stages of the parasite, with localization predominantly in the nucleus. Immunoprecipitation assays followed by mass spectrometry analyses revealed the interaction of GEXP15 with ribosomal- and RNA-binding proteins. Furthermore, through pull-down analyses of recombinant functional domains of His-tagged GEXP15, we confirmed its binding to the ribosomal complex via the GYF domain. Collectively, our study sheds light on the PfGEXP15-PP1-ribosome interaction, which plays a crucial role in protein translation. These findings suggest that PfGEXP15 could serve as a potential target for the development of malaria drugs.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Ribosome biogenesis, Malaria, Gexp15, Gyf domain, Cd2bp2, Protein phosphatase 1

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université Paris Cité - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRSUAR3633, Paris 75015, France.

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université Paris Cité - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRSUAR3633, Paris 75015, France.


