### Accession
PXD000933

### Title
HEK293 cells LC-MSMS -  XBP1 mitigates aminoglycoside-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and neuronal cell death

### Description
The iTRAQ 4-plex experiment was carried out with 2 biological replicates of untreated HEK cells (114 and 116 label) and 2 biological replicates of HEK cells treated with geneticin (16 µM) for 32 h (115 and 117 label).

### Sample Protocol
Cell samples were incubated with lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1x complete protease inhibitor (Roche)) for 10 min at room temperature while shaking. The lysate was ultrasonicated for 10 min and centrifuged for 20 min at 16,000 × g at 4 °C. Eighty micrograms of each sample was used for iTRAQ labeling (AB SCIEX)  following the manufacturer's protocol.  iTRAQ samples were pooled, dried and reconstituted in solvent A (5% ACN, 8 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5) and fractionated by HILIC-HPLC (Pack Polyamine II, 250 x 4mm, 120 Å S-5 µm, YMC). The column was equilibrated with solvent A. Peptides were eluted using solvent B (5% ACN, 100 mM KH2PO4, pH 4.5) by  following gradient: 0–7.5 min; 0% B, 7.5–37.5 min; 0–50% B, 37.5–42.5 min; 50–100% B and 42.5–47.5 min; 100% B at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. The resulting 13 fractions were desalted using ZipTips (Millipore) according to the vendor’s protocol and reconstituted in solvent C (3% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA)) for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were injected into an Eksigent-nano-HPLC system by an auto sampler and separated on a self-made reverse phase tip column (75 µm × 150 mm) packed with C18 material (3 µm, 200 Å, AQ, Bischoff GmbH). The column was equilibrated with solvent C and 5% solvent D (0.2% FA in ACN). For elution, a flow rate of 300 nl/min and the following gradient was used: 0–70 min, 5–25% D; 70–85 min, 25–50% D; 85–88 min, 50–98 % D. High accuracy mass spectra were acquired with an AB Sciex 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada) in the mass range of 385–1250 m/z. Up to 36 data dependent MS/MS  were recorded in high sensitivity mode of the most intense ions with charge state 2+, 3+ and 4+ using collision induced dissociation. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 s after three occurrences.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK). MS data were searched against a decoyed human database from Swissprot (release December 2012) concatenated with an in-house build contaminant database. The following search parameters were used: precursor ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance: 0.05 Da, trypsin digestion, fixed modifications of MMTS labeled cysteine, 4-plex iTRAQ modifications of free amines at the N-termini and of lysine, and as variable modification 4-plex iTRAQ of tyrosine. Peptides without 4-plex iTRAQ label at the N-terminus or at a lysine were excluded from the analysis. Scaffold_4.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. We could identify and quantify 1785 proteins (protein prophet probability 95%, minimum two peptides for identification of a protein, and a minimum Mascot Ionscore 40).

### Publication Abstract
Here we study links between aminoglycoside-induced mistranslation, protein misfolding and neuropathy. We demonstrate that aminoglycosides induce misreading in mammalian cells and assess endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways. Genome-wide transcriptome and proteome analyses revealed upregulation of genes related to protein folding and degradation. Quantitative PCR confirmed induction of UPR markers including C/EBP homologous protein, glucose-regulated protein 94, binding immunoglobulin protein and X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing, which is crucial for UPR activation. We studied the effect of a compromised UPR on aminoglycoside ototoxicity in haploinsufficient XBP1 (XBP1(+/-)) mice. Intra-tympanic aminoglycoside treatment caused high-frequency hearing loss in XBP1(+/-) mice but not in wild-type littermates. Densities of spiral ganglion cells and synaptic ribbons were decreased in gentamicin-treated XBP1(+/-) mice, while sensory cells were preserved. Co-injection of the chemical chaperone tauroursodeoxycholic acid attenuated hearing loss. These results suggest that aminoglycoside-induced ER stress and cell death in spiral ganglion neurons is mitigated by XBP1, masking aminoglycoside neurotoxicity at the organismal level.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293, Lc-msms, Aminoglycosides

### Affiliations
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Microbiology
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Stefan Duscha

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Erik Christian Böttger
University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Microbiology


