### Accession
PXD009818

### Title
Dichomitus squalens partially tailors its molecular responses to the composition of solid wood

### Description
The fungal response to compositional differences in softwood as measured by transcriptomics, proteomics and enzyme activities showed a partial tailoring to wood composition.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ and abundances inferred using PNNL's DMS and MTS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
White-rot fungi, such as Dichomitus squalens, degrade all wood components and inhabit mixed-wood forests containing both soft- and hardwood species. In this study, we evaluated how D. squalens responded to the compositional differences in softwood [guaiacyl (G) lignin and higher mannan content] and hardwood [syringyl/guaiacyl (S/G) lignin and higher xylan content] using semi-natural solid cultures. Spruce (softwood) and birch (hardwood) sticks were degraded by D. squalens as measured by oxidation of the lignins using 2D-NMR. The fungal response as measured by transcriptomics, proteomics and enzyme activities showed a partial tailoring to wood composition. Mannanolytic transcripts and proteins were more abundant in spruce cultures, while a proportionally higher xylanolytic activity was detected in birch cultures. Both wood types induced manganese peroxidases to a much higher level than laccases, but higher transcript and protein levels of the manganese peroxidases were observed on the G-lignin rich spruce. Overall, the molecular responses demonstrated a stronger adaptation to the spruce rather than birch composition, possibly because D. squalens is mainly found degrading softwoods in nature, which supports the ability of the solid wood cultures to reflect the natural environment.

### Keywords
Dichomitus squalens, Cazymes, Softwood, Hardwood, White-rot fungi

### Affiliations
Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald de Vries
Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute


