### Accession
PXD032363

### Title
Mitoproteomics of neuronal mitochondria of EAE mice

### Description
Inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS) can impair the function of neuronal mitochondria and contributes to axon degeneration in the common neuroinflammatory disease multiple sclerosis (MS). Here we combine cell type-specific mitochondrial proteomics with in vivo biosensor imaging to dissect how inflammation alters the molecular composition and functional capacity of neuronal mitochondria. Neuroinflammatory lesions in the mouse spinal cord cause widespread and persisting axonal ATP depletion, which precedes mitochondrial oxidation and calcium overload. This early axonal energy crisis is associated with impaired electron transport chain function, but also an upstream dysbalance of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes. Isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 (Idh3), the rate limiting enzyme of the TCA cycle, is depleted in neuronal mitochondria in experimental models and in human MS lesions. Notably, viral overexpression of Idh3 can rectify the axonal energy deficits, suggesting that TCA cycle dysfunction in neuroinflammation may be amendable to therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were immunocaptured from the spinal cord according to the above-described protocol. Samples were lysed in a modified RIPA buffer (1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8). Cell debris and undissolved material were removed by centrifugation at 16,000g  for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were assessed using the BCA assay. A protein amount of 20 µg was further diluted with distilled water at a 1:2 ratio, and 50 mM MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, and DNA/RNA was digested using 12.5U Benzonase. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteine alkylation was performed by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubation for 30 min at 24 ℃ in the dark. The alkylation step was quenched by adding 4 µL of 200 mM DTT. Protein digestion was performed using the single-pot, solid phase, sample preparation (SP3) protocol. Briefly, 10 µL of a 4 µg/µL bead slurry of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads A and B (GE Healthcare) were added to 20 µg of alkylated protein lysate. Protein binding to the magnetic beads was achieved by adding acetonitrile (ACN) to a final volume of 70% (v/v) and mixing at 1200 rpm at 24 °C for 30 min in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). Magnetic beads were retained in a DynaMag-2 magnetic rack (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the supernatant was discarded. Detergents were removed using four washing steps with 200 µL 80% (v/v) ethanol. Proteins were digested with 0.25 µg LysC (Promega, V1671) at 37°C for 3 hrs followed by a second digestion step with 0.25 µg trypsin (Promega, V5111) for 16 hr at room temperature. Tubes were placed in a magnetic rack, and peptides were transferred to 0.22 µm Costar Spin-X filter tubes (Corning) to remove the remaining magnetic beads. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA). Furthermore, the peptide concentration was estimated using the Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher, Q33211). Samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC-1200 nano UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online via a Nanospray Flex electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on self-packed C18 columns (300mm × 75 µm, ReproSilPur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (gradient: 0 min., 2.4% B; 2 min., 4.8% B; 92 min., 24% B; 112 min., 35.2% B; 121 min., 60% B). Full mass spectrometry spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (automatic gain control (AGC) target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions were chosen for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (resolution: 15,000, isolation width: 1.6 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, normalized collision energy (NCE): 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was applied for fragment ion spectra acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data was analysed with the software Maxquant (Version 1.6.3.3 or 1.6.10.43). The data was searched against a one gene per protein canonical database of Mus musculus downloaded from UniProt (download date: 2019-03-14, 22294 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cyteines was defined as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Peptide mass recalibration using the first search option with 20 ppm mass tolerance was enabled. For the main search, peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 7 and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1%, and FDRs were controlled using a forward and reverese concatenated database search approach. The option match between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1.5 s. Protein label-free quantification was performed on the basis of at least two ratio counts of unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation in the central nervous system can impair the function of neuronal mitochondria and contributes to axon degeneration in the common neuroinflammatory disease multiple sclerosis (MS). Here we combine cell-type-specific mitochondrial proteomics with in vivo biosensor imaging to dissect how inflammation alters the molecular composition and functional capacity of neuronal mitochondria. We show that neuroinflammatory lesions in the mouse spinal cord cause widespread and persisting axonal ATP deficiency, which precedes mitochondrial oxidation and calcium overload. This axonal energy deficiency is associated with impaired electron transport chain function, but also an upstream imbalance of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes, with several, including key rate-limiting, enzymes being depleted in neuronal mitochondria in experimental models and in MS lesions. Notably, viral overexpression of individual TCA enzymes can ameliorate the axonal energy deficits in neuroinflammatory lesions, suggesting that TCA cycle dysfunction in MS may be amendable to therapy.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Idh3, Neurons

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


