### Accession
PXD006620

### Title
A comprehensive Proteomic Investigation of Ebf1 Heterozygosity in pro B lymphocytes utilizing Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) and Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) Approaches

### Description
The study provide a comprehensive comparison between data dependent acquistion (DDA) and data independen acquisition (DIA) with the aim to detect and quantify proteome changes associated with reduced gene dosage using Ebf1 transcription factor as a modal.

### Sample Protocol
Two different genotypes were employed in this study. Proteins were extracted, purified using in Stage Tip (iST) protocol followed by digestion of proteins with trypsin. LC-MS data was acquired using QExactive Plus mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Data acquired using data dependent acquisition were analyzed using MaxQuant/ Perseus suite while data acquired using data independent acquisition were analyzed using Biognosys Spectronaut software (version 9).

### Publication Abstract
Early B cell factor 1 (EBF1) is one of the key transcription factors required for orchestrating B-cell lineage development. Although studies have shown that Ebf1 haploinsufficiency is involved in the development of leukemia, no study has been conducted that characterizes the global effect of Ebf1 heterozygosity on the proteome of pro-B lymphocytes. Here, we employ both data independent acquisition (DIA) and shotgun data dependent acquisition (DDA) workflows for profiling proteins that are differently expressed between Ebf1<sup>+/+</sup> and Ebf1<sup>+/-</sup> cells. Both DDA and DIA were able to reveal the downregulation of the EBF1 transcription factor in Ebf1<sup>+/-</sup> pro-B lymphocytes. Further examination of differentially expressed proteins by DIA revealed that, similar to EBF1, the expression of other B-cell lineage regulators, such as TCF3 and Pax5, is also downregulated in Ebf1 heterozygous cells. Functional DIA analysis of differentially expressed proteins showed that EBF1 heterozygosity resulted in the deregulation of at least eight transcription factors involved in lymphopoiesis and the deregulation of key proteins playing crucial roles in survival, development, and differentiation of pro-B lymphocytes.

### Keywords
Dda, Maxquant, Trascription factor, Dia, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics

### Submitter
Yaarub Musa

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics


