### Accession
PXD029226

### Title
Liver mitochondria-associated ER membrane proteomics for studying the effects of ZiBuPiYin recipe on Zucker diabetic fatty rats after chronic psychological stress

### Description
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex metabolic disease with multiple etiologies, involving both genetic and environmental factors. With changes associated with modern life, increasing attention has been paid to chronic psychological stressors such as work stress. Chronic psychological stress can induce or aggravate diabetes mellitus, and conversely, with the deterioration of T2DM, patients often experience different degrees of depression, anxiety, and other negative emotions. To elucidate the role of ZiBuPiYin recipe (ZBPYR) in regulating the liver mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum membrane proteome to improve T2DM with chronic psychological stress, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified among Zucker lean littermates (control group), chronic psychological stress T2DM rats (model group), and ZBPYR administration rats (ZBPYR group) via iTRAQ with LC-MS/MS. Using Mfuzz soft clustering analysis, DEPs were divided into six different clusters. Clusters 1-6 contained 5, 68, 44, 57, 28, and 32 DEPs, respectively. Given that ZBPYR can alleviate T2DM symptoms and affect exploratory behavior during T2DM with chronic psychological stress, we focused on the clusters with opposite expression trends between model:control and ZBPYR:model groups. We screened out the DEPs in clusters 1, 3, and 4, which may be good candidates for the prevention and treatment of T2DM with chronic psychological stress, and further conducted bioinformatics analyses. DEPs were mainly involved in the insulin signaling pathway, oxidative phosphorylation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, amino acid metabolism, lysosome-related processes, and lipid metabolism. This may indicate the pathogenic basis of T2DM with chronic psychological stress and the potential therapeutic mechanism of ZBPYR. In addition, two key proteins, a lysosome-associated protein (Lamp2) and tricarboxylic acid cycle-related protein (Suclg1), may represent novel biomarkers for T2DM with chronic psychological stress and drug targets of ZBPYR.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Collection and MAM Isolation All rats were anesthetized with ether and decapitated. The liver samples were immediately dissected on ice and weighed. The MAM was isolated according to an established protocol with minor modifications (Wieckowski et al., 2009). Briefly, tissues were manually homogenized on ice, and nuclei and unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged to separate the crude mitochondria from plasma membranes, lysosomes, microsomes, and ER fractions. After several washes, the crude mitochondrial fraction was suspended in 4 ml resuspending buffer III layered on top of 16 ml of a 30% Percoll medium and centrifuged at 95,000×g for 30 minutes. The MAM fraction and the pure mitochondrial fraction were separately extracted from the Percoll gradient and were further purified by centrifugation, to remove contaminants. All fractions were flash frozen by liquid nitrogen and preserved at −80°C until use.  Digestion of MAM Samples and iTRAQ Labeling 100 μl of each sample was digested in parallel via filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). The peptide concentration was analyzed by OD280. Subsequently, 50 μg of peptides per sample were labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit, Applied Biosystems SCIEX, Foster City, CA). The MAM samples from the control group were labeled with reagent 113, the MAM samples from the model group were labeled with reagent 114, and the MAM samples from the ZBPYR group were labeled with reagent 115, and the Internal standard (IS) were labeled with reagent 117. IS sample is a mixed sample prepared by us, which was made of identical quality protein mixtures from different groups. The labeling solution reaction was incubated at room temperature for 1 h prior to further analysis. Then, three independent biological experiments were performed for triplicate LC-MS/MS analyses.  EASY-nLC Separation and MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer. The column was equilibrated for 20 min with 95% (v/v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in Milli-Q water). Peptide mixtures were first flushed into a sample column, the Thermo Scientific EASY column (2 cm×100 μm, 5 μm-C18), then separated with an analytical column, the Thermo Scientific EASY column (75 μm×100 mm, 3 μm-C18), at 250 nl/min with solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, acetonitrile 84%) using a segmented gradient from 0-55% (v/v) for 220 min, from 55-100% (v/v) for 8 min, and then at 100% (v/v) for 12 min.  The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was set to perform data acquisition in positive ion mode with a selected mass range of 350-1800 mass/charge (m/z). The resolving power for the Q-Exactive was set as 70,000 for the MS scan and 17,500 for the MS/MS scan at m/z 200. MS/MS data were acquired using the top 10 most abundant precursor ions with charge ≥ 2 as determined from the MS scan. These were selected with an isolation window of 2 m/z and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 29 eV. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 20 and 60 ms, respectively, and the automatic gain control target values for the MS scan mode was set to 3e6. Dynamic exclusion for selected precursor ions was set at 30 s. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1% on the Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Protein Quantification The raw files were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; v2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4, against the Uniprot Rat database (02-28-2015, 34164 entries). The following settings were selected: Enzyme: Trypsin; Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y); Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); Peptide mass tolerance: ± 20 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.1Da. Only proteins identified at peptide FDR ≤ 1% with ≥ 1 peptide were considered for protein lists and further downstream analysis. To determine differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), it must be identified and quantified with at least one significant peptide and the p-values of proteins quantitation should be less than 0.05 in the control, model, and ZBPYR groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chronic psychological stress, Zibupiyin recipe, Proteomics, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, Mitochondria-associated er membrane

### Affiliations
Center for Innovative Engineering Technology in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Liaoning University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shenyang, China
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Huiying Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Libin Zhan
Center for Innovative Engineering Technology in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Liaoning University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shenyang, China


