### Accession
PXD004114

### Title
Salmon liver proteomics -  Preliminary Validation of a High Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) and -Linolenic Acid (ALA) Dietary Oil Blend: Tissue Fatty Acid Composition and Liver Proteome Response in Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar) Smolts

### Description
Novel DHA-enriched oils with high α-linolenic acid (ALA) content will be available in the near future as an alternative for dietary fish oil replacement in aquafeeds. As preliminary validation, we 1) assessed the ability of a diet containing a formulated oil blend (tuna oil + flaxseed oil, TOFX) with high DHA and ALA content to achieve fish oil-like omega-3 long-chain (≥C20) polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 LC-PUFA) tissue composition in Atlantic salmon smolts, and 2) applied liver proteomics as exploratory approach to understand the consequent nutritional changes. Comparisons were made on fish fed a fish oil-based diet (FO) and a commercial-like oil blend diet (fish oil + poultry oil, FOPO) over 89 days. Growth and feed efficiency ratio were lower on the TOFX diet. Fish tissue concentration of n-3 LC-PUFA and the n-3:n-6 ratio were significantly higher for TOFX than for FOPO, but not higher than for FO, while tissue retention efficiency of n-3 LC-PUFA was promoted by TOFX relative to FO. Proteomics analysis revealed an unexpected oxidative stress response as the main adaptive physiological mechanism in TOFX fish. While specific dietary fatty acid concentrations and balances and antioxidant supplementation may need further attention, the use of an oil with a high content of DHA and ALA can enhance tissue deposition of n-3 LC-PUFA in relation to a commercially used blend oil.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue was extracted with 7M urea and 2M thiourea and protein samples cleaned up using ethanol precipitation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Andromeda for RAW data processing, database searching and label-free protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Marine oils are important to human nutrition as the major source of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a key omega-3 long-chain (&#x2265;C20) polyunsaturated fatty acid (n-3 LC-PUFA) that is low or lacking in terrestrial plant or animal oils. The inclusion of fish oil as main source of n-3 LC-PUFA in aquafeeds is mostly limited by the increasing price and decreasing availability. Fish oil replacement with cheaper terrestrial plant and animal oils has considerably reduced the content of n-3 LC-PUFA in flesh of farmed Atlantic salmon. Novel DHA-enriched oils with high alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) content will be available from transgenic oilseeds plants in the near future as an alternative for dietary fish oil replacement in aquafeeds. As a preliminary validation, we formulated an oil blend (TOFX) with high DHA and ALA content using tuna oil (TO) high in DHA and the flaxseed oil (FX) high in ALA, and assessed its ability to achieve fish oil-like n-3 LC-PUFA tissue composition in Atlantic salmon smolts. We applied proteomics as an exploratory approach to understand the effects of nutritional changes on the fish liver. Comparisons were made between fish fed a fish oil-based diet (FO) and a commercial-like oil blend diet (fish oil + poultry oil, FOPO) over 89 days. Growth and feed efficiency ratio were lower on the TOFX diet. Fish muscle concentration of n-3 LC-PUFA was significantly higher for TOFX than for FOPO fish, but not higher than for FO fish, while retention efficiency of n-3 LC-PUFA was promoted by TOFX relative to FO. Proteomics analysis revealed an oxidative stress response indicative of the main adaptive physiological mechanism in TOFX fish. While specific dietary fatty acid concentrations and balances and antioxidant supplementation may need further attention, the use of an oil with a high content of DHA and ALA can enhance tissue deposition of n-3 LC-PUFA in relation to a commercially used oil blend.

### Keywords
Fish oil replacement, Nutrition, Proteomics, Aquaculture

### Affiliations
Proteomics facility manager
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility manager


