### Accession
PXD013005

### Title
Quantification of Tic-Toc subunits in gun1

### Description
Quantification of Tic-Toc subunits in the wild type and gun1-101 mutants in the control conditions and treated with lincomycin or norflurazon to determine if there are differences between genotypes.

### Sample Protocol
To quantify Tic-Toc subunits in the wild type and gun1-101 in the material used for protein import assays (15 μM Lin treatment), seedlings were grown in long-day conditions. To quantify the Tic-Toc subunits upon treatment with 0.5 mM Lin or 5 μM NF, seedlings were grown in the presence or absence of 0.5 mM Lin, or in the presence of 0.1% DMSO (control for NF treatment) or 5 μM NF in the dark for 5 days followed by 2 days in continuous light. Total protein was extracted and separated by SDS-PAGE. The gel region from the beginning of the separation gel until 100 kD (containing Toc159, Toc132, Ycf1 and Tic110) was excised, in-gel digested and analysed by the Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) high-resolution Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification was done the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.8.3). The parameters were: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of Cys; variable modification: oxidation of Met, protein N-terminal acetylation; multiplicity set to 1 for label-free quantitation; trypsin specified as protease allowing one missed cleavage; Unique peptides were used for quantification.; all other parameters set as default. Spectra were matched against the Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR10; 35,386 entries). Common contaminations (e.g., trypsin and keratin) were included in the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
Communication between organelles and the nucleus is essential for fitness and survival. Retrograde signals are cues emitted from the organelles to regulate nuclear gene expression. GENOMES UNCOUPLED1 (GUN1), a protein of unknown function, has emerged as a central integrator, participating in multiple retrograde signalling pathways that collectively regulate the nuclear transcriptome. Here, we show that GUN1 regulates chloroplast protein import through interaction with the import-related chaperone cpHSC70-1. We demonstrated that overaccumulation of unimported precursor proteins (preproteins) in the cytosol causes a GUN phenotype in the wild-type background and enhances the GUN phenotype of the gun1 mutant. Furthermore, we identified the cytosolic HSP90 chaperone complex, induced by overaccumulated preproteins, as a central regulator of photosynthetic gene expression that determines the expression of the GUN phenotype. Taken together, our results suggest a model in which protein import capacity, folding stress and the cytosolic HSP90 complex control retrograde communication.

### Keywords
Lincomycin, Arabidopsis, Norflurazon, Wild type, Gun1-101

### Affiliations
Max-Planck institute of molecular plant physiology
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany

### Submitter
Guo-Zhang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph Bock
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany


