### Accession
PXD041156

### Title
Clients of membrane-bound PDI family members

### Description
The client-specificity of TMX3, TMX4 and TMX5 in cellula, was assessed by expressing mutant forms of the enzymes, where the last cysteine residue of the TMX’s CXXC catalytic sites has been mutated to alanine, which stabilizes the mixed disulfide that oxidoreductases establish with clients. Clients remain disulfide-bonded to the oxidoreductase and are identified upon co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analyses.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion HEK293 cells were transiently mock-transfected (pcDNA3.1) or transfected with TMX3-V5, TMX3C53A-V5, TMX4-V5, TMX4C64A-V5 and TMX5-V5. Sixteen h after transient transfection, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and the PNS (post nuclear supernatant) was collected. The PNS was double immunoprecipitated using an anti-V5 conjugated beads. After washing, the beads used for immunoprecipitation of two independent experiments were extracted by boiling for 5 min in 60 ul of non-denaturing gel sample buffer (without any reducing agent). The supernatant was split in two aliquots, one of which was reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubating for 5 min at RT. Reduced and nonreduced samples were migrated on separate 10% polyacrylamide gels for a total distance of 4.0 cm. After Coomassie-blue staining, gel lanes were excised in 4 bands  from the loading point down to the 50 kDa marker and digested in-gel as described (1,2). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS  Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis of extracted peptide mixtures after digestion with trypsin was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a nanocapillary HPLC (Dionex RSLC 3000). Peptides were separated on a custom-packed C18 reversed-phase column  (75 μm ID × 45 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch), using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (total time: 65min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis. 1. Shevchenko, A.; Wilm, M.; Vorm, O.; Mann, M., Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 1996, 68 (5), 850-8.  2. Wilm, M.; Shevchenko, A.; Houthaeve, T.; Breit, S.; Schweigerer, L.; Fotsis, T.; Mann, M., Femtomole sequencing of proteins from polyacrylamide gels by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry. Nature 1996, 379 (6564), 466-9.

### Data Protocol
Collections of peptide tandem mass spectra were searched using Mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the January 2019 release of the SWISSPROT database limited to human taxonomy (20’762 sequences), together with a custom-built database containing common contaminants. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was defined as fixed modification while oxidation (Met) and N-terminal protein acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The software Scaffold (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide (minimum 90% probability(3)) and protein (min 95 % probability (4)) identifications, perform dataset alignment as well as parsimony analysis to discriminate homologous hits. 3. Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R., Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search. Anal Chem 2002, 74 (20), 5383-92.  4. Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Keller, A.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R., A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2003, 75 (17), 4646-58.

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle of nucleated cells that produces proteins, lipids and oligosaccharides. ER volume and activity are increased upon induction of unfolded protein responses (UPR) and are reduced upon activation of ER-phagy programs. A specialized domain of the ER, the nuclear envelope (NE), protects the cell genome with two juxtaposed lipid bilayers, the inner and outer nuclear membranes (INM and ONM) separated by the perinuclear space (PNS). Here we report that expansion of the mammalian ER upon homeostatic perturbations results in TMX4 reductase-driven disassembly of the LINC complexes connecting INM and ONM and in ONM swelling. The physiologic distance between ONM and INM is restored, upon resolution of the ER stress, by asymmetric autophagy of the NE, which involves the LC3 lipidation machinery, the autophagy receptor SEC62 and the direct capture of ONM-derived vesicles by degradative LAMP1/RAB7-positive endolysosomes in a catabolic pathway mechanistically defined as micro-ONM-phagy.

### Keywords
Mixed disulfides, Trapping mutants, Oxidoreductases, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Chiesa 5, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Maurizio Molinari
Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Via Chiesa 5, 6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland


