### Accession
PXD028330

### Title
Signalling and recycling endosomes_dataset 02

### Description
We studied Receptor Tyrosine Kinase signalling from recycling endosomes and how this affected downstream responses.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from stimulated epithelial cells upon different perturbations were enriched forphosphorylated peptides. Peptides were purified on Stage-Tips before loading on Q-Exactive QF instrument.

### Data Protocol
Label free data were analysed with the following softares: MaxQuant/Perseus/R

### Publication Abstract
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) endocytosis-dependent signalling drives cell proliferation and motility during development and adult homeostasis, but is dysregulated in diseases, including cancer. The recruitment of RTK signalling partners during endocytosis, specifically during recycling to the plasma membrane, is still unknown. Focusing on Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2b (FGFR2b) recycling, we reveal FGFR signalling partners proximal to recycling endosomes by developing a Spatially Resolved Phosphoproteomics (SRP) approach based on APEX2-driven biotinylation followed by phosphorylated peptides enrichment. Combining this with traditional phosphoproteomics, bioinformatics, and targeted assays, we uncover that FGFR2b stimulated by its recycling ligand FGF10 activates mTOR-dependent signalling and ULK1 at the recycling endosomes, leading to autophagy suppression and cell survival. This adds to the growing importance of RTK recycling in orchestrating cell fate and suggests a therapeutically targetable vulnerability in ligand-responsive cancer cells. Integrating SRP with other systems biology approaches provides a powerful tool to spatially resolve cellular signalling.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Label free, Signalling

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Molecular and Cellular Function School of Biological Science Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health The University of Manchester Manchester United Kingdom

### Submitter
Chiara Francavilla

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Francavilla
Division of Molecular and Cellular Function School of Biological Science Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health The University of Manchester Manchester United Kingdom


