### Accession
PXD002371

### Title
Environmental interactions and epistasis are revealed in the proteomic responses to complex stimuli

### Description
Ultimately, the genotype of a cell and its interaction with the environment determine the cell’s biochemical state.  While the cell’s response to a single stimulus has been studied extensively, a conceptual framework to model the effect of multiple environmental stimuli applied concurrently is not as well developed.  In this study, we developed the concepts of environmental interactions and epistasis to explain the responses of the S. cerevisiae proteome to simultaneous environmental stimuli. We hypothesize that, as an abstraction, environmental stimuli can be treated as analogous to genetic elements. This would allow modeling of the effects of multiple stimuli using the concepts and tools developed for studying gene interactions. Mirroring gene interactions, our results show that environmental interactions play a critical role in determining the state of the proteome. We show that individual and complex environmental stimuli behave similarly to genetic elements in regulating the cellular responses to stimuli, including the phenomena of dominance and suppression. Interestingly, we observed that the effect of a stimulus on a protein is dominant over other stimuli if the response to the stimulus involves the protein. Using publicly available transcriptomic data, we find that environmental interactions and epistasis regulate transcriptomic responses as well.

### Sample Protocol
Five mL of YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2 % glucose) was inoculated with a single yeast colony from a YPD agar plate and grown overnight.  Three replicates were grown under each growth condition: YPD at 30°C and 37°C and YPG at 30°C and 37°C.  50 mL of YPD was inoculated with 50 µL of the overnight culture and grown at 30°C and 37°C.  100 mL of YPG (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, and 3% glycerol v/v) was inoculated with overnight cultures and grown at 30°C and 37°C. The cultures were grown with constant shaking at 175 rpm in Innova 44 shaker incubators (New Brunswick Scientific). For all four growth conditions, cells were harvested at mid-log phase as determined by OD600 measurements.  Cells grown in YPD were harvested after 14 h, while cells grown in YPG were harvested after 24 h. All cultures were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C using a Sorvall HLR6/H600A/HBB6 rotor in Sorvall RC-3B centrifuge and washed with ice cold deionized H20.  The cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL ice cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 5 mM beta-mercaptoethanol, 500 mM ammonium chloride, 100 mM magnesium acetate) and lysed at 4°C using glass beads and a Bead Beater (BioSpec, Inc) for 10 min as previously described.  The whole cell extracts (WCE) were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 min at 4°C, and a 200 μL aliquot of the cleared WCE was stored at -80 °C.   iTRAQ labeling: The total protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Sigma Aldrich).  For each growth condition, 50 μg of total protein was mixed with 50 ng of bovine serum albumin (Thermo Scientific) as an internal standard.  Each protein sample was acetone precipitated and resolublized in 25 µl iTRAQ dissolution buffer (500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate).  The proteins were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 60°C for 60 min and the cysteines were derivatized with methyl methanethiosulfonate at room temperature for 10 min.  All samples were digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:50; Promega Corporation) overnight at 37°C.  Equal fractions of the tryptic digests from the three replicates grown in YPD at 30°C were pooled separately and used as a control for the iTRAQ experiments.   Fifty μg of the pooled control and 50 μg of each of the replicates were used for iTRAQ labeling. The iTRAQ labeling reagents were resolublized in 150 μL anhydrous ethanol (Sigma Aldrich). 75 μL of iTRAQ reagent solutions were added to each 50 μg sample, incubated with shaking for 1 h at room temperature on an Eppendorf Thermomixer R, pooled, frozen, lyophilized, resolublized in 200 μL of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid), and stored at -80°C. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry:  The iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed with MudPIT as previously described. Precursor ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by four CID fragment ion scans in the ion trap and four HCD fragment ion scans (normalized collision energy  = 45%) in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
RAW files generated by the MudPIT experiments were searched using the Sequest HT database search engine  running under Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) against a forward and reverse yeast protein database (S.cererevisiae_orf_trans_all_SGD.fasta.6718) with appended common contaminant sequences. Beta-methylthiolation and iTRAQ modifications were included as constant modifications. Oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine were used as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 3 Da and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Protein assembly, reporter ion quantitation, and protein fold change calculations were done using ProteoIQ at 5% peptide and protein FDR (Premier Biosoft).

### Publication Abstract
Ultimately, the genotype of a cell and its interaction with the environment determine the cell's biochemical state. While the cell's response to a single stimulus has been studied extensively, a conceptual framework to model the effect of multiple environmental stimuli applied concurrently is not as well developed. In this study, we developed the concepts of environmental interactions and epistasis to explain the responses of the S. cerevisiae proteome to simultaneous environmental stimuli. We hypothesize that, as an abstraction, environmental stimuli can be treated as analogous to genetic elements. This would allow modeling of the effects of multiple stimuli using the concepts and tools developed for studying gene interactions. Mirroring gene interactions, our results show that environmental interactions play a critical role in determining the state of the proteome. We show that individual and complex environmental stimuli behave similarly to genetic elements in regulating the cellular responses to stimuli, including the phenomena of dominance and suppression. Interestingly, we observed that the effect of a stimulus on a protein is dominant over other stimuli if the response to the stimulus involves the protein. Using publicly available transcriptomic data, we find that environmental interactions and epistasis regulate transcriptomic responses as well.

### Keywords
Environmental interaction, Yeast, Mudpit, Environmental epistasis, Itraq, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Dept of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Andrew Link

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Link
Dept of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine


