### Accession
PXD025105

### Title
Mapping the Interaction between Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 4A (eIF4A) and the Inhibitor Hippuristanol Using Carbene Footprinting and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Protein-ligand interactions are central to protein activity and cell functionality. Improved knowledge of these relationships greatly benefits our understanding of key biological processes and aids in rational drug design towards the treatment of clinically relevant diseases. Carbene footprinting is a recently developed mass spectrometry-based chemical labelling technique that provides valuable information relating to protein-ligand interactions, such as the mapping of binding sites and associated conformational change. Here we show the application of carbene footprinting to the interaction between eIF4A helicase and a natural product inhibitor, hippuristanol, found in the coral Isis hippuris. Upon addition of hippuristanol we identified reduced carbene labelling (masking) in regions of eIF4A previously implicated in ligand binding. Additionally, we detected hippuristanol-associated increased carbene labelling (unmasking) around the flexible hinge region of eIF4A, indicating ligand-induced conformational change. This work represents further development of the carbene footprinting technique and demonstrates its potential in characterising medicinally relevant protein-ligand interactions.

### Sample Protocol
eIF4A was used as a purified recombinant protein, photochemically labelled with TDBA, separated by 1D SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin and analysed with a Dionex U3000 nanoLC coupled to a ThermoFisher LTQ FT Ultra Mass Spectrometer containing a nano-ESI source. An injection volume of 3 µL was loaded onto a C18 Pepmap300 loading column (10 mm, 300 Å, 5 µm particle size). Sample separation was performed using a C18 Pepmap300 column (150 mm × 75 µm, 300 Å, 5 mm particle size) with a gradient of two mobile phases: mobile phase A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The FT was operated in positive ion mode with a standard coated SilicaTip emitter nanospray source.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of carbene labelling was carried out in PepFoot (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00238) using full scan mode files. Using unlabelled and labelled extracted ion chromatograms from the same peptide, spectral peaks were extracted - and depending on isotope distributions and mass accuracies -integrated, generating fractional modifications. Peptide identity was confirmed by CID MS/MS of precursor peptide ions and database searching using the TandemX! database (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00175).

### Publication Abstract
Protein-ligand interactions are central to protein activity and cell functionality. Improved knowledge of these relationships greatly benefits our understanding of key biological processes and aids in rational drug design towards the treatment of clinically relevant diseases. Carbene footprinting is a recently developed mass spectrometry-based chemical labelling technique that provides valuable information relating to protein-ligand interactions, such as the mapping of binding sites and associated conformational change. Here, we show the application of carbene footprinting to the interaction between eIF4A helicase and a natural product inhibitor, hippuristanol, found in the coral Isis hippuris. Upon addition of hippuristanol we identified reduced carbene labelling (masking) in regions of eIF4A previously implicated in ligand binding. Additionally, we detected hippuristanol-associated increased carbene labelling (unmasking) around the flexible hinge region of eIF4A, indicating ligand-induced conformational change. This work represents further development of the carbene footprinting technique and demonstrates its potential in characterising medicinally relevant protein-ligand interactions.

### Keywords
Mapping ligand binding, Protein footprinting, Carbene labelling

### Affiliations
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
James Lloyd

### Lab Head
Dr Neil J. Oldham
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom


