### Accession
PXD027228

### Title
A novel small molecule that induces cytotoxicity in lung cancer cells inhibits disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1

### Description
High-throughput phenotype-based screening of large libraries of novel compounds without known targets can identify small molecules that elicit a desired cellular response, but additional approaches are required to find and characterize their targets and mechanisms of action. Here we show that a compound termed lung cancer screen 3 (LCS3), previously selected for its ability to impair the growth of human lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cell lines, but not normal lung cells, induces oxidative stress and activates the NRF2 signaling pathway by generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) in sensitive LUAD cell lines. To identify the target that mediates this effect, we applied thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and uncovered the disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1 as LCS3 targets. Through enzymatic assays using purified protein, we confirmed that LCS3 inhibits disulfide reductase activity through a reversible, uncompetitive mechanism. Further, we demonstrate that LCS3-sensitive LUAD cells are correspondingly sensitive to the synergistic inhibition of glutathione and thioredoxin pathways. Lastly, a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen identified the loss of NQO1 as a mechanism of LCS3 resistance. This work highlights the ability of TPP to uncover targets of small molecules identified by high-throughput screens and demonstrates the potential utility of inhibiting disulfide reductases as a therapeutic strategy for LUAD.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression profiling (SILAC)  H23 cells were cultured either in normal media (light) or media with Lys and Arg substituted with 13C615N2 Lys and 13C6 Arg (heavy) (Cambridge Isotopes). One replicate of each treatment condition was cultured in light media and one in heavy. Cells were maintained in label-containing media and passaged until 99% labeling efficiency was achieved. Cells were treated in duplicate (one heavy and one light) with 3µM LCS3 for 24 hours and then harvested by cell scraping. Samples were mixed 1:1, digested with trypsin, and prepared for mass spectrometry as previously described (15, 74). The SILAC proteome dataset has been provided as a supplementary file.  Normalized Z-scores were calculated for each identified protein replicate based on its ratio of treatment-to-vehicle (75). Z-score values were statistically combined by Stouffer’s Z method. Proteins with Z > 1.5 were considered differentially expressed. The upregulated proteins were entered as input into DAVID Bioinformatics Database v6.8 to determine upregulated biological processes by gene ontology (73).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.7.4) with the Andromedasearch engine. MS-MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (Feb 2017, 70952 entries) and quantification was performed using default parameters for 3 stateSILAC in MaxQuant. Combined normalized SILAC ratio of theproteins and the phosphopeptides and individual ratios of eachexperiment were obtained from the MaxQuant search. Perseus (ver-sion 1.5.5.3) was used to view and further analyze the data.

### Publication Abstract
Phenotype-based screening can identify small molecules that elicit a desired cellular response, but additional approaches are required to characterize their targets and mechanisms of action. Here, we show that a compound termed LCS3, which selectively impairs the growth of human lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells, induces oxidative stress. To identify the target that mediates this effect, we use thermal proteome profiling (TPP) and uncover the disulfide reductases GSR and TXNRD1 as targets. We confirm through enzymatic assays that LCS3 inhibits disulfide reductase activity through a reversible, uncompetitive mechanism. Further, we demonstrate that LCS3-sensitive LUAD cells are sensitive to the synergistic inhibition of glutathione and thioredoxin pathways. Lastly, a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen identifies NQO1 loss as a mechanism of LCS3 resistance. This work highlights the ability of TPP to uncover targets of small molecules identified by high-throughput screens and demonstrates the potential therapeutic utility of inhibiting disulfide reductases in LUAD.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Lung cancer, Lcs3-sensitive luad cells

### Affiliations
NIH/NCI
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Willian Lockwood
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada


