### Accession
PXD027538

### Title
TMT proteomic analysis of thyroid cancer tissue sample

### Description
Our study aimed to adopt a proteomics strategy for analysing changes in the levels of proteins between PTC and para-tumour specimens. A integrative strategy was adopted to identify the important pathways in PTC.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from tissues,and determined by using the BCA protein assay, and then 100 μg of protein per condition was transferred into a new Eppendorf tube and the final volume was adjusted to 100 μL with 8 M urea. 2 μL of 0.5 M TCEP was added and the sample was incubated at 37℃ for 1 h, and then 4 μL of 1 M iodoacetamide was added to the sample and the incubation was last for 40 minutes protected from light at room temperature. After that, five volumes of -20℃ pre-chilled acetone was added to precipitate the proteins overnight at -20℃. The precipitates were washed by 1 mL pre-chilled 90% acetone aqueous solution for twice and then re-dissolved in 100 μL 100 mM TEAB. Sequence grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at the ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: protein, weight: weight) to digest the proteins at 37℃ overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted by C18 ZipTip, quantified by Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (23275) and then lyophilized by SpeedVac.The resultant peptide mixture was labeled with TMT-6plex Isobaric Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) following the manufacture’s instruction. The labeled peptide samples were then pooled and lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Online (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). PEAKS DB was set up to search the SP_Homosapiens_201907.fasta assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT 6plex (K, N-term) 229.16 were specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation (M)、Deamidation (NQ) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as the variable modifications. Peptides were filter by 1% FDR and 1 unique. ANOVA was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation. Normalization was performed on averaging the abundance of all peptides. Medians were used for averaging. Different expressed proteins were filtered if their fold change were over 2 and contained at least 2 unique peptides with p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Thyroid cancer, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Hernia and Abdominal Wall Surgery, General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China.
Qilu Hospital of Shandong University

### Submitter
Jinghui Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Jinghui Lu
Department of Hernia and Abdominal Wall Surgery, General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, PR China.


