### Accession
PXD025122

### Title
RNase III CLASH uncovers sRNA regulatory networks coupling metabolism to production of cytolytic toxins in methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an infectious pathogen that poses a significant threat to human health. MRSA is renowned for its ability to adapt to and even thrive in hostile environment within its host. By expressing a battery of virulence factors and toxins, MRSA is able to scavenge effectively essential nutrients and evade the immune system within the host. Post-transcriptional regulation by sRNAs contributes significantly to regulating the expression of virulence factors and toxins. However, the roles of the vast majority of sRNAs during host adaptation remain unknown. To challenge this gap, we performed UV cross-linking, ligation and sequencing of hybrids (CLASH) in S. aureus to unravel sRNA-RNA interactions with the double stranded ribonuclease III (RNase III) as a bait under conditions that mimic the host environment. Here we report a global analysis of RNA-RNA interactions in MRSA in vivo, which uncovered hundreds of novel sRNA-RNA pairs. Strikingly, our results indicate that the production of small membrane-permeabilizing toxins is under extensive sRNA-mediated regulation and that their expression is intimately connected to metabolism. We show that at least two sRNAs, RNAIII and RsaE, enhance the production of five clinically relevant cytolytic toxins that are important for survival within the host. Taken together, our data greatly expands the repertoire of sRNA-target interactions in S. aureus and provide detail on how these contribute to adjusting virulence in response to changes in metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of parental USA300 LAC pICS3:empty, rsaE pICS3:empty and rsaE pICS3:RsaE were grown overnight in TSB at 37°C with 180 rpm shaking. The following day, each culture was diluted 1:100 into 25 mL of fresh TSB and grown for three hours. Cultures were then re-inoculated into another 25 mL of fresh TSB for a starting OD600 of 0.05 and grown for 15 hours at 37°C with shaking. Samples were grown in biological triplicates. The following day, 1 mL of culture was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 1 minute and 500 µL of culture supernatant was moved to a new tube. 2 mL of freezing-cold acetone was added and solutions were incubated at -20°C for one hour to precipitate the proteins. Precipitated proteins were then pelleted through centrifugation at 13,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were washed with 70% ethanol and then resuspended in resuspension buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% SDS, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2). Protein concentrations were measured using a Qubit system and then 50 µg of protein was placed into a new tube and samples made up to identical volumes through addition of resuspension buffer.  Protein extracts were treated with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 minutes and then diluted 1:8 with UA buffer (8M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8). Extracts were passed through a FASP column (Expedeon) through centrifugation at 20,000 x g and washed with 200 µL of UA buffer. 100 µL of IAA buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer) was then added, and the samples stored in darkness for 10 minutes at room temperature. Afterwards, the IAA buffer was passed through the column by centrifugation and the column was washed twice with 100 µL of UA buffer. The column was then washed twice with 100 µL of ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water). The column was transferred to a new 2 mL tube and 40 µL of TWR buffer was added (1 µg trypsin in 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA)), and the samples left to digest overnight at 37°C. The following day, 40 µL of ABC buffer was added and the peptides were collected through centrifugation before being acidified with 10% TFA.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0(Tyanova et al., 2016) was used for mass spectra analysis and peptide identification via the Andromeda search engine(Cox et al., 2011). Match between runs and LFQ were chosen. Trypsin was chosen as the protease using a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A proteome database was made using 31 S. aureus toxin sequences. The first search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm and the main search peptide tolerance was set at 4.5. The peptide spectrum match was filtered to 1% FDR. Protein intensities were log transformed and missing values were imputed. Moderate t-test was performed on log2 transformed protein intensities using the limma package(Ritchie et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxin, Srna, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Edinburgh University
Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh

### Submitter
Liangcui Chu

### Lab Head
Dr Sander Granneman
Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys) University of Edinburgh Max Born Crescent                                                                  CH Waddington Building, room 3.06 EH9 3BF Edinburgh


