### Accession
PXD032011

### Title
Orphan precursor proteins and ROS activate the mitochondrial UPR_Redox proteomics

### Description
The mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt) safeguards mitochondria from proteotoxic damage by activating a dedicated transcriptional response in the nucleus to restore proteostasis. How the mitochondrial protein misfolding information is signalled to the nucleus as part of the human UPRmt remains unclear. Here, we showed that UPRmt signalling is carried out by the co-occurrence of two individual signals – ROS production in mitochondria and accumulation of orphan mitochondrial proteins in the cytosol. Combining proteomics and genetic approaches, we identified that mitochondrial protein misfolding caused the release of ROS into the intermembrane space (IMS), which was essential for UPRmt signalling. ROS released from mitochondria oxidized the cytosolic HSP40 protein DNAJA1 to enhance recruitment of cytosolic HSP70 to orphan mitochondrial proteins that accumulated in parallel in the cytosol due to mitochondrial import defect. This recruitment leads to the release of HSF1 from HSP70 and its subsequent translocation to the nucleus to activate transcription of UPRmt related genes. Strikingly, we found that combining ROS and the accumulation of orphan mitochondrial proteins in the cytosol was sufficient and necessary to activate the UPRmt. Our findings reveal that monitoring of ROS and orphan mitochondrial proteins in cytosol allows an elegant surveillance to control the UPRmt via HSF1 activation in human cells. These observations reveal a novel link between mitochondrial and cytosolic proteostasis and provide molecular insight into UPRmt signalling.

### Sample Protocol
For redox proteomics, cells were lysed in HES buffer (1 mM EDTA, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor and 10 % (v/v) TCA, and incubated for 2h at 4oC. Each sample was divided into two 2 fractions: 1. oxidized Cys fraction, 2. total Cys fraction. Proteins were precipitated with TCA/acetone precipitation. For fraction 2, 100 µg of proteins were resuspended in HES buffer supplemented with 5 mM TCEP and incubated for 1 h at 50 oC to reduce all Cys thiols. For fraction 1, 100 µg of the proteins were resuspended in denaturing buffer (6 M urea, 1 % (w/v) octyl ß-glucopyranoside, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor, 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for 1 h at 37 oC in the dark to block free Cys thiols. Oxidized Cys thiols were reduced as described previously for fraction 2. Proteins were clean-up by TCA/acetone precipitation. To label the free Cys thiols, proteins were resuspended in denaturing buffer supplemented with iodoTMT#1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for fraction 1 or iodoTMT#2 for fraction 2, and incubated for 1 h at 37 oC in the dark. Labelling reactions were quenched with 20 mM DTT. Labelled proteins were pooled together and cleaned up with TCA/acetone precipitation. Proteins were digested with 1:50 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 (w/w) Trypsin (Promega) in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 containing 1 M urea for overnight at 37 oC. Peptides were purified with (50 mg) SepPak columns (Waters) and then dried. IodoTMT-labelled peptides were enriched with anti-TMT antibody resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Enriched pools of labelled peptides were subjected to high pH reverse Phase fractionation with the HpH RP Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Fractionated peptides were concatenated into 4 separate fractions.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of redox proteomics data, raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in Proteome Discoverer. Database searches were performed against a trypsin-digested Homo sapiens SwissProt database, and FASTA files of common contaminants (‘contaminants.fasta’ provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Dynamic modifications were set as methionine oxidation (C, +15.995 Da), iodoTMT6plex (C, +329.227 Da) and carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021 Da) at cysteine residues. One search node was set up to search with Met-loss+acetyl (M, -89.030 Da) as dynamic modifications at the N-terminus. Searches were performed using Sequest HT. After each search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 10. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing. Non-normalized abundances were used for quantification. Percentage of cysteine oxidation for each peptide was calculated as follows:  % oxidized Cys = (abundance of fraction 1/abundance of fraction 2) x 100% For peptides with several different modifications, fold changes of % oxidized Cys from each different combination were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR<sup>mt</sup>) is essential to safeguard mitochondria from proteotoxic damage by activating a dedicated transcriptional response in the nucleus to restore proteostasis<sup>1,2</sup>. Yet, it remains unclear how the information on mitochondria misfolding stress (MMS) is signalled to the nucleus as part of the human UPR<sup>mt</sup> (refs. <sup>3,4</sup>). Here, we show that UPR<sup>mt</sup> signalling is driven by the release of two individual signals in the cytosol-mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) and accumulation of mitochondrial protein precursors in the cytosol (c-mtProt). Combining proteomics and genetic approaches, we identified that MMS causes the release of mtROS into the cytosol. In parallel, MMS leads to mitochondrial protein import defects causing c-mtProt accumulation. Both signals integrate to activate the UPR<sup>mt</sup>; released mtROS oxidize the cytosolic HSP40 protein DNAJA1, which leads to enhanced recruitment of cytosolic HSP70 to c-mtProt. Consequently, HSP70 releases HSF1, which translocates to the nucleus and activates transcription of UPR<sup>mt</sup> genes. Together, we identify a highly controlled cytosolic surveillance mechanism that integrates independent mitochondrial stress signals to initiate the UPR<sup>mt</sup>. These observations reveal a link between mitochondrial and cytosolic proteostasis and provide molecular insight into UPR<sup>mt</sup> signalling in human cells.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Ros, Redox, Uprmt, Iodotmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry II Goethe University Frankfurt – Medical School University Hospital  Germany

### Submitter
Reymond Sutandy

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II Goethe University Frankfurt – Medical School University Hospital  Germany


