### Accession
PXD011779

### Title
AP-MS analysis of FLAG-tagged Murine norovirus (NS1/2 and NS4)

### Description
Norovirus replication is accomplished by the use of a number of viral proteins derived from a long polyprotein. These components are named from NS1/2 to NS7. Having previously determined that the incorporation of FLAG epitope tags into certain positions in the norovirus genome was tolerated (Thorne et. al. 2012 J. Virol)

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labelled murine BV-2 microglial cells were infected with either wild-type or FLAG-epitope tagged murine norovirus. Epitope labelled samples were labeled in either the NS1/2 or NS4 proteins. Infected cells were harvested and subject to FLAG pulldowns using Sigma anti-FLAG beads according to the manufacturers protocol. Bound samples were removed from the beads by boiling in SDS-PAGE reducing sample buffer. Samples were run into precast SDS-PAGE gels for 5 minutes, the entire sample cut from the gel as a single band, and then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit. The resulting peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitap Velos mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Maxquant v1.6.0.16 and search against the Uniprot mouse database (Swissprot-only) and a custom fasta file containing the murine norovirus sequences. Both fasta files are included in the submission. Quantification was performed based on SILAC labelling (R0K0, R6K4, R10K8). The requantify option in maxquant was not enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge of the host factors required for norovirus replication has been hindered by the challenges associated with culturing human noroviruses. We have combined proteomic analysis of the viral translation and replication complexes with a CRISPR screen, to identify host factors required for norovirus infection. The core stress granule component G3BP1 was identified as a host factor essential for efficient human and murine norovirus infection, demonstrating a conserved function across the <i>Norovirus</i> genus. Furthermore, we show that G3BP1 functions in the novel paradigm of viral VPg-dependent translation initiation, contributing to the assembly of translation complexes on the VPg-linked viral positive sense RNA genome by facilitating ribosome recruitment. Our data uncovers a novel function for G3BP1 in the life cycle of positive sense RNA viruses and identifies the first host factor with pan-norovirus pro-viral activity.

### Keywords
Norovirus, Mnv, Flag, Ns4, Ns1/2

### Affiliations
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Edward Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Goodfellow
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


