### Accession
PXD004753

### Title
Analysis of heat-shock treated Drosophila melanogaster embryos by SWATH-MS

### Description
Protein expression levels of Drosophila melanogaster embryos were monitored by SWATH-MS after heat-shock treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from embryos using a total lysis with a buffer containing 4% SDS. Samples were prepared using GeLCMS preparation method and proteins were digested with trypsin. HRM peptides were spiked in the samples before analysis. The peptides were analysed using a SWATH acquisition mode on an ABSciex triple-TOF 6600.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut 8 (Biognosys) was used to analyse the SWATH experiments. Default settings were used except for the retention time prediction type that was set to dynamic iRT with a correction factor for window of 2. A Q-value of 10-5 (corresponding to a FDR of 0.001% at the peptide level) was used.  Proteins with at least two peptides were used for quantitative analysis. The sum of peptides intensity was used as protein intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Embryogenesis is one of the most important processes in the life of an animal. During this dynamic process, progressive cell division and cellular differentiation are accompanied by significant changes in protein expression at the level of the proteome. However, very few studies to date have described the dynamics of the proteome during the early development of an embryo in any organism. In this dataset, we monitor changes in protein expression across a timecourse of more than 20&#xa0;h of <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> embryonic development. Mass-spectrometry data were produced using a SWATH acquisition mode on a Sciex Triple-TOF 6600. A spectral library built in-house was used to analyse these data and more than 1950 proteins were quantified at each embryonic timepoint. The files presented here are a permanent digital map and can be reanalysed to test against new hypotheses. The data have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD0031078.

### Keywords
Embryo, Swath, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Bertrand Fabre

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Susan Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K


