### Accession
PXD001207

### Title
The proteome of tic56-1 plastids after thermolysin treatment

### Description
Analysing of the proteome of tic56-1 (tic56-1-plus) and wild type (wt-plus) plastids after thermolysin treatment as well as the proteome of non-thermolysin treated wild type plastids (wt-minus) and comparison of the proteome data sets.

### Sample Protocol
Plastids of tic56-1 and wild type were enriched and resulting pellets are treated with a buffer containing thermolysin (wild type: wt-plus, tic56-1: tic56-1-plus) or without (only wild type: wt-minus). Proteins of the samples were tryptic digested in-solution. The peptide-samples were analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated by liquid chromatography using C18 columns. For separation a gradient consisting of water with 0.1 % formic acid (A) and acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid (B) was used (method: 0 150 min 5 40% B, 150 155 min 40 80 % B, 155 160 min 80 % B). Precursor detection was done in an m/z-range from 400-1850 and the 20 most intensive signals were used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The raw-files were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Scientific) with the search engine SEQUEST. As database TAIR10 was used, the relaxed FDR was set to 5 %. As variable modifications N-terminal acetylation and as fixed modifications carbamidomethylation of cysteines were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
We report on the characterization of Tic56, a unique component of the recently identified 1-MD translocon at the inner envelope membrane of chloroplasts (TIC) in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) comprising Tic20, Tic100, and Tic214. We isolated Tic56 by copurification with Tandem Affinity Purification-tagged Toc159 in the absence of precursor protein, indicating spontaneous and translocation-independent formation of the translocon at the outer envelope membrane of chloroplasts (TOC) and TIC supercomplexes. Tic56 mutant plants have an albino phenotype and are unable to grow without an external carbon source. Using specific enrichment of protein amino termini, we analyzed the tic56-1 and plastid protein import2 (toc159) mutants to assess the in vivo import capacity of plastids in mutants of an outer and inner envelope component of the anticipated TOC-TIC supercomplex. Inboth mutants, we observed processing of several import substrates belonging to various pathways. Our results suggest that despite the severe developmental defects, protein import into Tic56-deficient plastids is functional to a considerable degree, indicating the existence of alternative translocases at the inner envelope membrane.

### Keywords
Protease protection assay, Thermolysin, Chloroplast, Tic56

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther-University, Nat.-Fac. I, Dept. Plant Biochemistry, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Martin-Luther-University, Nat.-Fac. I, Dept. Plant Biochemistry, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


