### Accession
PXD031997

### Title
Investigating the monomer-dimer transition of PKD1 kinase domain with EDC crosslinking

### Description
The project aim was to generate experimental constraints for the in silico modeling of the dimeric structure of the PKD kinase domain. And identify conformational changes upon dimerization. For this we used the heterobifunctional zero length crosslinker EDC to identify salt bridges within the protein and between the molecules in the dimeric arrangement. We could observe a stabilization of the protein in particularly in the activation loop upon dimerization and successfully identified one abundant dimer specific crosslink that helped us to identify contact surfaces in the dimer interface.

### Sample Protocol
PKD1 kinase domain (residues 570-890), dephosphorylated and purified to homogeneity was preincubated with 1mM ATP, 2mM MgCl2 in 40mM MES buffer pH 6.5 with 100mM NaCl before starting the crosslinking reaction at a final protein concentration of 4µM. Crosslinking with EDC and Sulfo-NHS was performed in three different concentrations (1mM EDC + 2.5mM Sulfo-NHS, 2mM EDC + 5mM Sulfo-NHS, 4mM EDC + 10mM Sulfo-NHS) for 30min at room temperature protected from light.  The reactions were stopped by adding 20mM β-mercaptoethanol 50mM Tris pH 7.5 and the monomeric and dimeric species were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.  The Coomassie-stained gel band was destained with a mixture of acetonitrile (Chromasolv®, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (Roche) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin (Promega; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) was used for proteolytic cleavage. Digestion was carried out with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Formic acid was used to stop the digestion and extracted peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (1.6.17.0) and searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome (January 2020, www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants.  The search was performed with standard identification settings: full trypsin specificity allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. All other settings were left at default. Results were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% at protein and peptide spectrum match level. To identify cross-linked peptides, the spectra were searched using pLink software (2.3.9) against the sequences of the top 8 non-contaminant proteins from the MQ search sorted by iBAQ. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing 4 missed cleavage sites. Crosslinker settings were selected as EDC. Search results were filtered for 1% FDR (false discovery rate) on the PSM level (peptide-spectrum matches) and a maximum precursor mass deviation of 5 ppm. To remove low quality PSMs, additionally an e-Value cutoff of < 0.001 was applied. Cross-link maps were generated in xiNET.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a ubiquitous mechanism by which signals are transduced in cells. Protein kinases, enzymes that catalyze the phosphotransfer reaction are, themselves, often regulated by phosphorylation. Paradoxically, however, a substantial fraction of more than 500 human protein kinases are capable of catalyzing their own activation loop phosphorylation. Commonly, these kinases perform this autophosphorylation reaction in <i>trans</i>, whereby transient dimerization leads to the mutual phosphorylation of the activation loop of the opposing protomer. In this study, we demonstrate that protein kinase D (PKD) is regulated by the inverse mechanism of dimerization-mediated <i>trans</i>-autoinhibition, followed by activation loop autophosphorylation in <i>cis</i>. We show that PKD forms a stable face-to-face homodimer that is incapable of either autophosphorylation or substrate phosphorylation. Dissociation of this <i>trans</i>-autoinhibited dimer results in activation loop autophosphorylation, which occurs exclusively in <i>cis</i>. Phosphorylation serves to increase PKD activity and prevent <i>trans</i>-autoinhibition, thereby switching PKD on. Our findings not only reveal the mechanism of PKD regulation but also have profound implications for the regulation of many other eukaryotic kinases.

### Keywords
Protein kinase d, Activation loop ordering, Kinase domain dimer

### Affiliations
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Leonard
Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs, Campus Vienna Biocenter 5, 1030 Vienna, Austria Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria


