### Accession
PXD023547

### Title
Defining Essential Regulators of Naïve Human Pluripotent Cell Reprogramming

### Description
Defining how human pluripotent cell identity is controlled and in particular how naïve pluripotency is acquired during cell reprogramming is crucial for the future applications of pluripotent stem cells. However, the regulatory pathways of naïve cell reprogramming remain incompletely understood. Here, we used genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening to identify novel regulators of primed to naïve pluripotent stem cell reprogramming, including genes that are essential for reprogramming and genes that normally impede reprogramming and whose targeted deletion led to enhanced reprogramming. Integrated analysis defined specific chromatin complexes and signalling pathways as critical regulators of naïve reprogramming, and were largely distinct from regulators of somatic cell reprogramming. Mechanistically, PRC1.3 and PRDM14 are jointly required to transcriptionally repress developmental and gene regulatory factors to ensure naïve cell reprogramming. Additionally, small molecule inhibitors of reprogramming impediments increased the efficiency of naïve cell reprogramming, and are of practical benefit that can improve on current reprogramming methods. Taken together, we have identified novel regulators controlling the establishment of naïve pluripotency in human cells, which will open up new ways to exploit the full potential of pluripotent stem cells. These results also provide new insights into mechanisms that destabilise and reconfigure cell identity during cell state transitions.

### Sample Protocol
cells were dissociated with Accutase (BioLegend), washed with PBS, and cross-linked with 2 mM Di(N-succinimidyl) glutarate (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS for 45 min at room temperature with shaking and then with 1% methanol-free paraformaldehyde (Agar Scientific) for 12.5 min at room temperature with shaking. Fixation was quenched with 0.125 M Glycine for 5 min at room temperature with shaking. Cells were washed with PBS containing cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche) and subject to magnetically activated cell sorting (MACS) to deplete Cd90.2-expressing mouse embryonic fibroblasts. To do this, cells were suspended in 2% FBS in PBS (flow buffer) and passed through a 50 µm strainer (VWR). Filtered cells were incubated with biotin-conjugated anti-mouse Cd90.2 antibody (BioLegend) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Cells were washed and incubated with Streptavidin microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) for 15 minutes at 4°C. Cells were washed and passed through an activated MACS LS column (Miltenyi Biotec) on a QuadroMACS magnetic separator (Miltenyi Biotec) to isolate unlabelled hPSCs in the flow-through.  Twenty million PSCs per RIME were resuspended in 10 ml Nuclei Extraction buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EGTA and 0.75% Triton X-100) and incubated for 10 min at 4⁰C with rotation. After centrifugation, nuclei were resuspended in 10 ml Nuclei Wash buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0 and 0.5 mM EGTA) and incubated for 10 min at 4⁰C with rotation. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in 600 µl lysis and sonication Buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1% SDS and 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate), transferred to protein lo-bind tubes and incubated for 30 min at 4⁰C to allow cell lysis. Chromatin was fragmented by sonication on a Microson ultrasonic cell disruptor XL Misonix wand sonicator with output setting of 10W using 30, 32 or 34 sonication cycles (15s on, 30s off) for primed, 48hr 5iLA and naïve PSC chromatin respectively. Triton-X100 was added to the fragmented chromatin to a final 1% prior to immunoprecipitation. Magnetic Protein A Dynabeads (ThermoFisher Scientific), 100 µl per immunoprecipitation, were washed three times with cold 0.5% BSA/PBS and 5 µg of anti-PCGF3+5 antibody (Abcam, ab201510)  was immobilised on the Protein A beads in 250 µl cold PBS/0.5% BSA for at least 5 hr at 4⁰C with rotation. The three wash steps with 0.5% BSA/PBS were then repeated and the fragmented chromatin was added to the beads overnight at 4⁰C with rotation. The next day, the protein-of-interest that was bound to the magnetic beads was washed stringently ten times with RIME RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl 500, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1% NP-40 and 0.7% Sodium Deoxycholate) and twice with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate.  Samples were prepared as described previously. In brief, after on bead tryptic digestion, C18 cleaned peptides were labelled with the TMT-16plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour. Samples were mixed and fractionated with Reversed-Phase cartridges at high pH (Pierce #84868). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5–50% ACN.  Peptide fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Å trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method using the loading pump at 5 μL/min flow rate for 10 min. For the peptide separation the EASY-Spray analytical column 75 μm × 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Ȧ column was used for multi-step gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted using a gradient as follows: 0 - 10 min, 5 % mobile phase B; 10 – 90 min, 5 – 38% mobile phase B; 90 -100 min, 38% - 95% B; 100 - 105 min, 95% B; 105 – 110min, 95% - 5% B; 110 – 120 min, 5% B.  Data-dependent acquisition began with a MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (380 – 1500 m/z, resolution 120,000 FWHM, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e5, maximum injection time 100 ms). MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 32, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 50 ms, an isolation window at 0.7, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 45s. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 setting. HCD-MS3 analysis with MS2 isolation window 2.0 Th. The HCD collision energy was set at 50% and the detection was performed with Orbitrap resolution 50,000 FWHM and in the scan range 100–400 m/z. AGC target 1e5, with the maximum injection time of 105ms.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of CID tandem mass spectra. The SequestHT search engine was used and all the spectra searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens FASTA database (taxon ID 9606 - Version January 2020). All searches were performed using as a static modification TMT pro 16plex (+304.207 Da) at any N-terminus and on lysine. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984) were included as dynamic modifications. Mass spectra were searched using precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. For peptide confidence, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification.   Data processing, normalisation and statistical analysis were carried out using qPLEXanalyzer package from Bioconductor. Peptide intensities were normalised using median scaling and protein level quantification was obtained by the summation of the normalized peptide intensities. A statistical analysis of differentially-regulated proteins was carried out using the limma method. Multiple testing correction of p-values was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2346101?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents) to control the FDR.   WT_Naive_Rep3 and Rep4 were identified as outlier replicates. Both samples had a much lower distribution of peptide intensities compared to all other WT samples and also very low correlation values to all other samples in the experiment. We therefore removed these two replicates from further downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Uncovering the mechanisms that establish na&#xef;ve pluripotency in humans is crucial for the future applications of pluripotent stem cells including the production of human blastoids. However, the regulatory pathways that control the establishment of na&#xef;ve pluripotency by reprogramming are largely unknown. Here, we use genome-wide screening to identify essential regulators as well as major impediments of human primed to na&#xef;ve pluripotent stem cell reprogramming. We discover that factors essential for cell state change do not typically undergo changes at the level of gene expression but rather are repurposed with new functions. Mechanistically, we establish that the variant Polycomb complex PRC1.3 and PRDM14 jointly repress developmental and gene regulatory factors to ensure na&#xef;ve cell reprogramming. In addition, small-molecule inhibitors of reprogramming impediments improve na&#xef;ve cell reprogramming beyond current methods. Collectively, this work defines the principles controlling the establishment of human na&#xef;ve pluripotency and also provides new insights into mechanisms that destabilize and reconfigure cell identity during cell state transitions.

### Keywords
Pluripotent stem cells; embryonic stem cells; pluripotency; reprogramming; cell state; crispr; polycomb; prc1; histone deacetylases; hdacs.

### Affiliations
Proteomics Lab Head, CRUK, University of cambridge
Research Assistant

### Submitter
Valar Nila Roamio Franklin

### Lab Head
Dr Clive D' Santos
Proteomics Lab Head, CRUK, University of cambridge


