### Accession
PXD014978

### Title
Human connective tissue mast cell proteome

### Description
Mast cells are hematopoietic cells that reside preferentially in tissues exposed to internal and external environments. Mast cells sense immunological, inflammatory and environmental stimuli, and can be activated to release granules and generate inflammatory mediators. Mast cell-derived products confer protection against snake venoms and some parasite infections. Aberrant activation of mast cells is a major contributor to human pathology, including allergy, asthma and adverse drug reactions. Their strict tissue location has largely impeded the isolation of large numbers of primary mast cell for further analysis. To better understand the biology of mast cells, we analyzed the proteome of primary human and mouse mast cells by quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified a mast cell-specific protein signature that was conserved from mouse to man. Compared to a comprehensive set of other immune cell lineages, proteome analysis identified a unique and distant mast cell cluster. The mast cell signature included proteins governing granule biosynthesis and secretion, as well as proteoglycan- and neurotransmitter metabolism. Proteome conservation across species suggests evolutionary maintenance of mast cell functions.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of human cells, sorted fat and skin mast cells as well as peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were centrifuged and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, USA) and 50 mM (NH4)HCO3, extracted proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM DTT and 10 mM iodoacetamide. Impurities were removed by precipitation with TCA and washing with acetone. Proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA). Peptides were differentially labelled with stable isotope-coded dimethyl labels on a column as described previously. The light and heavy labels were swapped between the two technical replicates. Labelled peptides were mixed 1:1:1 (i. e. equally from the three samples) according to cell number (50.000 cells per sample), and separated by offline high pH reverse phase fractionation over a 90-minute gradient on a C18 column (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) with an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Thirty-two fractions were collected and subsequently pooled into 10 fractions. Pooled peptide fractions were separated with the nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, USA) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18). Peptides were separated on a 120-minute gradient and were analyzed by electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) on a linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Full-scan spectra from a mass/charge ratio of 300 to 1,700 at a resolution of 30.000 full width at half maximum were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer. From each full-scan spectrum, the 15 ions with the highest intensity were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. A lock-mass correction with a background ion (mass/charge ratio, 445.12003) was applied. Technical replicate a labelling - Skin MC Heavy, Fat MC Light, PBMC Medium. Technical replicate b labelling - Fat MC Light, Skin MC Heavy, PBMC Medium

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (Version January 26, 2019, 73,920 entries). N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was selected as trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across all samples within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. Protein identification required at least 1 'razor peptide' in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Skin mast cell, Fat mast cell

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Reseach Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Thomas Plum

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Reimer Rodewald
Department of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Germany


