### Accession
PXD034897

### Title
Concomitant deletion of Shp-1 and Shp-2 in T cells fails to improve anticancer responses 

### Description
Anticancer T cells acquire a dysfunctional state characterized by poor effector function and expression of inhibitory receptors, such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1). Blockade of PD-1 signalling leads to T cell reinvigoration and is increasingly applied as an effective anticancer treatment. Recent work challenged the commonly held view that the phosphatase Src homology 2 (SH2) domain–containing phosphatase (SHP)-2 is essential for the molecular cascade downstream PD-1, suggesting functional redundancy with the homologous phosphatase SHP-1. Therefore, we investigated the effect of concomitant SHP-1 and 2 deletion in T cells by knocking out these phosphatases under the CD4cre promoter. In vivo results not only indicate that Shp-1/2 deletion is insufficient to ameliorate tumour control, but also that it impairs the therapeutic effects of anti-PD1 treatment, affecting tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells. Notably, acute deletion of Shp-1/2 in effector T cells also fails to improve tumour control. In vitro results show that Shp-1/2-deleted CD8+ T cells exhibit impaired expansion due to a survival defect and proteomics analysis reveals substantial alterations in their proteome, including in apoptosis-related pathways. This data indicates that concomitant ablation of SHP-1/2 in polyclonal T cells fails to improve their anticancer properties, implying that caution shall be taken when considering their inhibition for immunotherapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation  Cell pellets were processed using S-trap mini protocol (Protifi) as recommended by the manufacturer with little modification. After application of the samples on the S-trap mini spin column, trapped proteins were washed 5 times with S-TRAP binding buffer. Digestion with trypsin (10µg) was carried out overnight at 37oC in 160 µl of TEAB at a final concentration of 50 mM. Elution of peptides from S-trap mini spin column was achieved by centrifugation by adding 160 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then 160 µl of 2% aqueous formic acid and finally 160 µl of 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. Resulting tryptic peptides were dried and quantified using Pierce Quantitative fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific).  High pH RP fractionation  Peptides (77 µg each sample) were resuspended in 200 µL buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in milliQ water pH 9) and then fractionated with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo-Scientific) (High pH RP Chromatography). A C18 Column from Waters (XBridge peptide BEH, 130Å, 3.5 µm 2.1 X 150 mm, Waters, Ireland) and a guard column (XBridge, C18, 3.5 µm, 2.1X10mm, Waters) were used. Fractions were collected using a WPS-3000FC auto-sampler (Thermo-Scientific) at 1-minute intervals. Column and guard column were equilibrated with 2% Buffer B (10mM ammonium formate, pH 9 in 90% acetonitrile) for 18 minutes at a constant flow rate of 0.2 mL/min and a constant temperature of 20oC. Samples (190 µL) were loaded onto the column at 0.2 mL/min, and separation gradient started 1 minute after sample were loaded onto the column. Peptides were eluted from the column with a gradient of 2% buffer B to 60% B within 19 minutes, then from 60% B to 100% B in 5 minutes. The guard and the column were washed for 10 minutes at 100% buffer B and equilibrated at 2% buffer B for 18 minutes as mentioned above.  A blank was run between each sample using the same conditions. Fraction collection started 1 minute after injection and stopped after 40 minutes. The total number of fractions concatenated was set to 8 and the content of the fractions was dried and suspended in 50 µL 1% formic acid prior to analysis with LC-MS.  Fractions 5-8 of each sample were cleaned up using HiPPR detergent removal kit (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer protocol.  LC-MS/MS Analysis   Analysis of peptide readout was performed on a Q Exactive™ plus, Mass Spectrometer (Scientific) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers used are the following: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 5 µL (equivalent of 1µg) of each sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. The trap column was washed for 3 minutes at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA and then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 2% buffer B to 5% buffer B in 5 minutes then from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 125 minutes, from 35% buffer B  to 98% buffer B in 2 minutes. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 20 minutes and re-equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 17 minutes. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50oC.   Q Exactive™ plus was operated in data dependent positive ionization mode. The source voltage was set to 2.5 Kv and the capillary temperature was 250oC.  A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 350-1600, ion injection time of 20 ms, resolution 70 000 and automatic gain control (AGC) 1x106) acquired in profile mode, followed by 15 sequential dependent MS2 scans (resolution 17500) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC 2 x 105, maximum ion injection time 100 ms, isolation window of 1.4 m/z, fixed first mass of 100 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 2 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >6 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 45 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 27% of the normalized collision energy.  Mass accuracy is checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
Processing and analysis of proteomic data The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins and peptides were identified using a hybrid database from databases in Uniprot release 2020 06 as described in Marchingo et al., eLife 2020. The following search parameters were used: protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation were selected as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification; Trypsin and LysC were selected as the proteolytic enzymes; up to two missed cleavages were permitted; protein and PSM False discovery rates was set to 0.01 and matching of peptides between runs was switched off. Perseus software package (version 1.6.6.0) was used for data filtering and protein copy number quantification. Proteins were quantified from unique (found only in a specific protein group) and razor (peptides assigned to a specific protein group without being unique to that group) peptides. The data set was filtered to remove proteins categorised as “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site”. Copy numbers were calculated using the proteomic ruler plugin as described in Wisniewski et al., 2014. Copy numbers of histones in a diploid mouse cell get assigned to the summed peptide intensities of all histones present in a sample. The ratio between the histone peptide intensity and the summed peptide intensities of the other identified proteins is then used to estimate copy number per cell for all identified proteins in the data set.  Statistics and calculations proteomic data Three biological replicates were generated. P values were calculated via a two-tailed, unequal-variance t-test on log10 transformed copy number per cell values in Microsoft Excel. P values < 0.05 were considered as being statistically significant. Fold change > 1.5 or < 0.67 were considered as cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shp-2; shp-1; ptpn11; ptpn6; t cell exhaustion; cancer immunotherapy; inhibitory receptors; pd-1 checkpoint therapy 

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 5EH Dundee, U.K.
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee

### Submitter
Laura Spinelli

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Cantrell
Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee


