### Accession
PXD031884

### Title
F8 intein precise CodopN6 reconstitution

### Description
Liver gene therapy with adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors is under clinical investigation for hemophilia A (HemA), the most common inherited X-linked bleeding disorder. Major limitations are the large size of the F8 transgene, which makes packaging in a single AAV vector a challenge, as well as the development of circulating anti-F8 antibodies which neutralize F8 activity. Taking advantage of split inteins-mediated protein trans-splicing, we divided the coding sequence of the large and highly secreted F8-N6 variant in two separate AAV split-inteins vectors whose co-administration to HemA mice results in F8 protein reconstitution and expression of therapeutic levels of F8 over time without anti-F8 antibodies development.

### Sample Protocol
All the experiments were performed in a labeling free setting and samples prepared using the in StageTip (iST) method. Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a home-made chromatographic column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 250mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 75 min were used for all samples and a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min was used.  MS data were acquired using a data‐dependent top-15 method with maximum injection time of 20 ms, a scan range of 300–1650Th, an AGC target of 3e6 and a resolution of 120000. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 45000 at 200m/z. AGC target was set 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.4Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) using default settings (FDR = 0.01, oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N‐term) as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification). For peptide assignment, spectra were correlated with pTIGEM_CMV_codop-hF8-SQ-N6_3xflag_(Synthetic-polyA)_translation fasta.

### Publication Abstract
Liver gene therapy with adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors is under clinical investigation for haemophilia A (HemA), the most common inherited X-linked bleeding disorder. Major limitations are the large size of the F8 transgene, which makes packaging in a single AAV vector a challenge, as well as the development of circulating anti-F8 antibodies which neutralise F8 activity. Taking advantage of split-intein-mediated protein trans-splicing, we divided the coding sequence of the large and highly secreted F8-N6 variant in two separate AAV-intein vectors whose co-administration to HemA mice results in the expression of therapeutic levels of F8 over time. This occurred without eliciting circulating anti-F8 antibodies unlike animals treated with the single oversized AAV-F8 vector under clinical development. Therefore, liver gene therapy with AAV-F8-N6 intein should be considered as a potential therapeutic strategy for HemA.

### Keywords
Haemophilia a, Protein trans-splicing, Aav-intein, Liver gene therapy, Full length protein reconstitution

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM)
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy. Department of Advanced Biomedicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

### Submitter
Federica Esposito

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Auricchio
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy. Department of Advanced Biomedicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.


