### Accession
PXD004202

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of biofilm formation of the Antarctic archaeon Halorubrum lacusprofundi

### Description
Halorubrum lacusprofundi is an important member of Deep Lake in Antarctica, representing ~10% of the lake population (DeMaere et al., 2013). Deep Lake is in the Vestfold Hills, East Antarctica (68°33’36.8S, 78°11’48.7E) and is 36 m deep, monomictic, and perennially cold (down to -20°C) (DeMaere et al., 2013; Williams et al., 2014; Tschitschko et al., 2015; Tschitschko et al., 2016). In this project, using quantitative proteomics (8-plex iTRAQ labeling), proteins, pathways and cellular processes important for biofilm formation were determined for Hrr. lacusprofundi. The data provided a new level of understanding about molecular mechanisms and regulatory networks involved in adaptation of Hrr. lacusprofundi to biofilm formation.   DeMaere, M. Z., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Brown, M. V., Gibson, J. A., Rich, J., et al. (2013) High level of intergenera gene exchange shapes the evolution of haloarchaea in an isolated Antarctic lake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 16939-16944. Tschitschko, B., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Páez-Espino, D., Kyrpides, N., Zhong, L., et al. (2015) Antarctic archaea–virus interactions: metaproteome-led analysis of invasion, evasion and adaptation. ISME J 9: 2094-2107. Tschitschko, B., Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., Zhong, L., Raftery, M. J., and Cavicchioli, R. (2016) Ecophysiological distinctions of haloarchaea from a hypersaline Antarctic lake determined using metaproteomics. Appl Environ Microbiol 82: 3165 – 3173. Williams, T. J., Allen, M. A., DeMaere, M. Z., Kyrpides, N. C., Tringe, S. G., Woyke, T., and Cavicchioli, R. (2014) Microbial ecology of an Antarctic hypersaline lake: genomic assessment of ecophysiology among dominant haloarchaea. ISME J 8: 1645-1658.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in media with and without ammonium to mid-logarithmic (4 d) and stationary (14 d) phase and cells harvested to obtain planktonic or biofilms cells. Proteins were prepared from whole cell extracts and supernatant fractions following PMID: 20039705 with minor modifications. Quantitative proteomics was performed using 8-plex iTRAQ labeling to enable comparisons of protein abundance between biofilms and planktonic cells. Samples were analyzed using TripleTOF 5600 + hybrid tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Foster City, USA), and the acquisition of data was performed in information-dependent acquisition mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were matched against peptides with ProteinPilot software 4.5 (AB Sciex, Foster City, USA) using local Hrr. lacusprofundi ACAM34 protein FASTA database to identify proteins. All technical replicates for 8-plex labeling experiments were merged into a single sample file for each fraction during protein abundance analysis. Data were considered statistically significant when p was less than 0.05 and the error factor was less than 2. The weighted average mean and standard deviation of differential abundance between iTRAQ reporter ion ratios were calculated following PMID: 17676663. Protein annotation was performed following PMID: 19404327.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilms enhance rates of gene exchange, access to specific nutrients, and cell survivability. Haloarchaea in Deep Lake, Antarctica, are characterized by high rates of intergenera gene exchange, metabolic specialization that promotes niche adaptation, and are exposed to high levels of UV-irradiation in summer. Halorubrum lacusprofundi from Deep Lake has previously been reported to form biofilms. Here we defined growth conditions that promoted the formation of biofilms and used microscopy and enzymatic digestion of extracellular material to characterize biofilm structures. Extracellular DNA was found to be critical to biofilms, with cell surface proteins and quorum sensing also implicated in biofilm formation. Quantitative proteomics was used to define pathways and cellular processes involved in forming biofilms; these included enhanced purine synthesis and specific cell surface proteins involved in DNA metabolism; post-translational modification of cell surface proteins; specific pathways of carbon metabolism involving acetyl-CoA; and specific responses to oxidative stress. The study provides a new level of understanding about the molecular mechanisms involved in biofilm formation of this important member of the Deep Lake community.

### Keywords
Antarctic microorganism; psychrophile; archaea; itraq

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences The University of NSW Sydney NSW 2052 Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Yan Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Rick Cavicchioli
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences The University of NSW Sydney NSW 2052 Australia


