### Accession
PXD006491

### Title
An immature high-oleic acid near-isogenic line of rapeseed

### Description
To identify differentially expressed proteins in a high-oleic acid rapeseed line, self-bred seeds (20 to 35 days after pollination) of a high- and a low-oleic acid rapeseed near-isogenic line (oleic acid contents of 81.4% and 56.2%, respectively) were used as raw materials for iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation) analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The rapeseed samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, and then proteins were extracted in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4℅ CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (final concentration). After 5 min, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration) was added to the samples. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 4°C, at 30 000 g, for 15 min. The supernatant was mixed with five volumes of chilled acetone containing 10% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubated at 20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 4°C at 30 000g, the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was washed three times with chilled acetone. The pellet was air-dried and dissolved in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% NP40, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0–8.5). The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and centrifuged at 4°C at 30 000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to another tube. To reduce disulfide bonds in proteins in the supernatant, 10 mM DTT (final concentration) was added and the mixture was incubated at 56°C for 1 h. Subsequently, 55 mM indole-3-acetamide (IAM) (final concentration) was added to block the cysteines, and the mixture was incubated for 1 h in the dark. The supernatant was mixed well with five volumes of chilled acetone for 2 h at –20°C to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 4°C at 30 000 g, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was air-dried for 5 min, dissolved in 500 μL 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy), and sonicated at 200 W for 15 min. Finally, samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 30 000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and protein was quantified using the Bradford method (Bradford 1976) with bovine serum albumin as the standard. The proteins in the supernatant were kept at –80°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo) and 5600 msconverter and the MGF files were searched. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against the ‘plant’ subset of the NCBI non-redundant sequence database (released in April 2013, 1 495 260 entries).  For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da (ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and ±0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. The potential variable modifications were Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ), and the fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (K). The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of the database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. Each confident protein identification involved at least one unique peptide. For protein quantification, it was required that a protein contained at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values < 0.05. Proteins with fold changes of >1.5 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification; high oleic; fatty acid; rapeseed

### Affiliations
Hunan Agriculture University
Hunan branch of national oilseed crops improvement centre, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan 410128, China

### Submitter
zhang  zhenqian

### Lab Head
Dr Guan Chunyun
Hunan branch of national oilseed crops improvement centre, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan 410128, China


