### Accession
PXD008575

### Title
Mammalian proteome changes during oxidative stress and stress of the endoplasmic reticulum

### Description
Stress due to protein misfolding in the endoplasmic reticulum affects transcription and translation, RNA and protein degradation. By integrating several large-scale datasets, we quantified transcription, translation, RNA-protein binding events, and protein levels for several thousands of genes in HeLa cells. Here, we deposit the TMT-based, quantitative proteomics data consisting of two replicates with four measured time points collected for two stress treatments, i.e. tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets were collected for each sample and resuspended in 50 µl ice-cold PBS containing 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail. The cells were then sonicated with probe sonicator 2 x 30 seconds with amplitude 5. The samples were returned to ice for 30 seconds between sonication intervals. Then the samples were mixed with 50 µl trifluoroethanol (TFE) and the mixtures were kept at 60 °C for 1 h. Then the samples were reduced in 15 mM DTT at 55 °C for 45 min, and alkylated in 55mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Finally, 50 mM Tris (pH=8) was used to adjust the sample value to 1 ml, and 1 µg MS level trypsin was added to digest the proteins into peptides at 37 °C overnight. Peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher) and 30 µg peptide per time point was subjected to TMT labeling. TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (0.8 mg/40 µl) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 30µg/100µl peptide per sample labeled with 41 µl of the TMT 10-plex label reagent at final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reactions were quenched with 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All the samples were combined in a new microcentrifuge tube at equal amounts and dried down to remove acetonitrile prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were subjected to high-pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using an Agilent 1200 Infinity Series with a phenomenex Kinetex 5u EVO C18 100A column (100 mm x 2.1 mm, 5mm particle size). Mobile phase A was 20mM ammonium formate, and B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 20mM ammonium formate. Both were adjusted to pH 10. Peptides were resolved using a linear 120 min 0-40% acetonitrile gradient at a 100µl/min flow rate. Eluting peptides were collected in 2 min fractions. About 70 fractions covering the peptide-rich region were re-combined to give 40 samples for analysis. To preserve orthogonality, fractions were combined across the gradient, i.e. each of the concatenated samples comprising fractions which were 40 fractions apart. Re-combined fractions were dried down using an Eppendorf Concentrator vacufuge plus, desalted with C18 stage-tip, and suspended in 95% MS degree water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid for low pH LC-MS analysis.     While we collected three replicates in total, proteomics data was collected for replicates 1 and 3 only, with some samples for replicate 2. Replicate 1:  A Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 coupled on-line to a Q Exactive spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. An EASY Spray 50cm x 75µm ID PepMap C18 analytical HPLC column with 2μm bead size was used for peptide separations using the auto sampler of an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated a 110 minute linear gradient from 5%  to 23% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid),  followed by 20 minutes  from  23% to 56% solvent B, and 10 minutes from 56% to 100% solvent B. Solvent B was held at 100% for another 10 minutes. High resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 1e6, with a maximum ion time of 120 ms, and scan range of 400 to 1500 m/z.  Following each full MS scan ten data-dependent high resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired (with a mass window of 100-2,000 m/z).  All MS/MS spectra were collected using the following instrument parameters: resolution of 35,000, AGC target of 1e5, maximum ion time of 250 ms, one microscan, 1.5 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 115 m/z, and NCE of 30.     Replicate 3:  A Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 coupled on-line to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80 % ACN) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. A 75 µm x 15 cm chromatography column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, German) was packed in-house for peptides separation. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–40% buffer B over 110 min, 40%-100% B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a range of 300-1500 m/z with resolution 120,000 at m/z 200. The top 15 most abundant precursors were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 Thomsons and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 40. MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 30,000 (with a mass window of 100-2,000 m/z). The automatic gain control target value was 1e6 for full scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans respectively, and the maximum ion injection time is 60 ms for both.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.5.1 with its integrated search engine Andromeda. Data was searched against Human (Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.pep.all.fa) sequence file downloaded from the ENSEMBL database. All sample fractions of two individual sets were grouped by setting up experimental design parameters in Maxquant. The mass tolerance of MS/MS spectra were set to 20 ppm with a posterior global FDR of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the human FASTA file. In addition, MS/MS data were searched by Andromeda for potential common mass spectrometry contaminants. Trypsin/P specificity was used to perform database searches, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and 10-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines were considered as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and N- terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. TMT quantification was performed at MS2 level with default mass tolerance and other parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Maintaining a healthy proteome involves all layers of gene expression regulation. By quantifying temporal changes of the transcriptome, translatome, proteome, and RNA-protein interactome in cervical cancer cells, we systematically characterize the molecular landscape in response to proteostatic challenges. We identify shared and specific responses to misfolded proteins and to oxidative stress, two conditions that are tightly linked. We reveal new aspects of the unfolded protein response, including many genes that escape global translation shutdown. A subset of these genes supports rerouting of energy production in the mitochondria. We also find that many genes change at multiple levels, in either the same or opposing directions, and at different time points. We highlight a variety of putative regulatory pathways, including the stress-dependent alternative splicing of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, and protein-RNA binding within the 3' untranslated region of molecular chaperones. These results illustrate the potential of this information-rich resource.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Translation, Er stress, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Assistant research Scientist
New York University - Department of Biology, Center for Genomics & Systems Biology , New York, USA

### Submitter
Shuvadeep Maity

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
New York University - Department of Biology, Center for Genomics & Systems Biology , New York, USA


