### Accession
PXD017776

### Title
Tuning Liposome Composition to Modulate the Corona Forming in Human Serum and Uptake by Cells

### Description
Nano-sized objects such as liposomes are modified by adsorption of biomolecules in biological fluids. The resulting corona critically changes nanoparticle behavior at cellular level. A better control of corona composition could allow to modulate uptake by cells. Within this context, in this work, liposomes of different charge were prepared by mixing negatively charged and zwitterionic lipids to different ratios. The series obtained was used as a model system with tailored surface properties to modulate corona composition and determine the effects on liposome interactions with cells. Uptake efficiency and uptake kinetics of the different liposomes were determined by flow cytometry and fluorescence imaging. Particular care was taken in optimizing the methods to isolate the corona forming in human serum to prevent liposome agglomeration and to exclude residual free proteins which could confuse the results. Thanks to the optimized methods, mass spectrometry of replicate corona isolations showed excellent reproducibility and this allowed semi-quantitative analysis to determine for each formulation the most abundant proteins in the corona. The results showed that by changing the fraction of zwitterionic and charged lipids in the bilayer, the amount and identity of the most abundant proteins adsorbed from serum differed. Interestingly, the formulations also showed very different uptake kinetics. Similar approaches can be used to tune lipid composition in a systematic way in order to obtain formulations with the desired corona and cell uptake behavior.

### Sample Protocol
The zwitterionic lipids 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE), cationic lipids 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP) and 3ß-[N-(N',N'-dimethylaminoethane)-carbamoyl]cholesterol (DC CHOL), anionic lipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1'-rac-glycerol) (DOPG) and cholesterol were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids. To prepare different liposomal formulations, 10 mg lipid mixtures at different molar ratios were prepared and dissolved in chloroform. The composition of all formulations tested is given in Supplementary Table S1. Then, the solvent was evaporated using a nitrogen stream and then by incubation under vacuum overnight. The lipid films were hydrated with 1 mL 25 mM sulforhodamine B (SRB) in PBS at room temperature and vortexed to produce fluorescently labeled multilamellar liposomes. Small unilamellar liposomes were obtained by performing 8 freeze-thaw cycles followed by extrusion 21 times through a 0.1 µm polycarbonate membrane using the Avanti Mini-Extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids). Residual free SRB was removed by centrifugation with a Zeba Spin Desalting Column, 7K MWCO (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The obtained unilamellar liposomes were stored at 4 °C and were used only for up to 1 month after preparation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed with PEAKS Studio software (version 8.5) using the SwissProt human database (20197 entries; downloaded on July 27th, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Nano-sized objects such as liposomes are modified by adsorption of biomolecules in biological fluids. The resulting corona critically changes nanoparticle behavior at cellular level. A better control of corona composition could allow to modulate uptake by cells. Within this context, in this work, liposomes of different charge were prepared by mixing negatively charged and zwitterionic lipids to different ratios. The series obtained was used as a model system with tailored surface properties to modulate corona composition and determine the effects on liposome interactions with cells. Uptake efficiency and uptake kinetics of the different liposomes were determined by flow cytometry and fluorescence imaging. Particular care was taken in optimizing the methods to isolate the corona forming in human serum to prevent liposome agglomeration and to exclude residual free proteins, which could confuse the results. Thanks to the optimized methods, mass spectrometry of replicate corona isolations showed excellent reproducibility and this allowed semi-quantitative analysis to determine for each formulation the most abundant proteins in the corona. The results showed that by changing the fraction of zwitterionic and charged lipids in the bilayer, the amount and identity of the most abundant proteins adsorbed from serum differed. Interestingly, the formulations also showed very different uptake kinetics. Similar approaches can be used to tune lipid composition in a systematic way in order to obtain formulations with the desired corona and cell uptake behavior. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Liposomes and other nano-sized objects when introduced in biological fluids are known to adsorb biomolecules forming the so-called nanoparticle corona. This layer strongly affects the subsequent interactions of liposomes with cells. Here, by tuning lipid composition in a systematic way, a series of liposomes with tailored surface properties has been prepared to modulate the corona forming in human serum. Liposomes with very different cellular uptake kinetics have been obtained and their corona was identified in order to determine the most enriched proteins on the different formulations. By combining corona composition and uptake kinetics candidate corona proteins associated with reduced or increased uptake by cells can be identified and the liposome formulation can be tuned to obtain the desired uptake behavior.

### Keywords
Human serum, Cellular uptake, Liposomes, Nanoparticle corona

### Affiliations
University of Groningen. GRIP.
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Horvatovich Péter

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Salvati, Peter Horvatovich
University of Groningen. GRIP.


