### Accession
PXD028254

### Title
Human LMO2 binding protein LC-MSMS in U87MG(Glioblastoma cell)

### Description
To identify the binding partner of LMO2 for explanation of STAT3 signal-related protein in human glioblastoma

### Sample Protocol
U87MG cell stably expresses LMO2 containing the tandem N-terminal HA and FLAG epitopes, which analyzed using tandem affinity purification. First, we isolates LMO2 binding partner through immunoprecipitation using HA antibody. Next, we re-isolates LMO2 binding partner through immunoprecipitation using FLAG antibody in HA-immunoprecipitated sample. Isolated sample was seperated by their molecular weight using SDS-PAGE. Next, SDS-PAGE gel was stained by CBB (Coomassie Brillant Blue) and cut the band, which different region compared to normal IgG lane.  To in-gel protein digestion, protein bands of interest were excised and digested in-gel with sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega). In brief, each protein spot was excised from the gel, placed in a polypropylene (Eppendorf) tube, and washed 4-5 times (until the gel was clear) with 150µl of 1:1 acetonitrile/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. The gel slices were dried in a Speedvac concentrator, and then rehydrated in 30 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, containing 20 ng of trypsin. After incubation at 37℃ for 20 hr, the liquid was transferred to a new tube. Tryptic aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The combined supernatants were evaporated in a Speedvac concentrator and dissolved in 8 µl of 5% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis.   To identification of proteins by LC-MS/MS, the resulting tryptic peptides were separated and analyzed using reversed phase capillary HPLC directly coupled to Finnigan LCQ ion trap mass spectrometer LC-MS/MS. Both of a 0.1 x 20 mm trapping and a 0.075 x 130 mm resolving column were packed with Vydac 218MS low trifluoroactic acid C18 beads (5 µm in size, 300 Å in pore size; Vydac, Hesperia, CA, USA) and placed in-line. Following the peptides were bound to the trapping column for 10min at with 5% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, then the bound peptides were eluted with a 50min gradient of 5~80% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min. For tandem mass spectrometry, a full mass scan range mode was m/z=450~2000 Da. After determination of the charge states of an ion on zoom scans, product ion spectra were acquired in MS/MS mode with relative collision energy of 55%.

### Data Protocol
The individual spectra from MS/MS were processed using the TurboSEQUEST software (Thermo Quest, San Jose, CA). The generated peak list files were used to query either MSDB database or Swissprot using the MASCOT program (http://www.matrixscience.com). Modifications of methionine and cysteine, peptide mass tolerance at 2 Da, MS/MS ion mass tolerance at 0.8 Da, allowance of missed cleavage at 2, and charge states (+1, +2, and +3) were taken into account. Only significant hits as defined by MASCOT probalibity analysis were considered initially.

### Publication Abstract
The oncogenic role of nuclear LIM domain only 2 (LMO2) as a transcriptional regulator is well established, but its function in the cytoplasm is largely unknown. Here, we identified LMO2 as a cytoplasmic activator for signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling in glioma stem cells (GSCs) through biochemical and bioinformatics analyses. LMO2 increases STAT3 phosphorylation by interacting with glycoprotein 130 (gp130) and Janus kinases (JAKs). LMO2-driven activation of STAT3 signaling requires the LDB1 protein and leads to increased expression of an inhibitor of differentiation 1 (ID1), a master regulator of cancer stemness. Our findings indicate that the cytoplasmic LMO2-LDB1 complex plays a crucial role in the activation of the GSC signaling cascade via interaction with gp130 and JAK1/2. Thus, LMO2-LDB1 is a <i>bona fide</i> oncogenic protein complex that activates either the JAK-STAT signaling cascade in the cytoplasm or direct transcriptional regulation in the nucleus.

### Keywords
Human, Lmo2, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Korea University
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Sang-Hun Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Hyunggee Kim
Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea


