### Accession
PXD014644

### Title
Role for ribosomal quality control in sampling proteins for MHC class I-mediated antigen presentation

### Description
Mammalian cells present a fingerprint of their proteome to the adaptive immune system through the display of endogenous peptides on MHC-I complexes. MHC-I peptides originate from protein degradation by the proteasome, suggesting that efficiently-folding, long-lived proteins could evade monitoring. Here, we investigate the role of the ribosomal quality control (RQC) pathway, responsible for the degradation of nascent chains stalled at the ribosome during translation, in sampling proteins for antigen presentation. We find that degradation and presentation on MHC-I of model proteins encoded by defective mRNAs is independent of their folding potential. Quantitative profiling of MHC-I peptides in wild-type and RQC-deficient cells by mass spectrometry showed that RQC substantially contributes to the composition of the immunopeptidome. Our results not only reveal the role of RQC in sampling proteins that are otherwise difficult to present due to their folding properties, but also identify endogenous substrates of the RQC pathway in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of MHC-I peptides For the immunopeptidome analysis, we prepared 6 large independent cultures of HeLa.Kb WT and Listerin-KO, and 2 cultures of the stably complemented KO control cell line. The cultures were performed in Nunc Cell Factory Systems (Thermo Scientific) of 2528 cm² culture surface. After reaching semi confluent state, cells were harvested with TrypLE Express Enzyme, washed twice in PBS and dry pellets were flash frozen and stored at -80°C until further use. The yields per culture ranged from 2.9x108 to 4.3x108 cells (3.7x108 on average). MHC-I complex immunoprecipitation and peptide ligand purification were performed as previously described (65). Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 8 mL of PBS with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and lysed at 4°C for 1 hour. The lysates were then cleared by centrifugation at 40,000 x g at 4°C for 30 minutes. MHC-I immunoaffinity purification was performed on the cleared lysate with 2 mg of the panHLA-I antibody W6/32 (purified from HB95 cells; ATCC) covalently bound to protein-A Sepharose beads (Invitrogen), and MHC-I complexes were eluted at room temperature with 0.1 N acetic acid. The eluted molecules were then loaded on Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters) and the MHC-I peptides were separated from the MHC-I complexes by eluting them with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were then further purified using Silica C-18 column tips (Harvard Apparatus), eluted again with 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, MHC-I peptides were resuspended with 2% ACN in 0.1% TFA for single shot LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteome preparation from cell extracts After MHC-I purification, the total proteins from 40 µL (0.5%) of each cell extract were precipitated with ice cold 100% acetone, washed with cold 80% acetone, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Proteomes were prepared with the stage tip method with minor modifications (7). Briefly, 600 µL of the reducing alkylating sodium deoxycholate buffer (PreOmics) were added to each sample and proteins were denatured at 100 °C for 10 min in agitation, followed by further homogenization by Bioruptor sonication for 15 min (30 s on/off cycles, high settings). A fraction (10%) of the material was then digested with trypsin and Lys-C overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were finally acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted on SDB-RPS stage tips. After resuspension with 2% ACN in 0.1% TFA, peptide concentration was determined with NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 µg of peptides for each sample were used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were processed using the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform (8), version 1.5.9.1. The integrated Andromeda search engine (9) was employed to search the data against the Human Uniprot database (August 2015) together with a database of frequently observed contaminants. MHC-I immunopeptidome searches were performed by setting the enzyme specificity to unspecific and restricting the possible sequence matches to 8-15 amino acids with a maximum mass of 1500 Da. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and matching between runs was enabled in order to transfer identifications across runs, based on mass and normalized retention times, with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. A false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1% was required at the peptide spectrum match level, while protein FDR was disabled. For proteome searches, the enzyme specificity was set as “Trypsin/P” and the minimum length required for peptide identification was set at 7. N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with the same settings as above. Both peptide and protein FDR were required to be < 1%. Protein quantification was enabled both as Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) with the MaxLFQ algorithm (10), where a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 was required for quantification, and as Intensity Based Absolute Quantification  (iBAQ) to estimate relative protein abundance.  Statistic MS data analyses were performed with the Perseus software (www.perseus-framework.org (11)). Reverse and contaminant hits were removed from the resulting peptide lists before analysis. For the proteome analysis, proteins identified exclusively by modified peptides were not considered. For the immunopeptidome analysis, peptide intensities were log2 transformed and normalized to the median intensity of the respective sample. Biological replicates were then grouped according to the respective genotype, HeLa.Kb WT, Listerin-KO and complemented KO, and peptide intensities were filtered for valid values, keeping identifications with a minimum of 3 quantified values in at least one of the groups. Missing data points were replaced by imputation from a normal distribution, with 0.3 width and 1.8 downshift. To evaluate peptide intensity changes between WT and Listerin-KO, a two-sided two-sample t-test was performed using S0 of 0.1 and permutation-based FDR of 0.05. For hierarchical clustering analysis, the peptides with significantly higher presentation in WT than Listerin-KO were z-score normalized and all samples (WT, KO and complemented KO replicates) were considered for clustering. For the proteome analysis, LFQ intensities were processed using similar parameters: log2 transformed, grouped according to genotype, filtered for 3 valid LFQ values in at least one group, inputed with normal distribution, and analyzed by two-sided t-test (WT vs. Listerin-KO) using S0 of 0.1 and permutation-based FDR of 0.05. Supplemental Tables S1 (immunopeptidome) and S2 (proteome) report the final processed values, after filtering and imputation

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosomal quality control, Listerin, Immunopeptidome, Mhc-i

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr F. Ulrich Hartl
Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


