### Accession
PXD022941

### Title
Stradard protein and yeast top-down data

### Description
We developed a novel dissociation strategy in the data acquisition process, the Mesh strategy to dissociate multiple charge states of one proteoform with stepped HCD (high collision energy dissociation). We proved that the ‘Mesh’  strategy could generate fragments with improved sequence coverage and it could also improve identification rate in top-down proteomics analysis for complicated samples. The strategy is implemented within an an open source real-time instrument control software program called MetaDrive to perform real time deconvolution and precursor selection.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitin from bovine (UniProt Accession P0CG53), Cytochrome C from horse (UniProt Accession L7MRG1), and myoglobin from horse (UniProt Accession P68082) were purchased as standards from Sigma. All samples were resuspended at ∼10 pmol/μL in 49.9:49.9:0.2 acetonitrile/water/formic acid prior to infusions. Standard proteins were infused directly by electrospray into the mass spectrometer for top-down analysis. Full-mass profile scans are performed in the Orbitrap between 375 and 1,500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, followed by MS/MS HCD scans at a resolution of 60,000 and a mass range of 400-2000 m/z. Top-down proteomics analysis of yeast samples (~2 µg protein each injection) were performed using HPLC (NanoAcquity, Waters)-ESI-MS/MS (Q Exactive HF, ThermoFisher Scientific). Yeast cells were grown to a density of ∼106 cells/mL at which time they were washed, pelleted, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C until use. Yeast cells were lysed separately, and proteins were reduced and alkylated. Proteins were then precipitated with acetone before being resuspended in separation buffer. The proteins were separated based on molecular weight (MW) using a GELFrEE system (Expedeon),5 and approximately 400 μg of protein were collected into 11 fractions.

### Data Protocol
The pTop2 software program (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software.html) was used to perform the top-down analysis of the raw files.20 This software reported the number of matched fragment ions generated for each spectrum. Most of the default parameter settings were used, except that the max charge was changed to 50, mixture spectra was not checked, and variable modifications including Oxidation[M], dehydro[C] and Acetyl[Protein N-term] were added.

### Publication Abstract
Top-down proteomics is a key mass spectrometry-based technology for comprehensive analysis of proteoforms. Proteoforms exhibit multiple high charge states and isotopic forms in full MS scans. The dissociation behavior of proteoforms in different charge states and subjected to different collision energies is highly variable. The current widely employed data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method selects a narrow <i>m</i>/<i>z</i> range (corresponding to a single proteoform charge state) for dissociation from the most abundant precursors. We describe here Mesh, a novel dissociation strategy, to dissociate multiple charge states of one proteoform with multiple collision energies. We show that the Mesh strategy has the potential to generate fragment ions with improved sequence coverage and improve identification ratios in top-down proteomic analyses of complex samples. The strategy is implemented within an open-source instrument control software program named MetaDrive to perform real time deconvolution and precursor selection.

### Keywords
Top-down, Real-time, Stepped hcd, Mesh, Instrument control

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Dr. Lloyd Smith lab, Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Lei Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Lu
Dr. Lloyd Smith lab, Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison


