### Accession
PXD000728

### Title
Large-scale determination of absolute phosphorylation stoichiometries in human cells by motif-targeting quantitative proteomics

### Description
We developed a motif-based isotopic quantitative method for determination of phosphorylation stoichiometry based on kinase selection.

### Sample Protocol
Lung cancer cell (PC9 and PC9-IR) were grown in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine (all from Life Technologies, Inc.) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2-95% air. Adherent cells were detached from the culture dishes using a 0.1% trypsin solution containing 0.05% EDTA in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 0.01 M sodium phosphate, 0.14 M NaCl, pH 7.4) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Cells were harvested and washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then lysed in lysis buffer (12 mM SDC, 12mM SLS in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.0) . The lysate were  subjected to gel-assisted digestion. The phosphopeptides were purified by tip-based Fe-IMAC, The purifed phosphopeptides were analyzed by TripleTOF 5600

### Data Protocol
For phosphopeptides identification, the raw MS/MS data were processed using the AB_SCIEX MS Data Converter and analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3) against the SwissPort database (version 57.8, Homo sapiens, 20,329 sequences) with the following constraints: allowing for tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. For unlabeled phosphopeptides, phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications. For phosphopeptides labeled with dimethyl labeling, Dimethyl isotope labels on the peptide N termini and lysine residues, phosphorylation (S, T, Y) and oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications. The identification false discovery rate (FDR)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imac, Lung cancer, Phosphorylation stoichiometry, Drug resistance, Motif

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Feng Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


