### Accession
PXD023281

### Title
Long-term liver expression of an apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptide attenuates IFNα-induced inflammation and promotes antiviral activity

### Description
Apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptides are amphipathic alpha-helix peptides that display similar functions to apolipoprotein A-I. Preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptides in multiple indications associated with inflammatory processes. In this study, we evaluated the effect of the long-term expression of L37pA in the liver by an adeno-associated virus (AAV-L37pA) on the expression of an adeno-associated virus encoding interferon-alpha (AAV-IFNα). Long-term IFNα expression in the liver leads to lethal hematological toxicity one month after AAV administration. Concomitant administration of AAV-L37pA prevented the lethal toxicity since the IFNα expression was reduced one month after AAV administration by decreasing the expression of IFNα. To identify the mechanism of action of L37pA, a genomic and proteomic analysis was performed fifteen days after AAV administration when a similar level of IFNα and interferon-stimulated genes were observed in mice treated with AAV-IFNα alone and in mice treated with AAV-IFNα and AAV-L37pA. The coexpression of the apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptide L37pA with IFNα modulated the gene expression program of IFNα, inducing a significant reduction in inflammatory pathways affecting pathogen-associated molecular patterns receptor, dendritic cells, NK cells and Th1 immune response. The proteomic analysis confirmed the impact of the L37pA activity on several inflammatory pathways and indicated an activation of LXR/RXR and PPPARα/γ nuclear receptors. Thus, long-term expression of L37pA induces an anti-inflammatory effect in the liver that allows silencing of IFNα expression mediated by an adeno-associated virus.

### Sample Protocol
---------------------------------------------------------

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were exported to mgf format using Peak View v1.2.0.3 and searched using Mascot Server 2.5.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM 2013.02.01.1, and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from the 54,425 Mus musculus sequences at Uniprot (proteome ID UP000000589, January 2019) plus some commonly occurring contaminants. Correctly identified peptides from an initial X!TANDEM search with mass error tolerance of 35 ppm were used to recalibrate parent ion mass measurements in all spectra using linear models. All search engines were then configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus, and modification of lysine and peptide N-terminus with TMT 6-plex reagents. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values, and spectra recovered by a FDR <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain).

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptides are amphipathic alpha-helix peptides that display similar functions to apolipoprotein A-I. Preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptides in multiple indications associated with inflammatory processes. In this study, we evaluated the effect of the long-term expression of L37pA in the liver by an adeno-associated virus (AAV-L37pA) on the expression of an adeno-associated virus encoding interferon-alpha (AAV-IFN&#x3b1;). Long-term IFN&#x3b1; expression in the liver leads to lethal hematological toxicity one month after AAV administration. Concomitant administration of AAV-L37pA prevented the lethal toxicity since the IFN&#x3b1; expression was reduced one month after AAV administration. To identify the mechanism of action of L37pA, a genomic and proteomic analysis was performed 15 days after AAV administration when a similar level of IFN&#x3b1; and interferon-stimulated genes were observed in mice treated with AAV-IFN&#x3b1; alone and in mice treated with AAV-IFN&#x3b1; and AAV-L37pA. The coexpression of the apolipoprotein A-I mimetic peptide L37pA with IFN&#x3b1; modulated the gene expression program of IFN&#x3b1;, inducing a significant reduction in inflammatory pathways affecting pathogen-associated molecular patterns receptor, dendritic cells, NK cells and Th1 immune response. The proteomic analysis confirmed the impact of the L37pA activity on several inflammatory pathways and indicated an activation of LXR/RXR and PPPAR&#x3b1;/&#x3b3; nuclear receptors. Thus, long-term expression of L37pA induces an anti-inflammatory effect in the liver that allows silencing of IFN&#x3b1; expression mediated by an adeno-associated virus.

### Keywords
Apolipoprotein a-i mimetic peptide, Adeno-associated virus, Liver, Antiviral, Type i ifn

### Affiliations
Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Cima Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Berraondo
Program of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Cima Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain


