### Accession
PXD020331

### Title
mTORC1 regulates GRASP55-dependent unconventional secretion in response to stress

### Description
In cells, several cargoes are delivered to the cell surface or the extracellular space via unconventional secretion routes. GRASP55 is a Golgi protein that regulates unconventional secretion of distinct proteins and controls the assembly and membrane stacking of Golgi cisternae. Recent work suggested that the role of GRASP55 in unconventional secretion may involve its relocalization to other organelles. However, the stimuli that drive GRASP55-dependent unconventional secretion, the signaling events that regulate GRASP55 function, the subcellular locations where GRASP55 acts, and the cargoes that follow this route for secretion remain unclear. Here, we show that mTORC1 directly phosphorylates GRASP55 at multiple sites to maintain its Golgi localization. Cellular stresses or drugs that inhibit mTORC1 cause GRASP55 dephosphorylation and relocalization to autophagosomal / MVB structures. Using secretome and surfactome analyses in GRASP55-null cells, we identify for the first time numerous -previously unknown- cargoes that rely on this unconventional secretory pathway.

### Sample Protocol
APEX2-based proximity ligation assay Cells were labeled by the addition of 500 µM biotin-phenol to the medium for 30 min, followed by addition of 1 mM H2O2 for 1 min to induce the biotinylation reaction. Cells were then washed 3x with quenching buffer (1x PBS, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox) and 1x with PBS. Cells were lysed in 1 ml Triton lysis buffer, supplemented with 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 5 mM Trolox. Crude lysates were sonicated (2 x 4 sec, 30% amplitude), incubated on ice for 20 min, and clarified by centrifugation (15 min, 12.000 x g, 4°C). The supernatant was incubated with 60 µl streptavidin sepharose beads overnight at 4 °C. The beads were then washed sequentially 2x with 1 ml lysis buffer, 1x with 1 ml 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2x with 1ml lysis buffer, and 1x with 1 ml PBS. Biotinylated proteins were eluted by boiling the beads for 5 min in Laemmli buffer, containing 0.1 mM DTT. For mass-spectrometry, samples were alkylated using 40 mM chloracetamide (CAA) and run on a stacking gel. When the sample was completely in the stacking gel, each lane was excised and fixed with 10% acetic acid / 20% methanol for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were then dehydrated and in-gel digested overnight with Trypsin / Lysyl EndopeptidaseR (LysC). Digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% formic acid to the reaction and the peptides were subjected to StageTip purification, before injection into the mass spectrometer. Secretome analysis Cells were pre-incubated with Met/Arg/Lys-free DMEM/F12, supplemented with 1 mM pyruvate, 200 mg/L L-Proline and dialyzed FCS for 30 min, to deplete intracellular Arg, Lys and Met. Cells were then incubated for 24 h with 100 µM of the azide group-containing methionine analog AHA in SILAC medium either supplemented with medium (146 µg/ml Lys-4 / 84 µg/ml Arg-6) or heavy isotopes (146 µg/ml Lys-8 / 84 µg/ml Arg-10). Supernatants of wild-type heavy isotope-labelled and knock-out medium isotope-labelled cultures were combined, dead cells were removed by centrifugation (5 min, 1000 x g, 4oC), and proteins were concentrated to approximately 250 µl, using Amicon ultra-15, PLBC Ultracel-PL 3 KDa cut-off concentrator tubes. Cells were lysed in urea lysis buffer provided with the Click Chemistry Capture kit, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Supernatants and cell lysates were individually covalently coupled to 200 µl pre-washed (2x with 1 ml HPLC H2O each) alkyne agarose, rotating overnight at room temperature. Alkyne agarose-bound samples were spun down (5 min, 2000 x g, 4 °C), washed once with 1 ml HPLC water, and then reduced with 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 40 mM CAA, transferred to columns and extensively washed sequentially with SDS wash buffer, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 / 8 M urea buffer, 20% isopropanol, and 20% Acetonitrile. Proteins were then digested overnight with Trypsin and LysC in a heated shaker (37°C, 800 rpm). Digestion was stopped by adding 0.5% formic acid to the reaction, and the peptides were subjected to StageTip purification, before injection into the mass spectrometer. Surfactome analysis Wild-type and GRASP55 knock-out cells were metabolically labeled for two weeks with medium or heavy isotopes. Cells were then grown to 90% confluency in 10 cm dishes, with biotinylation and lysis performed as described above, with the exception that the cleavable Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin was used. A portion of the sample (10%) was kept as input control for total proteome analysis. Biotinylated proteins were purified using Streptavidin Sepharose beads as described above.  Mass spectrometry analysis Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were resuspended in Solvent A (0.1% FA), picked up with an autosampler and loaded onto in-house made 50 cm fused silica columns (internal diameter 75 µm, packed with C18 Poroshell beads, 2.7 µm) at a flow rate of 0.75 µL/min. Depending on sample complexity and preparation method, different segmented acetontrile gradients were used to elute peptides. Eluted peptides were sprayed into the heated transfer capillary of the mass spectrometer using a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution (R) of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 ions collected within 20 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s. From the full MS scan, the 10 most intense peaks (z≥2) were fragmented in the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) cell. Collisional energy, ion target and maximum injection time were adapted for the different input samples.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.8) and its implemented Andromeda search engine {Cox, 2011 #374}. Parameters were set to default values and SILAC labels were included as described in the surfactome and secretome sections above. Statistical tests for pairwise comparisons were performed using Perseus (v 1.5.5.3) (Tyanova et al., 2016). For label free experiments a two-sample Students t test was performed (S0 = 0.1, side = both) and for SILAC experiments a one-sample t test was performed (Value = 0, S0 = 0.1, side = both) and calculated p values are reported in the supplemental tables.

### Publication Abstract
Cells communicate with their environment via surface proteins and secreted factors. Unconventional protein secretion (UPS) is an evolutionarily conserved process, via which distinct cargo proteins are secreted upon stress. Most UPS types depend upon the Golgi-associated GRASP55 protein. However, its regulation and biological role remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) directly phosphorylates GRASP55 to maintain its Golgi localization, thus revealing a physiological role for mTORC1 at this organelle. Stimuli that inhibit mTORC1 cause GRASP55 dephosphorylation and relocalization to UPS compartments. Through multiple, unbiased, proteomic analyses, we identify numerous cargoes that follow this unconventional secretory route to reshape the cellular secretome and surfactome. Using MMP2 secretion as a proxy for UPS, we provide important insights on its regulation and physiological role. Collectively, our findings reveal the mTORC1-GRASP55 signaling hub as the integration point in stress signaling upstream of UPS and as a key coordinator of the cellular adaptation to stress.

### Keywords
Unconventional secretion, Mtorc1, Tsc2, Golgi, Rapamycin, Grasp55, Cellular stress response

### Affiliations
University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Center for Biochemistry, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Plomann
University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Center for Biochemistry, 50931 Cologne, Germany


