### Accession
PXD039833

### Title
The proteome of large or small extracellular vesicles in pig seminal plasma differs and defines sources and biological functions. Spectral Library

### Description
Seminal plasma contains many and morphologically heterogeneous extracellular vesicles (sEVs) which, released by cells of the testis, epididymis and accessory sex glands, are involved in male and female reproductive processes. The goal of this study was to describe the proteome of porcine sEVs isolated by a size exclusion chromatography (SEC)-based procedure and size-classed as small (S-EVs) or large (L-EVs). The sEV-subsets were characterized for their total protein concentration, morphology, size distribution, EV-specific protein markers and purity. A total of 988 proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS and 737 of them were quantified by SWATH in S-EVs, L-EVs and EVs-free samples. The differential expression analysis revealed 197 differentially abundant proteins between both EV-subsets, and 37 and 199 between S-EVs and L-EVs vs EVs-free samples, respectively. The gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differentially abundant proteins suggested, by the type of protein detected, that S-EVs would be released mainly through an apocrine blebbing pathway and be involved in modulating the immune environment of the female reproductive tract as well as during sperm-oocyte interaction. In contrast, the protein types detected might imply L-EVs are released by fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane and would be involved in sperm physiological processes, such as capacitation and avoidance of oxidative stress.  In conclusion, this study provides a procedure capable of isolating of subsets of EVs from pig seminal plasma with a high degree of purity and shows differences in the proteomic profile between EV-subsets, suggesting different sources and biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Forty μg (for S-EVs and EVs-free) and 20 μg (for L-EVs) of total protein were mixed (4:1; v:v) with 4× Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) containing β-mercaptoethanol, and denatured at 95 ºC during 5 min. Then, samples were loaded on 12 % Tris HCl precast one-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1-D SDS PAGE; Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA) including a molecular weight marker (ECL Plex Fluorescent Rainbow Marker, GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The electrophoresis was performed at a constant voltage of 200 V for 5 min at RT. Then, the gel was fixed with a solution containing 40 % ethanol and 10 % acetic acid for 60 min, stained with Brilliant R250 Blue stain Coomassie (Bio-Rad) for 60 min to visualize protein bands and destained with H2O milliQ. Thereafter, for pooled samples the lanes were sliced into 6 pieces (EVs-free) and 5 pieces (L-EVs and S-EVs), respectively. For individual samples, the gel was sliced at 25 kDa into 2 pieces (for S-EVs and EVs-free), and the top and the bottom pieces of the gel were used to analyze the less and major abundant proteins, respectively. Finally, the gel from L-EVs was cut into a single slice. All samples were digested following the protocol used by Shevchenko et al., (1996). Briefly, this procedure involves (i) a trypsin digestion (ranging from 150 to 500 ng; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) at 37 ºC, and stopped with 10 % trifluoroacetic, (ii) a peptide extraction by incubation in pure acetonitrile at 37 °C in a shaker for 15 min, and (iii) a suspension of resulting peptide mixture in 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic (6 to 30 μL), after drying in a speed vacuum (ISS 110 SpeedVac System, Thermo Savant, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The peptide mixtures were analyzed for the spectral library acquisition by liquid chromatography (LC) using a NanoLC Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) connected to an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600+ mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in direct injection mode. Briefly, 5 µL of peptide mixture (obtained from in gel-digestion of each sample) was loaded on a trap NanoLC precolumn (3-μm particle size C18-CL, 350 µm × 0.5 mm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) and desalted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic at 5 µL/min for 5 min. Thereafter, the digested peptides were loaded onto an analytical LC column (3-μm particle size C18-CL 120 A, 0.075 x 150 mm, Eksigent Technologies) equilibrated in 5 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, peptide elution was carried out using a linear gradient from 7 % to 40 % of acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min for either 45 min (pooled samples and less abundant proteins of individual samples [L-EVs and S-EVs]), or for 20 min (major abundant proteins of individual samples [L-EVs and S-EVs]), respectively. The eluted peptides were infused on a spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (TripleTOF 6600+). The samples were ionized using an Optiflow® system applying 3.0 kV to the emitter spray at 200 ºC. The TripleTOF was operated in data-dependent mode, in which a time of flight (TOF) MS scan was carried out from 350 to 1400 m/z and accumulated for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘LOW’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100 to 1,500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. The criteria for precursor peptide ions selection were charge (2+, 3+ or 4+); and minimum intensity of 250 counts per second. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge states were removed from the analysis. Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each scanning and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The rolling collision energy equations were automatically set by the instrument.

### Data Protocol
The obtained .wiff data-files were processed by Protein Pilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm (4.0.0.0, 4767) of ProteinPilot v5.0 was used to search against Uniprot Database (Uniprot-Mammalia_200218.fasta) with the specific parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction (120117 proteins), and the search effort set to through. The same analysis was also made for Sus scrofa taxonomy. Irrespective of the peptide sequence assigned, and with the aim to avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Pro Group™ Algorithm. The primary protein of the group was defined as the protein within each group that could explain the most spectral data with confidence

### Publication Abstract
Seminal plasma contains many morphologically heterogeneous extracellular vesicles (sEVs). These are sequentially released by cells of the testis, epididymis, and accessory sex glands and involved in male and female reproductive processes. This study aimed to define in depth sEV subsets isolated by ultrafiltration and size exclusion chromatography, decode their proteomic profiles using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and quantify identified proteins using sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra. The sEV subsets were defined as large (L-EVs) or small (S-EVs) by their protein concentration, morphology, size distribution, and EV-specific protein markers and purity. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry identified a total of 1034 proteins, 737 of them quantified by SWATH in S-EVs, L-EVs, and non-EVs-enriched samples (18-20 size exclusion chromatography-eluted fractions). The differential expression analysis revealed 197 differentially abundant proteins between both EV subsets, S-EVs and L-EVs, and 37 and 199 between S-EVs and L-EVs versus non-EVs-enriched samples, respectively. The gene ontology enrichment analysis of differentially abundant proteins suggested, based on the type of protein detected, that S-EVs could be mainly released through an apocrine blebbing pathway and be involved in modulating the immune environment of the female reproductive tract as well as during sperm-oocyte interaction. In contrast, L-EVs could be released by fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane becoming involved in sperm physiological processes, such as capacitation and avoidance of oxidative stress. In conclusion, this study provides a procedure capable of isolating subsets of EVs from pig seminal plasma with a high degree of purity and shows differences in the proteomic profile between EV subsets, indicating different sources and biological functions for the sEVs.

### Keywords
Subsets, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jordi Roca
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain


