### Accession
PXD002989

### Title
Analysis of mitochondrial proteins in the surviving myocardium after ischemia identifies mitochondrial pyruvate carrier expression as possible mediator of tissue viability.

### Description
Using proteomics, we analysed mitochondrial protein expression in the surviving myocardium, adjacent to the injury, after ischemia and reperfusion injury in a porcine model.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from cardiat tissue using a commertial isolation kit. Protein extracts enriched in mitocondrial protein were separated using gel electrophoresis, manually digested using trypsin and quantified using mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Digested protein extracts were analysed using a Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. MS data were processed using Mascot (Matrix Science) and Protein Discoverer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The endogenous mechanisms contributing to tissue survival following myocardial infarction are not fully understood. We investigated the alterations in the mitochondrial proteome after ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) and its possible implications on cell survival. Mitochondrial proteomic analysis of cardiac tissue from an in vivo porcine I/R model found that surviving tissue in the peri-infarct border zone showed increased expression of several proteins. Notably, these included subunits of the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC), namely MPC1 and MPC2. Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and mRNA analysis corroborated the elevated expression of MPC in the surviving tissue. Furthermore, MPC1 and MPC2 protein levels were found to be markedly elevated in the myocardium of ischemic cardiomyopathy patients. These findings led to the hypothesis that increased MPC expression is cardioprotective due to enhancement of mitochondrial pyruvate uptake in the energy-starved heart following I/R. To test this, isolated mouse hearts perfused with a modified Krebs buffer (containing glucose, pyruvate, and octanoate as metabolic substrates) were subjected to I/R with or without the MPC transport inhibitor UK5099. UK5099 increased myocardial infarction and attenuated post-ischemic recovery of left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. However, aerobically perfused control hearts that were exposed to UK5099 did not modulate contractile function, although pyruvate uptake was blocked as evidenced by increased cytosolic lactate and pyruvate levels. Our findings indicate that increased expression of MPC leads to enhanced uptake and utilization of pyruvate during I/R. We propose this as a putative endogenous mechanism that promotes myocardial survival to limit infarct size.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Ischemia, Myocardium, Pyruvate

### Affiliations
Instituto de Investigacion Biomediaca de A Coruna (INIBIC) - Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruna, A Coruna, SPAIN
King's College London

### Submitter
Javier Barallobre-Barreiro

### Lab Head
Dr Nieves Domenech Garcia
Instituto de Investigacion Biomediaca de A Coruna (INIBIC) - Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruna, A Coruna, SPAIN


