### Accession
PXD039817

### Title
CREB regulated transcriptional coactivator 2 proteome landscape is plausibly modulated by SREBF1

### Description
CRTC2 is a critical transcription cofactor that induces the glucose homeostatic genes by activating CREB. However, energy homeostasis is maintained by multiple pathways, therefore, it is possible that CRTC2 may interact with other transcription factors, especially under metabolic stress. Thereby, CRTC2 liver-specific knockout mice were created and the global proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome from liver tissue under the high fat diet conditions were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and bioinformatics analysis. As expected, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) are enriched in metabolic pathways that were subsequently corroborated by animal experiments. The consensus DEPs from these datasets were used as seed proteins to generate a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network using STRING and GeneMANIA identified fatty acid synthase (FASN) as the mutually relevant protein. Additional local-PPI (LPPI) analysis of CRTC2 and FASN with DEPs, SREBF1 was found to be a common mediator. CRTC2/CREB and SREBF1 are transcription factors, DNA-binding motif analysis showed multiple CRTC2/CREB regulated genes also possess SREBF1 binding motifs that unveil the possible induction by CRTC2/SREBF1 complex, which is reinforced by structural analysis. Thus, CRTC2/SREBF1 complex plausibly modulate the transcription of multiple proteins that fine-tune the cellular metabolism under metabolic stress.

### Sample Protocol
After washing in PBS on ice to remove blood, the tissues were separately pulverized using a Cryoprep device. Each tissue was placed in a cryovial on liquid nitrogen, transferred to a Covaris tissue bag and pulverized at an impact level 3 after placing in the tissue bag into liquid nitrogen for 10 sec. The obtained powder from each different tissue was subsequently placed in a sonication tube and mixed with lysis buffer [4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and one tablet phosphatase inhibitor (04906845001, Sigma Aldirch, St. Louis, UT) in 10 ml]. Tissue was lysed by sonication using a focused-ultrasonicator 2 W for 5 sec followed by 36 W for 20 sec and 0 W for 10 sec setting, and the whole cycle was repeated for 20 times at 16C. The lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 g and 20C for 10 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. To measure the protein concentration, BCA protein assay (23227, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used. 500 ug proteins of each tissue type were digested using a Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. Proteins were reduced by SDT buffer (4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT) at 37C for 45 min and boiled for 15 min. The protein sample was subsequently sonicated for 15 min in a bath sonicator. The supernatant was then transferred to a membrane filter (YM-30, Millipore, Burlington, VT) and centrifuged at 14,000 g and 20C for 90 min to remove SDS. This procedure was performed thrice to completely remove SDS, subsequently, 100 ul of IAA buffer (0.05 M iodoacetamide in 8 M urea) was added to the filter for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g and 20C for 30 min. The buffer on the membrane filters were diluted with 200 ul of 8 M urea and concentrated three times. Finally, 100 ul of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, was added to the filter and centrifuged at 14,000 g and 20C for 30 min for three times. Trypsin (90058, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1: 50 (w/w) and the proteins were incubated at 37C for 12 h. The digested peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g and at 20C for 30 min. For collecting the residual peptides on the filter, the filter was washed with 70 ul of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged at 14,000 g and 20C for 10 min for three times. The eluents were dried and kept in -80C. The prepared samples (global, phospho- and acetylprofiling groups) were resuspended in 0.1% FA in water and analyzed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA) along with the Easy-nLc1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The linear gradient was set up as follows: changing from 5 to 40% of solvent B in 100 min, changing from 40 to 80% of solvent B in 5 min, holding at 80% of solvent B for 20 min, 80 to 5% of solvent B in 5 min, and equilibrating the column with 5% of solvent B for 20 min. A trap column (2 cm × 75 m is packed with 2 m C18 resin) and an analytical column (50 cm × 75 m is packed with 2 m C18 resin) were used to separate peptides as hydrophobicity. A data dependent acquisition (DDA) method was adopted, and the top ten precursor peaks were selected and isolated for fragmentation. Ions were scanned in 70,000 resolution in MS1, and 17,500 resolution in MS2. The mass scan range was 400–2000 m/z at both the MS1 level and the MS2 level. Precursor ions were fragmented with a NCE of 30 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were preprocessed with post-experiment monoisotopic mass refinement to increase peptide identification sensitivity and accuracy by selecting the unique mass class. The refined data were then analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), where the mass spectral files were searched with the Sequest HT search engine against the UniProt mouse reference dataset (released in Feb 2016) with two missed cleavages were allowed using Trypsin. While database searching, Carbamidomethylation, alkylation of S-bonds in cysteine (+57.021 Da), and TMT 6-plex modification of lysine and N-terminal of peptide (+229.163 Da) were added as static modifications, and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine (+79.966 Da) were added as variable modiﬁcations. The false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level was kept to 0.01 for removing false positive peptide identification as much as possible. To quantify each sample’s reporter ion, “reporter ion quantiﬁer” with TMT 6-plex was used. For highly conﬁdent quantiﬁcations of protein, the protein ratios were calculated from two or more unique quantitative peptides in each replicate.  The average value of triplicate protein intensity has been used to calculate log2 fold change (log2fc) as: Log2fc = log2 (protein intensity in Crtc2LKO / protein intensity in wild type (WT)) The proteins with log2fc > ±0.26 for upregulated and downregulated respectively with as p-value of < 0.05 have been considered as differentially expressed proteins. Those proteins that were consistently crossed this threshold in all three data sets i.e. proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome, were considered as the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) for PPI generation. For the gene ontology enrichment analysis, either the DEPs from independent dataset or all the DEPs were merged and used as input in EnrichR (Kuleshov et al., 2016). For PPI, Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins database (STRING v11.0) (Doncheva et al, 2019) was used as provided in Cytoscape (v3.8.1)(Shannon et al, 2003). The differentially expressed proteins from all three datasets (log2fc >±0.26 with p-value < 0.05) have been input and the interactions have been retrieved based on 0.4 confidence level and with no additional interactors. STRING can create the PPI based on a variety of interactions types such as physical interaction, localization, occurrences, text mining etc that are above the threshold.  The GeneMANIA tool (Montojo et al, 2010; Warde-Farley et al, 2010) can identify the novel proteins pertaining to given gene list for possible hypothesis testing. It also extracts the mode of PPI from a variety of genomics and proteomics data. It calculates a score for the reliability of the possible interaction that can be used to prioritize the output gene list. While creating PPI using GeneMANIA, mouse database has been used with default interaction networks and top 25 partners and their attributes have been extracted using different weighting methods for different PPIs.  For functional class scoring, the ClusterProfiler in R (v3.6.2) has been used (Yu et al, 2012). A list of DEPs from independent dataset with decreasing log2fc has been given with a minimum gene set of 20 genes, the number of permutations 5000, and the p-value was corrected using Benjamini-Hochberg method. There were cases when none of pathway cross the default p-value threshold (0.05), thus, a lower value (cutoff value 0.1) was used to analyze the top hit pathways. Signaling pathway impact analysis (SPIA) has been performed to analyze the pathway activation/inhibition based on up(down) regulated proteins (Tarca et al, 2009). Only common proteins between proteome and phosphoproteome and proteome and acetylome were used and this analysis has been performed in R (v3.6.2) with mouse database and the number of bootstrap iterations were set to 3000 for accurate results.  The identification of motif has been performed in Rv3.6.2 using BioStrings (v2.58.0). The position frequency matrix (PFM) for CRE and E-box have been retrieved from mouse database while for SRE1 human database was used, and the JASPAR2018 model (Khan et al, 2018) was used for all cases. The promoter sequences have been extracted using TxDB.Mmusculus.UCSC.mm10 based on genes and a sequence of ±5000 from transcription start site has been extracted suing GenomicFeatures library (Lawrence et al, 2013). The position weight matrix was compared against this sequence with 90% or above threshold for match.

### Publication Abstract
cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) regulated transcriptional coactivator 2 (CRTC2) is a critical transcription factor that maintains glucose homeostasis by activating CREB. Energy homeostasis is maintained through multiple pathways; therefore, CRTC2 may interact with other transcription factors, particularly under metabolic stress. CRTC2 liver-specific KO mice were created, and the global proteome, phosphoproteome, and acetylome from liver tissue under high-fat diet conditions were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analysis. Differentially regulated proteins (DRPs) were enriched in metabolic pathways, which were subsequently corroborated through animal experiments. The consensus DRPs from these datasets were used as seed proteins to generate a protein-protein interaction network using STRING, and GeneMANIA identified fatty acid synthase as a mutually relevant protein. In an additional local-protein-protein interaction analysis of CRTC2 and fatty acid synthase with DRPs, sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1 (SREBF1) was the common mediator. CRTC2-CREB and SREBF1 are transcription factors, and DNA-binding motif analysis showed that multiple CRTC2-CREB-regulated genes possess SREBF1-binding motifs. This indicates the possible induction by the CRTC2-SREBF1 complex, which is validated through luciferase assay. Therefore, the CRTC2-SREBF1 complex potentially modulates the transcription of multiple proteins that fine-tune cellular metabolism under metabolic stress.

### Keywords
Crtc2, Glucose homeostasis, Ppi, Metabolic disorders, Srebf1

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University, Global Campus
Department of Applied Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, Global Center for Pharmaceutical Ingredient Materials, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, 17104, South Korea.

### Submitter
Muhammad Ayaz Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry, Institute of Natural Science, Global Center for Pharmaceutical Ingredient Materials, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, 17104, South Korea.


