### Accession
PXD027351

### Title
Online Nanoflow Two-Dimension Comprehensive Active Modulation Reversed Phase-Reversed Phase Liquid Chromatography High Resolution Mass Spectrometry for Metaproteomics of Environmen-tal and Microbiome Samples

### Description
Metaproteomics is a powerful analytical approach that can assess the functional capabilities deployed by microbial communi-ties in both environmental and biomedical microbiome settings. Yet the mass spectra resulting from these mixed biological communities are challenging due to the high number of low intensity peak features. The use of multiple dimensions of chroma-tographic separation prior to mass spectrometry analyses has been applied to proteomics previously but can require increased sampling handling and instrument time. Here we demonstrate an automated online comprehensive active-modulation two-dimensional liquid chromatography method for metaproteome sample analysis. A high pH PLRP-S column was used in the first dimension followed by low pH separation in the second dimension using dual modulating C18 traps and a C18 column. This method increased the number of unique peptides found in ocean metaproteome samples by more than 50% when com-pared to a one dimension separation while using the same amount of sample and instrument time.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and preparation. Seawater samples were collected on filters using large volume in situ pumps (McLane Research Laboratories, Inc.) during a research ex-pedition to study proteomics in an oxygen minimum zone in the Central Pacific Ocean from January–February 2016 on the RV Falkor (FK160115 station 10, 8oN 140oW; chief sci-entist M. Saito). Fraction filtration was done using 142 mm diameter 51 μm pore size acid-cleaned (10% hydrochloric, Seastar) nylon mesh filters positioned before 142 mm 0.2 μm pore size Supor® polyethersulfone membrane filters (Pall Corporation). Pumps were deployed simultaneously at 20, 80, 150, 200, 300, and 400m, and programmed to pump at 4 L/min for 3 hours. Filters were then cut and frozen at -80oC. Proteins were extracted from filter quarter sections using a modified magnetic bead extraction procedure, adapted from the SP3 method for larger volumes needed for metaproteome samples. Briefly, pro-teins were extracted with from the filters with an extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES at pH = 8.5 (Boston BioProducts), 1% SDS in HPLC-grade water), isolated protein was reduced and alkylated (dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide), then puri-fied with magnetic beads (GE Healthcare SpeedBeads). The purified protein was cleaned and reconstituted from the beads, the protein concentration recovery calculated using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce), and then trypsin digested (Promega). HeLa peptides were also used for method devel-opment (Pierce HeLa protein digest standard 88329). Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Sam-ple Analysis. All liquid chromatographic experiments were performed using a Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano system with a loading pump, an additional RSLCnano pump, a 10-port two-position switching valve (VICI cheminert C72X-6670SHYD), and a Dionex UltiMate3000 autosampler. All components were controlled with Chromeleon 7 software linked to Thermo Scientific Xcalibur 4.2. Columns were in-terfaced with a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer using a Thermo Flex ion source. To perform LC x LC-MS, 5 μg of each sample was directly injected onto a PLRP-S column (200 μm x 150 mm, 3 um bead size, 300Å pore size, NanoLCMS Solutions) followed by a nonlinear 8 hour gradient with a flow rate of 1 μL/min from 5% to 95% buffer B using the first RSLCnano pump, where buffer A was 10 mM ammonium formate in water and buffer B was 10mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, both adjusted to pH = 10. The PLRP-S column eluent was diluted inline (10 μL/min 0.1% formic acid using the loading pump and added to the eluent using a Valco tee, P/N ZT1XCS6) then trapped and eluted every 30 min on alter-nating dual traps (300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm bead size, 100 Å pore size, C18 PepMap100, in PepMap trap holders, P/N 164649, Thermo Scientific). The alternating traps were elut-ed at 500 nL/min onto a C18 column (100 μm x 150 mm, 3 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, C18 Reprosil-Gold, Dr. Maisch GmbH packed in a New Objective PicoFrit column) with repeating 30 min nonlinear gradients of 2% to 95% buffer D using the second RSLCnano pump, where buffer C was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer D was 0.1% for-mic acid in 80% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra files were searched using SEQUEST HT within Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software using a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da and allowing up to 1 missed cleavage site. Oxidation and acetyl dynamic modifications and carbamidomethyl static modifications were included. Percolator peptide spec-tral matching was used within Proteome Discoverer with a maximum Delta Cn of 0.05 and a decoy search validation based on posterior error probabilities (PEP).39 A custom metagenomic database was used for peptide to spectrum matching that was based on six deep metagenomic samples which were co-collected from this research expedition. A HeLa reference proteome from UniProt was used to match HeLa digest samples. Processed files were then loaded into Scaffold 5.0 (Proteome Software Inc.) using prefiltered mode with a protein threshold of 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) and a peptide threshold of 0.1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics is a powerful analytical approach that can assess the functional capabilities deployed by microbial communities in both environmental and biomedical microbiome settings. Yet, the mass spectra resulting from these mixed biological communities are challenging to obtain due to the high number of low intensity peak features. The use of multiple dimensions of chromatographic separation prior to mass spectrometry analyses has been applied to proteomics previously but can require increased sampling handling and instrument time. Here, we demonstrate an automated online comprehensive active modulation two-dimensional liquid chromatography method for metaproteome sample analysis. A high pH PLRP-S column was used in the first dimension followed by low pH separation in the second dimension using dual modulating C18 traps and a C18 column. This method increased the number of unique peptides found in ocean metaproteome samples by more than 50% when compared to a one-dimension separation while using the same amount of sample and instrument time.

### Keywords
2dlc, Automated, Metaproteomics, Proteomics, Lc, Ocean, Lcms, Rprp, Comprehensive active modulation

### Affiliations
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Unites States
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Unites States


