### Accession
PXD024140

### Title
Multi-omic analyses 1 in Abyssinian cats with primary renal amyloid deposits

### Description
The amyloidoses constitute a group of diseases occurring in humans and animals that are characterized by abnormal deposits of aggregated proteins in organs, affecting their structure and function. In the Abyssinian cat breed, a familial form of renal amyloidosis has been described. In this study, multi-omics analyses were applied and integrated to explore some aspects of the unknown pathogenetic processes in cats. Whole-genome sequences of two affected Abyssinians and 195 controls of other breeds (part of the 99 Lives initiative) were screened to prioritize potential disease-associated variants. Proteome and miRNAome from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded kidney specimens of fully necropsied Abyssinian cats, three affected and three non-amyloidosis affected were characterized. While the trigger of the disorder remains unclear, overall, i) 35,960 genomic variants were detected;  ii) 215 and 56 proteins were identified as exclusive or overexpressed in the affected and control kidneys, respectively; iii) 60 miRNAs were differentially expressed, 20 of which are newly described. With omics data integration, the general conclusions are:i) the familial amyloid renal form in Abyssinians is not a simple monogenic trait ii) amyloid deposition is not triggered by mutated amyloidogenic proteins but is a mix of proteins codified by wild-type genes iii) the form is biochemically classifiable as AA amyloidosis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis was performed on kidney FFPE blocks. Two slices of 10 μm were cut from each block of the three affected and three healthy cats. Specimens were mounted on glass slices and deparaffinized by incubating through two changes of xylene for 10 min each. The slices were rehydrated through a series of graded ethanol for 5 min each (100%, 95%, 70%), distilled water for 5 min, and then incubated in 50 mM Tris HCl buffer with mini protease inhibitors cocktail, for at least 30 min. Hydrated tissue slices were harvested with a scalpel blade and homogenized using a potter homogenizer in extraction buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM Hepes pH 8, with mini protease inhibitors cocktail. The homogenate was centrifuged (15 min, +4°C) to pellet non-homogenized tissue and cellular debris. The supernatant containing proteins were quantified with Bradford’s protein assay. Extracted proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and protein digestion by using sequence-grade trypsin (Roche) overnight at 37°C. The digestion was quenched by the addition of 2 μL of 98% formic acid, into the sample solution.  The proteolytic digest was desalted using a reversed-phase Zip-Tip C18 pipette tip (Millipore) and evaporated at 65°C in a SpeedVac. Before LC-MS, samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and the LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed as published. MS spectra were searched against the Felis catus reference NCBI sequence database (release March 2019) by MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) using the following parameters: initial maximum allowed mass deviation of 15 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks, trypsin enzyme specificity, a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation, as variable modifications. False protein identification rate (1%) was estimated by searching MS/MS spectra against the corresponding reversed-sequence (Decoy) database. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and the minimum number of unique peptides supporting protei identification was set to 1. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using label-free quantification algorithms (LFQ) based on the extracted ion intensity of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Only proteins detectable and quantifiable in at least 2 out of 3 biological replicates were considered as positively identified in a sample and used for statistical analyses. Statistical analyses of Max Quant results were performed using the Perseus software module to identify proteins differentially expressed among the different conditions. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if they were present only in one condition or showed a significant t-test difference (p-value ≤0.05).  Bioinformatic analyses were carried out by Panther software (Version 12.1) and DAVID software (release 6.8) [50] to cluster enriched annotation groups of Cellular Component (GOCC), Biological Process (GOBP), Molecular Function (GOMF) and Pathways within the set of proteins upregulated or present only in affected cats. The functional grouping was based on p-value ≤ 0.05 and at least three counts.

### Publication Abstract
The amyloidoses constitute a group of diseases occurring in humans and animals that are characterized by abnormal deposits of aggregated proteins in organs, affecting their structure and function. In the Abyssinian cat breed, a familial form of renal amyloidosis has been described. In this study, multi-omics analyses were applied and integrated to explore some aspects of the unknown pathogenetic processes in cats. Whole-genome sequences of two affected Abyssinians and 195 controls of other breeds (part of the 99 Lives initiative) were screened to prioritize potential disease-associated variants. Proteome and miRNAome from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded kidney specimens of fully necropsied Abyssinian cats, three affected and three non-amyloidosis-affected were characterized. While the trigger of the disorder remains unclear, overall, (i) 35,960 genomic variants were detected; (ii) 215 and 56 proteins were identified as exclusive or overexpressed in the affected and control kidneys, respectively; (iii) 60 miRNAs were differentially expressed, 20 of which are newly described. With omics data integration, the general conclusions are: (i) the familial amyloid renal form in Abyssinians is not a simple monogenic trait; (ii) amyloid deposition is not triggered by mutated amyloidogenic proteins but is a mix of proteins codified by wild-type genes; (iii) the form is biochemically classifiable as AA amyloidosis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Milan
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Simona Nonnis

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Nonnis
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Italy


