### Accession
PXD024991

### Title
Identification of DIR1-dependant cellular responses required for systemic acquired resistance in guard cells

### Description
After localized invasion by bacterial pathogens, systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is induced in uninfected plant tissues, resulting in enhanced defense against a broad range of pathogens. Although SAR requires mobilization of signaling molecules via the plant vasculature, the specific mechanisms remain elusive. The lipid transfer protein-defective in induced resistance 1-1 (DIR1-1) was identified in Arabidopsis thaliana by screening for mutants that were defective in SAR. Since then, the structure and lipid-binding properties of DIR1 have been determined, showing that its barrel structure can bind two, long-chain fatty-acid molecules. Several SAR mobile signals, including dehydroabietinal (DA), azelaic acid (AzA), and glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) are dependent on DIR1 for transport to systemic leaves. Closure of stomata, controlled by guard cells, is a local response to bacteria. Here we demonstrate that stomatal response to pathogens is altered in systemic leaves by SAR, and this guard cell SAR defense requires DIR1. Using a multi-omics approach, we have determined potential SAR signaling mechanisms specific for guard cells in systemic leaves by profiling metabolite, lipid, and protein differences between guard cells in wild type and dir1-1 mutant during SAR. We identified two 18C fatty actyls and two 16C wax esters as putative SAR-related molecules dependent on DIR1. Proteins and metabolites related to amino acid biosynthesis and response to stimulus were altered in guard cells of dir1-1 compared to wild type. Identification of guard cell-specific SAR-related molecules will lead to new avenues of genetic modifications/molecular breeding for disease resistant plants.

### Sample Protocol
We adapted a protocol to simultaneously extract metabolites, lipids, and proteins from a single whole leaf or guard cell sample (Kang et al., 2021). Briefly, a chloroform and methanol solution is added to samples that are in an aqueous isopropanol solution. This process induces the formation of two solvent layers – an upper aqueous phase containing hydrophilic metabolites, and a lower organic phase containing lipids and other hydrophobic metabolites. The proteins are at the interphase. Components were normalized from internal standards that were added during the first step of extraction. Internal standards included, for proteins: 60 fmol digested bovine serum albumin (BSA) peptides per 1 µg sample protein; for metabolites: 10 µL 0.1 nmol/µL lidocaine and camphorsulfonic acid; and for lipids: 10 µL 0.2 µg/µL deuterium labeled 15:0–18:1(d7) phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and 15:0–18:1(d7) diacylglycerol (DG). The lipid extracts were dried under nitrogen gas to prevent oxidation and stored in −80 ◦C. The lipid extract was later dissolved in 1 mL isopropanol for LC-MS/MS analysis. Aqueous metabolites were lyophilized and placed at −80 ◦C. Aqueous metabolite pellets were later solubilized in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein components were collected by precipitation in cold 80% acetone in the centrifuge tubes at −20 ◦C overnight. Acetone was removed using glass pipettes, and the tubes with the protein samples were dried in a speedvac.Four biological replicates of mock and SAR primed guard cell samples from WS and dir1 genotypes were prepared for proteomic experiments. Protein samples were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 22 ◦C for 1 h, and alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide in darkness for 1 h. Trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) was added for digestion (w/w for enzyme : sample = 1 : 100) at 37 °C for 16 h. The digested  peptides were desalted using micro ZipTip mini-reverse phase (Millipore), and then lyophilized to dryness. The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis.  The bottom-up proteomics data acquisition was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 ultraperformance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 with FAIMS Pro instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptide samples were loaded in 5 µL injections to an IonOpticks Aurora 0.075x250mm, 1.6 µm 120Å analytical column and column temperature was set to 50oC with a sonation oven. . The flow rate was set at 400 nL/minute with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) as the mobile phases. Separation was conducted using the following gradient: 3-19% B in 108 min; 19-29% B in 42 min; 29-41% B in 30 min. . The full MS1 scan (m/z 350-1200) was performed on the Orbitrap Exploris with a resolution of 120,000. The FAIMS voltages were on with a FAIMS CV (V) set at -50. The RF Lens (%) was set to 40 and a custom automatic gain control (AGC) target was set with a normalized AGC target (%) set at 300.Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enforced to filter for peptides with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors are found. Peptides bearing +2 - 6 charges were selected with an intensity threshold of 5e3. A custom dynamic exclusion mode was used with 60 s exclusion duration and isotopes were excluded. Data-dependent MS/MS was carried out with a 3 FAIMS CV loop (-50,-65,-80). MS/MS orbitrap resolving power was set to 60,000 with 2 m/z quadropole isolation. Top speed for data dependent acquisition within a cycle was set to118 ms maximum injection time. The MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Fragmentation of the selected peptides by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was done at 30% of normalized collision energy and a 2 (m/z) isolation window. . The MS2 spectra were detected by defining first mass scan range as 120 m/z and the maximum injection time as 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS proteomic data analysis, we used Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the search engine SEQUEST algorithm to process raw MS files. Spectra were searched using the TAIR10 protein database with the following parameters: 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 da as mass tolerance for MS2, two maximum missed tryptic cleavage sites, a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.021) on cysteine residues, dynamic modifications of oxidation of methionine (+15.996) and phosphorylation (+79.966) on tyrosine, serine, and threonine. Search results were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and peptide confidence level was set for at least two unique peptides per protein for protein identification.Relative protein abundance in primed and control dir1 and WS guard cell samples was measured using label-free quantification in Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Proteins identified and quantified in all 4 out of 4 sample replicates were used. Peptides in mock and primed samples were quantified as area under  the chromatogram peak. Peak areas were normalized by total protein amount. The average intensity of four primed dir1 vs. four primed WS samples were compared as a ratio and two criteria were used to identify significantly altered proteins: (1) increase or decrease of 2-fold (primed dir1/primed WS), and (2) p-value from an unpaired Student’s t-test less than 0.0

### Publication Abstract
After localized invasion by bacterial pathogens, systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is induced in uninfected plant tissues, resulting in enhanced defense against a broad range of pathogens. Although SAR requires mobilization of signaling molecules <i>via</i> the plant vasculature, the specific molecular mechanisms remain elusive. The lipid transfer protein defective in induced resistance 1 (DIR1) was identified in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> by screening for mutants that were defective in SAR. Here, we demonstrate that stomatal response to pathogens is altered in systemic leaves by SAR, and this guard cell SAR defense requires DIR1. Using a multi-omics approach, we have determined potential SAR signaling mechanisms specific for guard cells in systemic leaves by profiling metabolite, lipid, and protein differences between guard cells in the wild type and <i>dir1-1</i> mutant during SAR. We identified two long-chain 18 C and 22 C fatty acids and two 16 C wax esters as putative SAR-related molecules dependent on DIR1. Proteins and metabolites related to amino acid biosynthesis and response to stimulus were also changed in guard cells of <i>dir1-1</i> compared to the wild type. Identification of guard cell-specific SAR-related molecules may lead to new avenues of genetic modification/molecular breeding for disease-resistant plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Metabolomics, Proteomics, Guard cells, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Biology University of Florida

### Submitter
Lisa David

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
Department of Biology University of Florida


