### Accession
PXD002363

### Title
Phosphoproteomic profiling of the DNA damage response in MCF10A and human PBMC cells by SILAC labeling and 1D and 2D-LC-MS/MS

### Description
The DNA-damage response (DDR) is a critical network for maintaining genomic integrity, and mutations in the DDR are among the most frequently identified in tumors. Phosphorylation is a key signaling event in the DDR network. We sought to design high throughput, mass spectrometry based assays to monitor phosphopeptides in the DDR network for biological experiments and pharmacodynamics studies.  These assays require an enrichment step, which can be done using antibodies.  Developing antibodies de novo for phosphopeptide enrichment is costly and time-consuming, so we assessed the feasibility of immobilized-metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment coupled with multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) for precise measurement of large numbers of phosphopeptides in the DDR network. Towards this goal, we evaluate the ability of the approach to reproducibly measure the endogenous phosphorylation levels of proteins associated with the DDR. Reproducibly detectable phosphopeptide targets for MRM-based assay development were empirically identified from LC-MS/MS analyses of SILAC-labeled MCF10A human breast epithelial cells exposed or mock-exposed to DNA damage.  Samples were treated in triplicate with either ionizing radiation (IR) or methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) as the DNA-damaging agent. SILAC-labeled cells were prepared in two separate (label swap) experiments. First, treated cell lines were grown in heavy SILAC medium and untreated in light, and second, this labeling scheme was reversed.  Untreated and treated cells were mixed at a 1:1 ratio by protein mass. To identify phosphopeptides at levels observable by MRM in an approach amenable to moderate throughput, a single step IMAC enrichment was developed for rapid processing of whole cell lysate.

### Sample Protocol
PBMCs were cultured in SILAC light medium. Expanded cells were treated with 10 Gy IR and harvested two hours post-IR; controls were mock irradiated. The lysates were then mixed separately with a pool of six lysates from IR-treated lymphoblast cell lines (LCLs) grown in heavy SILAC media (i.e. a superSILAC reference sample). The MCF10A cells were cultured in SILAC light and heavy media and treated with 10 Gy IR or 0.5mM MMS, along with mock treated controls. Cells were harvested 2 hours and 3 hours post-exposure for IR and MMS treatments, respectively. Each experiment was performed with two biological replicates, where in the first replicate the treated cells were grown in the heavy SILAC media, and in the second replicate the treated cells were grown in light SILAC media (i.e. the labels were swapped). For each sample, three independent IMAC enrichments were performed on 0.5 mg aliquots of digested protein lysate. Each process replicate was subjected to two LC-MS/MS runs (for a total of six runs per sample).  Deep profiling experiments were conducted in PBMCs from two individual donors. PBMCs were isolated and cultured in SILAC light medium and treated as described above (i.e. treatment with 10Gy IR and quantification by superSILAC reference method using the pooled LCLs as a reference sample). The mixed protein lysate was subjected to trypsin digestion, separated into 13 fractions by basic reverse phase HPLC, and phosphopeptides were enriched from each fraction by IMAC. The IMAC eluates were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification of phosphopeptides and relative quantification by light:heavy peak area ratio.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were searched against version 3.69 of the Yeast International Protein Index (IPI) sequence database using four independent search engines (MaxQuant/Andromeda, Spectrum Mill, xTandem and ProteomeDiscoverer). All searches were performed with the tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification. For MaxQuant, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. For X!Tandem, the peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 2.0 Da with post-search filtering of the precursor mass to 50 ppm and the fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at 0.5 Da. For Spectrum Mill, peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and fragment MH+ mass tolerances were set at 0.7 Da. The overall FDR was set at ≤4% based on a decoy database search. Phosphosite localization probabilities are reported in the MaxQuant results. Any site with a probability greater than 0.8 was considered to be localized. Quantification of the Heavy:Light ratios was performed using MaxQuant software, with a minimum ratio count of 2 and using unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
A major goal in cell signaling research is the quantification of phosphorylation pharmacodynamics following perturbations. Traditional methods of studying cellular phospho-signaling measure one analyte at a time with poor standardization, rendering them inadequate for interrogating network biology and contributing to the irreproducibility of preclinical research. In this study, we test the feasibility of circumventing these issues by coupling immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)-based enrichment of phosphopeptides with targeted, multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry to achieve precise, specific, standardized, multiplex quantification of phospho-signaling responses. A multiplex immobilized metal affinity chromatography- multiple reaction monitoring assay targeting phospho-analytes responsive to DNA damage was configured, analytically characterized, and deployed to generate phospho-pharmacodynamic curves from primary and immortalized human cells experiencing genotoxic stress. The multiplexed assays demonstrated linear ranges of &#x2265;3 orders of magnitude, median lower limit of quantification of 0.64 fmol on column, median intra-assay variability of 9.3%, median inter-assay variability of 12.7%, and median total CV of 16.0%. The multiplex immobilized metal affinity chromatography- multiple reaction monitoring assay enabled robust quantification of 107 DNA damage-responsive phosphosites from human cells following DNA damage. The assays have been made publicly available as a resource to the community. The approach is generally applicable, enabling wide interrogation of signaling networks.

### Keywords
Human, Mms, Mcf10a, Lc-ms/ms, Ir, Silac, Pbmc

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda G Paulovich
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center


