### Accession
PXD044359

### Title
LC-MS/MS detection of proteins involved in Escherichia coli biomineralized nanoparticles

### Description
Biomineralization is a naturally occurred process, by which microorganism reduced mental ions to minerals. Bacteria-driven biomineralization is most applied in metal recycling or environmental governance, the biomineralized products are rarely used. This probably due to the attachments of microorganism derived components on minerals, such as proteins, which are treated as impurities and hard to remove. However, these microorganism generated molecules are potent in activation of immune systems, suggesting promising potentials of biomineralized products in developing immunotherapeutic strategies. In this research, we analyzed the protein components on DH5a Escherichia coli produced gold nanoparticles, to explored the generation process of gold nanoparticles in bacterial cells, as well as its immune adjuvant potentials.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was mixture with protein lysis buffer (containing 7 M urea, 2% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail) and lyzed using ultrasonication. After centrifugating at 13, 000 rpm for 20 min, the supernatant was collected and sedimented with acetone at -20oC overnight. The sediment was then collected and redissolved in a solution with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride and 300 mM TEAB. The protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/mL using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then reductively alkylated through sequentially adding DTT and iodoacetamide. After that, the proteins were collected by ultrafiltration and digested to peptides by incubating with trypsin at 37oC overnight. The peptides were harvested through centrifugal concentration and drying. The dried peptides were then added with 0.1%FA to redissolve and take 1-2 ug sample to analyze in a LC-MS. Separation was performed with EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, USA), using self-filled Trap columns (C18, 5um, 100um*2cm) and analytical columns (C18, 1.9um, 75um*20cm). The flow rate was 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer is Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, USA). Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode is used for tandem mass spectrometry detection. The full sweep resolution is 60,000 (FWHM), the mass-charge ratio range is set to m/z 375-1600, and the impact energy is set to 30% in HCD fragmentation mode.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification was carried out using a Maxquant 1.5.8.3 software. The MS/MS mass spectrometry raw data were uploaded to the software, together with a Uniprot database, to perform the similarity comparison. The main search parameters are as follows: Uniprot (database), Escherichia coli (taxonomy), Trypsin (Enzyme), Carbamidomethyl (fixed modifications), Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term, variable modifications), 2 (max missed cleavages), 2+/3+/4+ (peptide charge state), 0.01 (PSM FDR), 0.05 (protein FDR), 0.01 (site FDR), 7 (min. peptide length), 20 ppm (MS/MS tol., FTMS), Revert (decoy mode). The quantitative analysis was based on the peak intensity of peptide segment associated with primary mass spectrometry (Precursor Intensity) and performed using the MaxQuant inserted MaxLFQ algorithm. The quantitative value (intensity) was processed to generate the normalized quantitative value LFQ, based on which, the proteins are quantified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanoparticle, Escherichia coli, Biomineralization

### Affiliations
National Center for Nanoscience and Technology

### Submitter
Hao Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Guangjun Nie
National Center for Nanoscience and Technology


