### Accession
PXD023224

### Title
PI3K-AKT pathway and cell-cell contact regulates maspin nuclear localization

### Description
Background: Maspin (SERPINB5) is a potential tumor suppressor gene with pleiotropic biological activities, including regulation of cell proliferation, death, adhesion, migration and gene expression. Several studies indicate that nuclear localization is essential for maspin tumor suppression activity. We have previously shown that the EGFR activation leads to maspin nuclear localization in MCF-10A cells. The present study investigated which EGFR downstream signaling molecules are involved in maspin nuclear localization and explored a possible role of cell-cell contact in this process.  Methods: MCF-10A cells were treated with pharmacological inhibitors against EGFR downstream pathways followed by EGF treatment. Maspin subcellular localization was determined by immunofluorescence. To investigate the role of cell-cell contact these cells were either treated with chelating agents or plated on different cell densities. Maspin and E-cadherin subcellular localization was determined by immunofluorescence. In addition, proteomic and interactome analyses were conducted in order to identify molecular partners which interact with maspin in EGF-treated cells only. Results: EGFR activation regulates cell behavior via de extracellular signal–related kinase (ERK)/MAP kinase, phosphatidyl-inositol-3 (PI 3) kinase- AKT and Jak-STAT pathways. Using pharmacological inhibitors against key components of these signaling pathways we found that PI3K-AKT and Jak-STAT, but not MAP kinase pathway, regulate EGF-induced maspin nuclear accumulation in MCF-10A cells. Interestingly, we observed that maspin is predominantly nuclear in sparse cell culture, but it is redistributed to the cytoplasm in confluent cells even in the presence of EGF. Proteomic and interactome results suggest a role of maspin on post-transcriptional and translation regulation, protein folding and cell-cell adhesion.Conclusions: Maspin nuclear accumulation is determined by an interplay between EGFR (via PI3K-AKT and Jak-STAT pathways) and cell-to-cell contact.

### Sample Protocol
In order to maintain protein-protein interactions, extracts were obtained by sonicating cells (two times of 7 seconds with 20 sec of interval; 50 Hz frequency and 70% amplitude) in buffer A (1.5 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT), containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, followed by a centrifugation step of 15 minutes at 14.000 rpm and 4 oC. Final supernatants were collected for subsequent immunoprecipitation assays. Immunoprecipitation was performed by incubating 500 μg of total protein extracts with 2 μg of anti-maspin antibody or isotype-match IgG control for each condition. The samples were allowed to rotate overnight at 4 oC. After a centrifugation step (1000 rpm for 3 min at 4 oC), samples were incubated with sepharose G beads according to manufacturer's instructions. The beads were washed three times with aforementioned buffer A and samples submitted to TCA precipitation. For this purpose, 60-100 μg of proteins were filled to a final volume of 400 μL with cold 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Following that, 100 μL of cold TCA were added and incubation performed overnight at 4 oC. The solutions were centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C and pellets washed twice with cold acetone followed by a centrifugation step at 14.000 rpm for 10 minutes and 4 oC. Finally, pellets were let dry at room temperature.  Protein digestion was then carried out resuspending pellets in 30 μL of buffer B (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.2 , reduced with DTT (final concentration 5 mM) for 25 minutes and alkylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 14 mM) for 30 minutes. Urea concentration in solution was reduced to 1.6 M and samples digested with trypsin (Sigma) at 1:200 ratio (enzyme:substrate) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digested peptide products were resuspended in formic acid 0.1% and injected into a C18 reversed-phase pre-column coupled to nano HPLC (NanoLC-Proxeon) and using a gradient elution mode (2-50% ACN in formic acid 0.1%). The eluted peptides were analyzed online in a high resolution mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher). The top 10 most intense ions were selected for CID fragmentation in data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Obtained data from LTQ-Orbitrap Velos were analyzed by Andromeda-MAXQUANT 1.5.3.12 software using the SwissProt (Homo sapiens) database, with 6 ppm tolerance at MS and 0.5 Da at MS/MS. Fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications were methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, heavy lysine with 6 Da addition and 1% FDR. At least one razor + unique peptide match between runs was used to peptide identification and quantification in order to enhance the number of reliable identifications. For quantitative values, normalized LFQ values of output protein groups were utilized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pi3k-akt, Maspin, Jak-stat, Cell-to-cell contact, Egfr

### Affiliations
LCC
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1524, SP 05508-000, BR

### Submitter
Julia Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Cella
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1524, SP 05508-000, BR


