### Accession
PXD012674

### Title
Targeted quantification by PRM analysis

### Description
The goal of the project was to quantify the dynamics of BRD4 proline hydroxylation in response to oxygen depletion and differential enzyme regulations.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells or HeLa cells were treated under either different oxygen concentration or different prolyl hydroxylase activities (overexpression or knockdown) were lysed and BRD4 was purified with immunoprecipitation. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested by trypsin. Peptides were desalted and subject to targeted LC-MS/MS analysis by monitoring hydroxylated and unmodified Brd4 peptide covering P536.

### Data Protocol
Targeted peak detection and peak area calculation were performed in the Qual Browswer of Xcalibur.

### Publication Abstract
Proline hydroxylation is a critical cellular mechanism regulating energy homeostasis and development. Our previous study identified and validated Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) as a proline hydroxylation substrate in cancer cells. Yet, the regulatory mechanism and the functional significance of the modification remain unknown. In this study, we developed targeted quantification assays using parallel-reaction monitoring and biochemical analysis to identify the major regulatory enzyme of BRD4 proline hydroxylation. We further performed quantitative interactome analysis to determine the functional significance of the modification pathway in BRD4-mediated protein-protein interactions and gene transcription. Our findings revealed that PHD2 is the key regulatory enzyme of BRD4 proline hydroxylation and the modification significantly affects BRD4 interactions with key transcription factors as well as BRD4-mediated transcriptional activation. Taken together, this study provided mechanistic insights into the oxygen-dependent modification of BRD4 and revealed new roles of the pathway in regulating BRD4-dependent gene expression.

### Keywords
Prm, Brd4, Targeted quantification

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota


