### Accession
PXD000885

### Title
Analysis of acetylation stoichiometry suggests that SIRT3 repairs nonenzymatic acetylation lesions

### Description
Acetylation is frequently detected on mitochondrial enzymes and the sirtuin deacetylase SIRT3 is thought to regulate metabolism by deacetylating mitochondrial proteins. However, the stoichiometry of acetylation has not been studied and is important for understanding whether SIRT3 regulates or suppresses acetylation. Using quantitative mass spectrometry we measured acetylation stoichiometry in mouse liver tissue and found that SIRT3 suppressed acetylation to a very low stoichiometry at its target sites. By examining acetylation changes in the liver, heart, brain, and brown adipose tissue of fasted mice, we found that SIRT3-targeted sites were mostly unaffected by fasting, a dietary manipulation that is thought to regulate metabolism through SIRT3-dependent deacetylation. Globally increased mitochondrial acetylation in fasted liver tissue, higher stoichiometry at mitochondrial acetylation sites, and greater sensitivity of SIRT3-targeted sites to chemical acetylation in vitro and fasting in vivo, suggests a nonenzymatic mechanism of acetylation. Our data indicate that most mitochondrial acetylation occurs as a low-level nonenzymatic protein lesion and that SIRT3 functions as a protein repair factor that removes acetylation lesions from lysine residues.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver tissues used for stoichiometry estimation (from 1, 4, 8, and 16 month old animals) was harvested mid-morning from five 16-week C57BL/6 male mice fed ad libitum and transferred immediately to liquid nitrogen. 8-10 week old male wild-type and ATGL deficient animals (both on C57BL/6J background) were sacrificed and tissues immediately snap frozen in pre-chilled 2-methylbutane and stored in liquid nitrogen. Tissues from several mice were pooled and pulverized at -180C using a liquid nitrogen chilled Retsch MM 400 Ball Mill, mixed with lysis buffer (50mM Tris, pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 10mM nicotinamide, 5mM valproic acid), clarified by centrifugation, and precipitated with -20C acetone. Mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) and HeLa cell lines were cultured in DMEM (PAA Laboratories) supplemented with heavy isotopes of arginine and lysine (13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and dialyzed serum (Sigma). HeLa cells were serum starved for 48 hours by washing the cells twice with PBS before transferring into the above described DMEM median lacking dialyzed serum. Cells were harvested using lysis buffer (above), centrifuged, and protein was acetone precipitated. Acetone precipitated protein was re-dissolved in urea solution (6M urea, 2M thio-urea, 10mM Hepes pH8.0), and the concentration determined by Quick-Start Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Protein was treated with freshly prepared acetyl-phosphate (AcP, Sigma) in urea solution at 37C for 3 hours. AcP was removed by acetone precipitation. Protein digestion, peptide purification, acetyllysine peptide enrichment, and SCX fractionation were performed as described (Weinert et al, 2013a)

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as described (Kelstrup et al, 2012; Weinert et al, 2013a). Raw data was computationally processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the UniProt database (downloaded January 23, 2014) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al, 2011). Acetylation sites were further filtered to ensure a localization probability greater than 90%, and to remove redundant entries. In order to reduce parent ion interference, quantification using TMT reporter ions was performed using only fragment (MS2) scans where the targeted ion constituted more than 75% of the total ions present (parent ion fraction, PIF > 0.75). All sites quantified by SILAC in this study were detected in untreated control samples, indicating that these sites occurred endogenously in the absence of chemical acetylation. Similarly, sites quantified by TMT had reporter ion signal in untreated control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Acetylation is frequently detected on mitochondrial enzymes, and the sirtuin deacetylase SIRT3 is thought to regulate metabolism by deacetylating mitochondrial proteins. However, the stoichiometry of acetylation has not been studied and is important for understanding whether SIRT3 regulates or suppresses acetylation. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we measured acetylation stoichiometry in mouse liver tissue and found that SIRT3 suppressed acetylation to a very low stoichiometry at its target sites. By examining acetylation changes in the liver, heart, brain, and brown adipose tissue of fasted mice, we found that SIRT3-targeted sites were mostly unaffected by fasting, a dietary manipulation that is thought to regulate metabolism through SIRT3-dependent deacetylation. Globally increased mitochondrial acetylation in fasted liver tissue, higher stoichiometry at mitochondrial acetylation sites, and greater sensitivity of SIRT3-targeted sites to chemical acetylation in vitro and fasting-induced acetylation in vivo, suggest a nonenzymatic mechanism of acetylation. Our data indicate that most mitochondrial acetylation occurs as a low-level nonenzymatic protein lesion and that SIRT3 functions as a protein repair factor that removes acetylation lesions from lysine residues.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Liver, Sirt3, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Proteomics
NNF Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3b, DK-2200 Copenhagen N

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Chuna Choudahary
NNF Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 3b, DK-2200 Copenhagen N


