### Accession
PXD022586

### Title
Phosphorus-Ca2+ signalling in marine diatoms

### Description
Phosphorus is a critical nutrient controlling phytoplankton growth. Availability of this limiting factor can vary significantly in space and time, particularly in dynamic aquatic ecosystems. Diatoms are important eukaryotic phytoplankton that thrive in regions of pulsed phosphate supply, yet little is known of the sensory mechanisms enabling them to detect and rapidly respond to phosphorus availability. Here we show that phosphorus-starved diatoms utilise a novel Ca2+-dependent signalling pathway to sense and regulate cellular recovery following phosphorus resupply. This pathway, which has not previously been described in eukaryotes, is sensitive to sub-micromolar concentrations of phosphate, alongside a range of environmentally relevant phosphorus forms. Using comparative proteomics, we have characterised early adaptations governing diatom cellular recovery from phosphorus limitation. Strikingly, the dominant response was substantial enhancement of nitrogen assimilation proteins. This led to 12-fold increases in absolute nitrate uptake rates, relative to phosphorus-starved cells. Moreover, we find that the novel phosphorus-Ca2+ signalling pathway controls this primary recovery response. Our findings highlight that fundamental cross-talk between the essential nutrients phosphorus and nitrogen drive diatom recovery from phosphorus limitation. Moreover, a novel Ca2+-dependent phosphorus signalling pathway governs such ecological acclimation responses, and is thus likely critical to the success of diatoms in regions of episodic nutrient supply.

### Sample Protocol
Preplete, Plimited, and Presupply treatment cultures were inoculated with PtR1 cells to a cell density of 3 × 10E4 cells ml-1 and incubated in standard growth conditions for 4 days. We added 36 µM of phosphate to the Presupply cultures and incubated all cultures for an additional 4 h. Cells from 15 ml of culture were harvested by centrifugation (4000 g at 4˚C for 5 min). Supernatants were removed and cell pellets flash-frozen until further analysis. Cell pellets were then dissolved in 100 µl of 1 x LDS loading buffer (Invitrogen, USA) and given three cycles of 5 min sonications (Branson 2510 Ultrasonic water bath), 10 s of vortex and 5 min incubations at 95˚C. Thirty µl of the lysate was loaded immediately onto a precast 10% Tris-Bis NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen, USA) using 1 x MOPS solution (Invitrogen, USA) as the running buffer. SDS-PAGE was performed for a short gel migration (5 mm of migration into the gel). Polyacrylamide gel bands containing the cellular proteomes were excised and standard in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide was performed prior to trypsin (Roche, Switzerland) proteolysis. The resulting tryptic peptide mixture was extracted from the polyacrylamide gel bands and prepared for mass spectrometry as previously described (Kaur et al 2018). Samples were analysed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Ultimate 2000 LC system (120 minute LC separation on a 25 cm column; Dionex-LC Packings) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific, USA), using LC conditions and MS settings as described previously (Christie-Oleza et al 2015).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 for protein identification and quantification, using default parameters, match between runs and P. tricornutum strain CCAP 1055/1 protein database (Ref. UP000000759) obtained from UniProt. The comparative proteomic analysis between samples (i.e. data filtering and processing, as well as two-sample Student’s T-tests and fold changes) was carried out using Perseus version 1.5.5.3 following the standard pipeline, but including a stringent rule where only proteins confidently detected in all three biological replicates of at least one condition were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms are a diverse and globally important phytoplankton group, responsible for an estimated 20% of carbon fixation on Earth. They frequently form spatially extensive phytoplankton blooms, responding rapidly to increased availability of nutrients, including phosphorus (P) and nitrogen (N). Although it is well established that diatoms are common first responders to nutrient influxes in aquatic ecosystems, little is known of the sensory mechanisms that they employ for nutrient perception. Here, we show that P-limited diatoms use a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent signaling pathway, not previously described in eukaryotes, to sense and respond to the critical macronutrient P. We demonstrate that P-Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling is conserved between a representative pennate (Phaeodactylum tricornutum) and centric (Thalassiosira pseudonana) diatom. Moreover, this pathway is ecologically relevant, being sensitive to sub-micromolar concentrations of inorganic phosphate and a range of environmentally abundant P forms. Notably, we show that diatom recovery from P limitation requires rapid and substantial increases in N assimilation and demonstrate that this process is dependent on P-Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling. P-Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling thus governs the capacity of diatoms to rapidly sense and respond to P resupply, mediating fundamental cross-talk between the vital nutrients P and N and maximizing diatom resource competition in regions of pulsed nutrient supply.

### Keywords
Phosphorous metabolism, Nitrogen metabolism, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Ca2+ signalling, Marine diatoms

### Affiliations
Universitat de les Illes Balears
University of the Balearic Islands

### Submitter
Joseph Christie-Oleza

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Christie-Oleza
University of the Balearic Islands


