### Accession
PXD028983

### Title
Identifying candidate protein markers of acute kidney injury in acute decompensated heart failure using sheep kidney cortex

### Description
A quarter of patients with acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) experience acute kidney injury (AKI), an abrupt loss of kidney function that doubles the risk of death at one-year. There is a critical need to identify early markers for AKI in ADHF, however, no protein candidates have been validated as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers in this setting. We aimed to identify novel candidate protein biomarkers by quantifying changes in protein expression in the kidney that occur during ADHF development and recovery in an ovine model. Relative quantitative protein profiling was performed using Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) in kidney cortex from healthy control sheep (n=5), sheep with established rapid pacing-induced ADHF (n=8) and sheep after ~4 weeks recovery from ADHF (n=7). Of 790 proteins quantified, we identified 17 candidate kidney injury markers, one potential marker of kidney recovery and two markers of long-term renal impairment that were differentially expressed between groups (1.2-2.6 fold-change, p<0.05). Differentially expressed proteins were enriched in pro-inflammatory signaling pathways: Glycoprotein VI (activated during ADHF development, adjusted p<0.01) and acute phase response (repressed during recovery from ADHF, p<0.01). This research identified 20 candidate protein markers of kidney injury, including 6 promising candidates supported by existing evidence and 14 novel candidates never implicated in AKI. Early awareness of AKI in ADHF through the use of biomarkers has the potential to reduce mortality and improve outcomes for these at-risk patients.

### Sample Protocol
The Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) protocol was performed as described by Doellinger et. al. Briefly, 100mg of ground, frozen kidney cortex was added to trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis) at a 1:4 v/v sam-ple:TFA ratio and incubated at room temperature with occasional mixing by inversion. Kidney was incubated for 20 minutes until complete tissue dissolution. 2M Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane Base (TrisBase; Sigma-Aldrich) was added at 10x the volume of TFA to neutralize the pH. Reduction was performed using Tris(-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 10mM and alkylation simultaneously performed using 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA; Sig-ma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 40mM. Upon addition of TCEP and CAA, samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using turbid-ity by quantifying absorbance (360nm) in samples and MacFarland standards (bioMé-rieux, OT-70900, Marcy-l'Etoile) as described by Doellinger et. al. An aliquot of 150µg of protein was adjusted to 0.75µg/µL using a 10:1 v/v mixture of 2M TrisBase and TFA then diluted 1:5 with high-performance liquid chromatography grade water (Fisher Chemical, Waltham). Digestion was performed using a protein:trypsin ratio of 25:1 (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, PRV5111, Promega Fitchburg, WI), and samples incubated on a Thermomixer at 37°C for 20 hours. TFA was added at a final concentration of 2% to quench trypsinization. Peptides were desalted using reverse-phase Vydac C18 Silica 96-well MACROSpin plates (SNS SS18V-L, The Nest Group Inc., Ipswich) as detailed in the Appendix A. Peptides were concentrated to near-dryness in a Speed-Vac (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Hamburg) at 37°C.  Retention time calibration peptides (iRT-Kit, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked into each sample at 75x dilution of the iRT stock solution. SWATH-MS was carried out on a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer coupled to an ekspert nanoLC 415 system (eksigent, AB Sciex, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with an in-house packed emitter tip col-umn filled with 2.6 µm Aeris C18 material (Phenomenex) on a length of 20 cm. Peptides were separated over a 120-minute gradient using a binary solvent system (solvent A: 1% ACN, 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 90% ACN, 0.1% FA in water). The following linear gradient steps of solvent B were used across all samples at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.: loading at 5%B, 3 min at 5% B, 90 min increase to 25% B, 10 min increase to 40% B, 10 min increase to 95% B, 1 min at 95% B, 1 min decrease to 5% B, 5 min at 5% B. To generate spectral li-braries, the mass spectrometer was run in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. For each sample, an MS1 survey scan was run (400 ms) followed by 22 MS2 scans in which the most abundant peptides were fragmented, covering a precursor mass range of 400-1300 mass to charge (m/z). All high-sensitivity fragment ion scans used an accumulation time of 140 ms, resulting in a total cycle time of ~3.5 seconds for all 23 scans. SWATH-MS spectra were acquired over a 2-hour gradient using variable window width for precursor ion selection.First, an MS survey scan was acquired at 100 ms accumulation time, followed by a total of 34 SWATH-MS fragment ion scans with overlapping m/z windows (1 m/z for the window overlap), covering a precursor mass range of 400-1250 m/z. SWATH-MS spectra were collected from 100-1600 m/z. Collision energy spread (CE) was automatically optimized for each window  using a CE spread of 15 eV. All high-sensitivity fragment ion scans used an accumulation time of 96 ms, resulting in a total cycle time of ~3.4 seconds for all 35 scans. Each sample was injected three times, and the median ion level data calculated across the three SWATH-MS runs.

### Data Protocol
DDA data files were used to generate a spectral reference library in ProteinPilot (v4.5, AB Sciex). ProteinPilot (v4.5, AB Sciex) was used to process DDA data for library construction. AB Sciex *wiff DDA files were searched against the a concatenated target/decoy [1] version of the Ovis aries (27,638 entries, 99.8%), Ovis aries musimon (46 entries, 0.2%) and Ovis aries platyura (1 entry, <0.01%) sheep proteomes from UniProtKB [2] TrEMBL (27,685 target sequences, accessed 22 July 2020). Searches were performed using the ParagonTM algorithm (v4.5.0.0) using the following search parameters: i) sample type: identification; ii) cys-alkylation: iodoacetamide; iii) digestion: trypsin; iv) instrument: TripleTOF 5600; v) special factors: none; vi) ID focus: biological modifications; amino acid substitutions; vii) search effort: thorough ID; and viii) detected protein threshold: > 0.05 (10.0%). At a False Discovery Rate of 1.0%, this library contained 1,777 proteins. SWATH-MS data were analyzed using the SWATH Acquisi-tionTM MicroApp in PeakView software (v2.2, AB Sciex).  To correct for possible retention time shifts between SWATH-MS runs and library spectra, the ion signals of Biognosys peptides (ADVTPADFSEWSK, TPVITGAPYEYR, GAGSSEPVTGLDAK, YILAGVENSK, LGGNEQVTR, TPVISGGPYEYR)and endogenous high abundance proteins consistently detected across samples (LLTVNPWLTQVR, AVFVDLEPTVIDEIR) were aligned. SWATH AcquisitionTM MicroApp processing settings were set as follows: 6 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, a 12-minute window for the extracted ion chromatogram, FDR threshold of 1.0%, a mass accuracy of 75 ppm and a fixed library rank of peptides. Extracted transition ion, peptide and protein peak areas were exported in Excel format for quality control pro-cessing and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tripletof, Acute kidney injury, Sheep, Swath-ms, Adhf, Kidney

### Affiliations
Omics Lab, Christchurch Heart Institute Department of Medicine University of Otago, Christchurch New Zealand
University of Otago

### Submitter
Evie Templeton

### Lab Head
Dr Victoria Anne Cameron
Omics Lab, Christchurch Heart Institute Department of Medicine University of Otago, Christchurch New Zealand


