### Accession
PXD039399

### Title
Yeast calibration curve dataset

### Description
The yeast calibration curve dataset was acquired to compare the accuracy of DIA tools with decreasing contents of target peptides. Four samples (Y1, Y2, Y3 and Y4) with decreasing contents (200, 100, 50 and 25 ng, respectively) of analytes (yeast tryptic peptides) and a high content of background peptides (800 ng human tryptic peptides constantly) were analyzed in triplicate using LC-DIA-MS/MS. The DIA data were processed by different DIA tools based on the spectral library generated from the DDA data. The accuracy of different DIA tools was compared.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses. The yeast calibration curve dataset was acquired using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to a Vanquish Neo HPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an EASY-Spray ESI source. Positive ion mode was used and the spray voltage was set at +2.0 kV.  Separation was conducted using a PepMap C18 column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 20 OC with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A was aqueous formic acid (0.1%, v/v) and mobile phase B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. The fraction of mobile phase B was linearly increased from 4% to 24% in 95 min and from 24% to 48% in 5 min, followed by an increase to 90% in 5 min, then kept at 90% for 5 min. DDA was performed for spectral library generation. 500 ng of yeast tryptic peptides (Promega, V7461) were analyzed in technical triplicate. For MS1, the scan range was 399-1200 m/z and the resolution was set as 120000 at 200 m/z. The AGC (automatic gain control) target was 3×106 for MS1. The 20 most intense precursors with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS2 scanning. Dynamic exclusion time was set as 20 s with m/z tolerance of 10 ppm, and the ion cluster isotopes were also excluded. For MS2 scanning, the isolation width was set to 1.6 m/z and the scan range was 150-1500 m/z. The normalized collision energy was set at 30% for MS2 acquisition. The resolution was set as 15000 at 200 m/z and the AGC target was 4×104 for MS2.  In DIA, different amounts (200, 100, 50 and 25 ng, respectively) of yeast tryptic peptides were injected together with 800 ng of human tryptic peptides (Promega, V6951) in technical triplicate. In each cycle, one MS1 scan is followed by 64 MS2 scans with isolation windows covering the 400-1200 m/z range (13.5 m/z window width with 1 m/z window overlap). The resolutions were all set as 15000 at 200 m/z for MS1 and MS2, and the scan ranges were all 150-1500 m/z. The normalized collision energy was set at 30%. The AGC target was 1×106 and the maximum inject time was 20 ms.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation. The DDA data were processed with MaxQuant v2.1.4.0 to generate the spectral library. Tandem mass spectra were matched against an in-silico trypsin digest of the UniProt canonical yeast proteome (UP000002311_559292). The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the maximum mass was limited to 4600 Da. Maximum precursor charge was set as six. Mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm for main search. Maximum missed cleavage was set as one. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Neutral water loss and ammonia loss were not considered. De-isotoping of fragment ions was deactivated. FDR was controlled at 1% at both the peptide and protein levels.  EncyclopeDIA (v1.12.31) was used to transform the output of MaxQuant into .tsv format. Then the peptide precursors were limited to 2-6 charges and 400-1200 m/z. The fragments with series numbers of 1-2 and the same as the peptide length were removed. The peptide precursors with too few fragments (less than six) were removed. The peptides found in the UniProt canonical human proteome (UP000005640_9606) were removed. The decoy library was generated using Skyline (v. 22.2.1.306) with the shuffle sequence method. Results of DIA tools for comparison. DIA-NN (v1.8.1) and Spectronaut (v17.0.221202.55965) were used for comparison. For DIA-NN, the default settings were used, except that robust LC (high-accuracy) mode was used and match-between-runs was enabled, and normalization was disabled. For Spectronaut, the default settings were used, except that cross run normalization was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics provides molecular bases of biology and disease, and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is a platform widely used for bottom-up proteomics. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) improves the run-to-run reproducibility of LC-MS/MS in proteomics research. However, the existing DIA data processing tools sometimes produce large deviations from true values for the peptides and proteins in quantification. Peak-picking error and incorrect ion selection are the two main causes of the deviations. We present a cross-run ion selection and peak-picking (CRISP) tool that utilizes the important advantage of run-to-run consistency of DIA and simultaneously examines the DIA data from the whole set of runs to filter out the interfering signals, instead of only looking at a single run at a time. Eight datasets acquired by mass spectrometers from different vendors with different types of mass analyzers were used to benchmark our CRISP-DIA against other currently available DIA tools. In the benchmark datasets, for analytes with large content variation among samples, CRISP-DIA generally resulted in 20 to 50% relative decrease in error rates compared to other DIA tools, at both the peptide precursor level and the protein level. CRISP-DIA detected differentially expressed proteins more efficiently, with 3.3 to 90.3% increases in the numbers of true positives and 12.3 to 35.3% decreases in the false positive rates, in some cases. In the real biological datasets, CRISP-DIA showed better consistencies of the quantification results. The advantages of assimilating DIA data in multiple runs for quantitative proteomics were demonstrated, which can significantly improve the quantification accuracy.

### Keywords
Human, Accuracy, Yeast, Calibration curve, Lc-ms/ms, Benchmark

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Binjun Yan

### Lab Head
Dr B. Yan
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences


