### Accession
PXD026660

### Title
Plasmodiophora brassicae-triggered cell enlargement and loss of cellular integrity in root systems is mediated by pectin demethylation.

### Description
Gall formation on the belowground parts of plants infected with Plasmodiophora brassicae is the result of extensive host cellular reprogramming. The development of these structures is a consequence of increased cell proliferation followed by massive enlargement of cells colonised with the pathogen. Drastic changes in cellular growth patterns create local deformities in the roots and hypocotyl giving rise to mechanical tensions within the tissue of these organs. Host cell wall extensibility and recomposition accompanies growth of the gall, influences pathogen spread and also pathogen life cycle progression. Demethylation of pectin within the extracellular matrix may play an important role in P. brassicae-driven hypertrophy of host underground organs.  Through proteomic analysis of the cell wall we identified proteins accumulating in the galls developing on the underground parts of Arabidopsis thaliana plants infected with P. brassicae. One of the key proteins identified was the pectin methylesterase PME18; we further characterised its expression and conducted functional and anatomic studies in the knock-out mutant and used Raman spectroscopy to study the status of pectin in P. brassicae infected galls. We found that late stages of gall formation are accompanied with increased levels of Pectin Methylesterase 18 (PME18). We have also shown, that the massive enlargement of cells colonised with P. brassicae coincides with decreases in pectin methylation. In pme18-1 knock-out mutants P. brassicae could still induce demethylation; however, the galls in this line were smaller and cellular expansion was less pronounced. Alteration in pectin demethylation in the host resulted in changes in pathogen distribution and slowed down disease progression. To conclude, P. brassicae driven host organ hypertrophy observed during clubroot disease is accompanied by pectin demethylation in the extracellular matrix. The pathogen hijacks endogenous host mechanisms involved in cell wall loosening to create an optimal cellular environment for completion of its life cycle and eventual release of resting spores facilitated by degradation of demethylated pectin polymers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration of the cell wall protein extracts was estimated using the 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). Proteomic analysis of the complete cell wall protein extracts from 3 g of hypocotyl tissue (200-250 µg of protein per sample), including 2D GE and mass spectrometry (MS), was performed as described by Perlikowski et al. (2016) with some modifications. In the first dimension, isoelectric focusing (IEF), 24 cm dried gel strips (IPG BlueStrips, Serva) with immobilised linear pH range 6–10 were used to focus extracted proteins. Rehydration and focusing were performed in an Ettan IPGphor II (GE Healthcare) at 20°C at 50 µA per strip, with the following program: 12 h of rehydration at 0 V and 9 h of focusing (1 h at 500 V, 2 h at 1000 V, and 6 h at 8000 V). In the second dimension, the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, using 13% polyacrylamide gels (1.5 × 255 × 196 mm). The gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB; BioShop) G-250 using the modified method of Neuhoff et al. (1988), scanned with an ImageScanner III (GE Healthcare) and processed with LabScan 6.0 program (GE Healthcare). Spot detection and image analysis (spot matching) were performed using Image Master 2-D Platinum 6.0 software (GE Healthcare). The 2D GE analysis was performed for two independent biological replicates. Differential spots which were present only for the infected samples were excised from the gels and analysed by liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry at the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences (Warsaw, Poland).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analysed with Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3, MatrixScience). The obtained peptide masses and fragmentation spectra were matched to the National Center Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant database with an Arabidopsis filter using the Mascot search engine (Mascot Daemon v2.3, Mascot Server v2.3.02; MatrixScience). Candidate matches with highest Mascot MudPIT (Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology) score were chosen for further analysis. For unification of selected protein identities additional BLAST-P comparison has been performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2d gel, Gall, Cell wall

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Agata Malinowska
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences


