### Accession
PXD028561

### Title
Glucose dissociates DDX21 dimers to regulate mRNA splicing and promote epidermal differentiation

### Description
We discovered that glucose directly bind to DDX21, induced the conformation change of the proteins and inhibit its helicase activity. Glucose also inhibits the dimerization of DDX21, re-localize DDX21 from nucleolus to nucleoplasm and reassemble DDX21 to RNA splicing complex. DDX21 is essential for epidermal differentiation while with normal glucose condition, DDX21 was re-localized from nucleolus to nucleoplasm, bind to splicing factors and mRNA introns more to regulate splicing of key differentiation factors and promote epidermal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were resolved on a SDS-PAGE. The gel pieces was excised and cut into 1 mm^3 cubes. The proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin. The resulted peptides were extracted by sonicating the gel pieces in 50% ACN/ 0.1% FA and then desalted by using C18 ziptip. The desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and then subjected to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometry coupled with Dionex Ultimate UPLC for data dependent mode analysis (DDA).

### Data Protocol
For bioID in 293T, Maxquant, Version 2.0.1.0, was used to analyze the LC-MS and MS/MS data for protein identification and quantification. The database we used for search was human Uniprot database, Proteome ID UP000005640, reviewed and with isoforms. For bioID in keratinocytes, Maxquant, Version 1.5.2.8, was used to analyze the LC-MS and MS/MS data for protein identification and quantification. The database we used for search was human IPI database, version 3.68, which contained 87,061 protein entries. Label-free quantification was applied for all bioID search. The maximum number of miss-cleavages for trypsin was two per peptide. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as ﬁxed and variable modiﬁcations, respectively. The tolerances in mass accuracy were 20 ppm for both MS and MS/MS. The maximum false discovery rates (FDRs) were set at 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels, and the minimum required peptide length was 6 amino acids. For BS3 crosslinking-MS, raw files were first converted to *.mgf with RawConverter 1.2.0.1 and then files were searched by XiSearch 1.7.6.1 with mass accuracy tolerances of 20 ppm and filtered by XiFDR 2.1.5.2 and FDR setting as recommended. For UVC crosslinking-MS, raw files were first searched by Maxquant, Version 2.0.1.0 using the same search parameter as indicated above and the 57 unique peptides were manually went through to see if they were glucose crosslinked or not by adding glucose, glucose -H2O or glucose -NH3 for chromatography, MS and MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Glucose is a universal bioenergy source; however, its role in controlling protein interactions is unappreciated, as are its actions during differentiation-associated intracellular glucose elevation. Azido-glucose click chemistry identified glucose binding to a variety of RNA binding proteins (RBPs), including the DDX21 RNA helicase, which was found to be essential for epidermal differentiation. Glucose bound the ATP-binding domain of DDX21, altering protein conformation, inhibiting helicase activity, and dissociating DDX21 dimers. Glucose elevation during differentiation was associated with DDX21 re-localization from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm where DDX21 assembled into larger protein complexes containing RNA splicing factors. DDX21 localized to specific SCUGSDGC motif in mRNA introns in a glucose-dependent manner and promoted the splicing of key pro-differentiation genes, including GRHL3, KLF4, OVOL1, and RBPJ. These findings uncover a biochemical mechanism of action for glucose in modulating the dimerization and function of an RNA helicase essential for tissue differentiation.

### Keywords
Bioid, Splicing, Ddx21, Epidermal differentiation, Glucose, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside

### Submitter
Yen-Yu Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Department of Chemistry, University of California Riverside


