### Accession
PXD016428

### Title
Glyco-CPLL: an integrated method for in-depth and comprehensive N-glycoproteome profiling of human plasma

### Description
N-glycoproteins are involved in various biological processes. Certain distinctive glycoforms on specific glycoproteins enhance the specificity and/or sensitivity of cancer diagnosis. Therefore, the characterization of plasma N-glycoproteome is essential for new biomarker discovery. Absence of suitable analytical methods for in-depth and large-scale analyses of low-abundance plasma glycoproteins make it challenging to investigate the role of glycosylation. In this study, we developed an integrated method termed Glyco-CPLL, which integrates combinatorial peptide ligand libraries, high-pH reversed-phase pre-fractionation, hydrophilic interaction chromatography, trypsin and PNGase F digestion, shotgun proteomics, and various analysis software (MaxQuant and pGlyco2.0) for the low-abundance plasma glycoproteomic profiling. Then, we utilized the method to perform a comparative study and to explore papillary thyroid carcinoma-related proteins and glycosylations with reference to healthy controls. Finally, a large and comprehensive human plasma N-glycoproteomic database was established, containing 786 proteins, 369 N-glycoproteins, 862 glycosites, 171 glycan compositions, and 1644 unique intact N-glycopeptides. Additionally, several low-abundance plasma glycoproteins were identified, including SVEP1 (~0.54 ng/mL), F8 (~0.83 ng/mL), ADAMTS13 (~1.2 ng/mL). These results suggest that this method will be useful for analyzing plasma intact glycopeptides in future studies. Besides, the Glyco-CPLL method has a great potential to be translated to clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from healthy controls or patients within the same group were pooled before analysis. Low and medium abundant proteins were prepared using the combinatorial peptide ligands library (CPLL) method with a slight modification30. Specifically, the ProteoMiner column (Hercules, CA) was conditioned three times by 200 μl phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The column was then loaded with 200 μl pooled plasma and incubated in room temperature for 2 h. After the loading, the column was centrifuged at 1,000 g for 30 s at 4 ℃ and then washed with 200 μl of PBS for 5 min and centrifuged for 30 s at 4 ℃. Three loading-washing cycles were performed. After removal of the residual wash buffer by 200 μl ddH2O, the CPLL bound proteins were eluted with 20 μl of elution buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS) for 3 times. The eluent was collected into 1.5 mL tube and stored at –80 ℃ until use. The CPLL bound plasma proteins were proteolyzed using filter-aided sample preparation protocol. Briefly, the eluant was diluted 20 times with UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and added to a 30-kDa filter. After centrifuging at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 ℃, 200 μl of UA solution with 20 mM DTT was added, and the reduction reaction was carried out for 4 h at 37 ℃. The solution was removed by centrifugation, and 200 μl of UA solution with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. After washes with 200 μl of UA two times and 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 ℃, 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (1:50) was added to each filter tube. The filter tubes were washed twice with 100 μl of water by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 ℃. The flow-through fractions were collected and pooled. The peptide concentration was measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit at an absorbance of 480 nm. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried and then stored at −80 ℃. The peptides were separated using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography31. In brief, a pipet tip (AXYGEN, USA) was blocked using a layer of C8 membrane and then filled with 5 mg of C18 reverse-phase medium. The tip was washed twice with 90 μl of methanol and then with 90 μl of ammonia water (pH 10). In total, 50 μg of tryptic peptide was re-dissolved in 90 μl of ammonia water, then loaded onto the tip and centrifuged at 1,200g for 5 min at 25℃.  The peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in ammonia water (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 50%, v/v). The fractions were collected and defined as F1 (6% + 25%), F2 (9% + 30%), F3 (12% + 35%), F4 (15%), F5 (18%), and F6 (21% + 50%) . The final six fractions were freeze-dried and stored at −80 °C. Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched by HILIC. Specifically, 100 μg of tryptic peptides were resuspended in 80% ACN/0.2% TFA solution. Then, 5 mg of Venusil HILIC was washed three times for 10 min each with 0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.2% TFA, followed by sample loading and rotating for 2 h at room temperature. Lastly, the mixture was transferred to a pipet tip that was packed with a layer of C8 membrane and washed twice with 80% ACN/0.2% TFA. Intact N-glycopeptides bound to the HILIC column were eluted three times with 70 μl of 0.1% TFA. The eluent was divided into three tubes equally and dried by SpeedVac for further analysis.  The intact N-glycopeptides were deglycosylated with PNGase F. Briefly, intact N-glycopeptides in one tube were resuspended in 20 μl of PNGase F which was dissolved in 20 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Those in the other tube were resuspended in 20 μl of PNGase F which was dissolved in 20 μl of water-18O. Then, the mixture was digested at 37 °C for 2 hours and dried by SpeedVac for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). Specifically, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated on a 75-μm-inner-diameter column with a length of 15 cm (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr Maisch) over a 78-min gradient (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in 80 % ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min (0–8 min, 5–8% B; 8–58 min, 8–22% B; 58–70 min, 22–32% B; 70–71 min, 32–90% B; and 71–78 min, 90% B). The parameters for peptides and deglycosylated peptides analysis were: (1) MS: Orbitrap resolution = 120,000; scan range (m/z) = 300–1400; RF lens = 30%; AGC target = 5.0 e5; maximum injection time = 50 ms; included charge state = 2–6; exclusion after n times, n = 1; exclusion duration = 18 s; each selected precursor was subject to one HCD-MS/MS; (2) HCD-MS/MS: isolation window (m/z) = 1.6; HCD collision type = 35%; detector type = ion trap; ion trap scan rate = rapid; first mass (m/z) = 120; AGC target = 5.0 e3; maximum injection time = 35 ms. The parameters for intact N-glycopeptides were: (1) MS: Orbitrap resolution = 120,000; scan range (m/z) = 800-2000; RF lens = 30%; AGC target = 2.0 e5; maximum injection time = 100 ms; included charge state = 2–6; exclusion after n times, n = 1; exclusion duration = 15 s; each selected precursor was subject to one SCE-HCD-MS/MS; (2) SCE-HCD-MS/MS: isolation window (m/z) = 2; detector type = Orbitrap; resolution = 15000; AGC target = 5.0 e5; maximum injection time = 250 ms; HCD collision type = 30%; stepped collision mode on, energy difference of ±10%. The raw data files of peptides and deglycosylated peptides from LC-MS/MS were searched against the human Uniprot database (version 2015_03, 20,410 entries) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8). The search parameters were set as follows: Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (N) or Deamidation 18O (N) were set as variable modifications. All other settings were set at the default values.  The raw data files of intact N-glycopeptides were searched against the human Uniprot database (version 2015_03, 20,410 entries) using pGlyco software (version 2.2.0). Parameters are listed as follows: mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions were set as ± 10 ppm and ± 20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavages sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. The fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications contained Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Deamidation (N). The N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T/C, X≠P) was modified by changing 'N' to 'J' (the two shared the same mass). Quality control methods for intact glycopeptides identification were 1% GPSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
N-glycoproteins are involved in various biological processes. Certain distinctive glycoforms on specific glycoproteins enhance the specificity and/or sensitivity of cancer diagnosis. Therefore, the characterization of plasma N<i>-</i>glycoproteome is essential for a new biomarker discovery. The absence of suitable analytical methods for in-depth and large-scale analyses of low-abundance plasma glycoproteins makes it challenging to investigate the role of glycosylation. In this study, we developed an integrated method termed Glyco-CPLL, which integrates combinatorial peptide ligand libraries, high-pH reversed-phase prefractionation, hydrophilic interaction chromatography, trypsin and PNGase F digestion, shotgun proteomics, and various analysis software (MaxQuant and pGlyco2.0) for the low-abundance plasma glycoproteomic profiling. Then, we utilized the method to perform a comparative study and to explore papillary thyroid carcinoma-related proteins and glycosylations with reference to healthy controls. Finally, a large and comprehensive human plasma N<i>-</i>glycoproteomic database was established, containing 786 proteins, 369 N<i>-</i>glycoproteins, 862 glycosites, 171 glycan compositions, and 1644 unique intact N<i>-</i>glycopeptides. Additionally, several low-abundance plasma glycoproteins were identified, including SVEP1 (&#x223c;0.54 ng/mL), F8 (&#x223c;0.83 ng/mL), and ADAMTS13 (&#x223c;1.2 ng/mL). These results suggest that this method will be useful for analyzing plasma intact glycopeptides in future studies. Besides, the Glyco-CPLL method has a great potential to be translated to clinical applications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016428.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; papillary thyroid carcinoma; n-glycoproteomics; combinatorial peptide ligands library

### Affiliations
Sichuan University,West China Hospital
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
Sichuan University,West China Hospital


